CORNELL    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY 


3  1924  101  104  739 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104739 


THE 

PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 

EDITED    BY   THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 
AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

introductions' 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H,  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A, 

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toeonto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY 


EDITED  BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

▼ICAR  AND  RURAL  DEaH  OF  ST.  PAMCRAS,  AND  EXAUININO  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  LORD  BISHOI 
OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL; 


AND  BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


HOSEA. 


Introbnction : 
By   rev.   W.    J.   DEANE,   M.A., 

RECTOR  OF  ASHEH. 

(£^)iosiUon  anh  fomiletics: 
Bt   rev.    prof,   J.   J.    GIVEN,   Ph.D.,  D.D., 

LATE  PROFESSOR  OF  HEBREW  AND  HERMENBUTICS,  MAGEE  COLLEGE,  LONDOHDBSaT. 

i^omilieo  bg  Various  <^utl)ors: 

REV.   PROF.  J.   R.   THOMSON,   M.A.  REV.   A.   ROWLAND,   B.A.,  LL.R 

BEV.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D.  REV.  C.  JERDAN,  M.A.,  LL.B. 

REV.  J.  ORR,  M.A.,  B.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoke  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


INTRODUCTION. 


S  I.  Sdbjbct  or  THE  Book. 

In  the  Book  of  Hosea  vre  hare  a  summary  of  what  the  prophet  tanght  and 
felt  daring  his  official  career  of  some  thirty  years.  His  lot  was  cast  in 
niotimfal  times.  If  he  did  not  live  to  see  the  actual  destruction  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  he  beheld  it  in  prophetic  vision  a  very  short  time  before 
the  terrible  consummation ;  and  the  causes  that  led  to  the  overthrow  were 
plain  and  open  to  his  clear  insight.  Under  Jeroboam  II.  Israel  had  been 
prosperous  and  successful,  as  she  had  never  been  since  the  days  of  David 
and  Solomon.  She  had  recovered  much  of  the  territory  which  those 
monarchs  had  held,  and  restored  the  ancient  boundaries  which  had  marked 
out  the  promised  inheritance.  As  it  is  recorded  in  2  Kings  xiv.  25,  28,  "  He 
restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the 
plain  .  .  .  and  warred,  and  recovered  Damascus."  But  the  curse  of  idolatry 
still  remained,  accompanied  with  other  sins  which  defection  from  the  Lord 
and  the  worship  of  strange  gods  always  brought  in  their  train.  Impiety, 
luxury, profligacy,  everywhere  abounded;  and  when  Jeroboam  died,  and  the 
strong  hand  which  had  checked  the  open  turbulence  and  lawlessness  of  the 
people  was  removed,  a  scene  of  anarchy  and  confusion  ensued,  which  gave 
sure  token  of  coming  vengeance.  His  son  Zechariah  was  assassinated,  after 
a  reign  of  six  months,  by  Shallum,  who  usurped  the  crown,  and,  after  wearing 
it  for  one  month,  was  himself  murdered  by  one  of  his  generals,  Menahera. 
This  cruel  and  wicked  tyrant  occupied  the  throne  thus  gained  by  bloodshed 
for  ten  years.  His  reign  is  chiefly  remarkable  for. the  appearance  of  th(> 
Assyrians  in  the  Holy  Land  under  Pnl,  who  assumed  the  name  of  Tiglath- 
Pileser.  To  escape  the  attack  of  these  stern  invaders,  Menahem  became 
tributary  to  the  Assyrians,  and  was  confirmed  in  his  kingdom  at  the  price 
of  a  thousand  talents  of  silver,  which  he  exacted  from  the  wealthiest  of  his 
subjects.  His  son  Pekahiah,  after  a  troubled  reign  of  two  years,  was 
murdered  by  one  of  hia  officers  named  Pekah,  who  seized  the  throne,  aui 
souu.  ^ 


INTBUDUCnOir  TO 


held  it  for  twenty  yean  aooording  to  the  present  reading  in  1  Kings  xr.  27 ; 
but  there  is  some  error  in  the  namber,  and  probably  we  onght  to  read  "  two  " 
instead  of  "  twenty,"  as  he  was  oonqnered  by  the  Aasyrians  and  pnt  to  death 
B.C.  734,  which  was  the  seoond  year  of  his  reign.  This  man,  in  order  to 
strongthen  his  position,  formed  a  close  alliance  with  Bezin  of  Damascns, 
and  the  two  kings  turned  their  arms  against  Jndah,  in  the  hope  of  orer- 
throwing  the  dynasty  of  David.  Jotham,  the  King  of  Jadah,  in  his  extremity, 
called  in  the  aid  of  the  Assyrians,  who  devastated  the  territory  of  Damascns, 
took  Samaria,  pnt  Pekah  to  death,  and  appointed  Hoshea  king  in  his  place, 
exacting  from  him  a  large  yearly  tribute.  The  discontinnance  of  the  tribute, 
which  was  efEected  by  the  secret  machinations  of  Egypt,  under  promises  of 
support  which  were  never  fulfilled,  led  to  another  inroad  of  the  Assyrians 
under  Shalmaneser  IV.,  the  successor  of  Tiglath-Pileser.  Hoshea  was  carried 
into  captivity;  and,  after  a  siege  of  three  years,  Samaria  fell  into  the  hands 
of  Sargpn,  who  had  seized  the  Assyrian  crown  on  the  death  of  Shalmaneser, 
B.C.  722.  Many  of  the  people  were  deported  into  foreign  countries,  their  places 
being  partially  filled  by  the  introduction  of  heathen  settlers,  while  much  of 
the  land  became  wholly  depopulated.  Thus  ended  the  kingdom  of  Israel, 
brought  to  this  miserable  issue  because  its  rulers  and  its  people  had  done 
evil  before  the  Lord  continually. 

The  moral  condition  of  the  people,  as  we  conclude  from  the  historical 
books  and  from  intimations  in  Hosea's  own  pages,  was  exceedingly  corrnpt ; 
that  of  Judah  indeed  was  notoriously  bad  (as  we  see  later  from  the  denuiiL- 
ciations  of  Micah,  Habakkuk,  and  Zephaniah),  but  it  never  fell  into  such 
a  depth  of  degradation  as  its  northern  sister.  The  very  priests,  instead  of 
instructing  the  people  in  the  duties  of  pure  religion,  taught  the  very  oppo- 
site, encoaraging  a  worship  which  led  to  gross  excesses,  welcoming  the  spread 
of  any  impiety  which  occasioned  them  material  advantage  (oh.  iv.  8 ;  v.  1), 
and  even  waylaying  and  murdering  those  who  were  passing  on  their  way  to 
Jerusalem  (ch.  vi.  9).  The  kings  and  rulers  set  an  example  of  drankenness 
and  debauchery,  and  delighted  in  the  contemplation  of  the  general  iniquity 
(ch.  vii.  8 — 5).  These  calamitous  results  were  the  natural  issue  of  corrupt 
worship.  The  Israelites,  indeed,  worshipped  Jehovah,  and  observed  certain 
imitations  of  the  Mosaic  ritual  and  festivals;  but  they  used  these  forms 
without  entering  into  their  spirit  and  meaning ;  they  confounded  Jehovah 
with  the  local  Baalim,  they  employed  unlawful  symbols  in  their  worship, 
and  "  the  calf  of  Samaria  "  (ch.  viii.  5)  destroyed  all  the  spirituality  of  their 
religion,  bringing  about  that  gross  declension  in  morals  of  which  we  have 
abundant  proof.  This  formal  Jehovah-Baal  worship  led,  as  Professor  Cheyne 
has  well  remarked  (' Introduction,'  p.  25),  to  distrust  of  God,  and  to  reliance 
on  foreign  aid  as  a  scarce  of  strength.  The  Assyrians  always  referred  their 
military  jsuccesses  to  the  favour  of  the  gods  whom  they  adored ;  they  made 
a  point  of  depreciating  and  insulting  the  deities  of  conquered  nations. 
This  spirit  the  Israelites  had  imbibed.  They  distrusted  their  own  national 
Divinity ;  they  doubted  his  power  to  protect  them,  and,  as  Hosea  complains 


tto!  BOOK  QJ'  fiOSBA- 


(oh.  TiiL9, 10),  "hired  lovers  among  the  nations" — appealed  either  to  Assyria 
or  Egypt  for  that  assistance  which  they  ought  to  hare  asked  from  the  Lord. 
To  these  consequences  the  schism  inangnrated  by  Jeroboam  the  son  of 
Nebat  had  inevitably  led.  And,  though  this  separation  was  now  of  long 
standing,  and  had  been  accepted  for  ages  as  an  accomplished  fact,  for  which 
no  remedy  was  likely  to  be  forthcoming,  Hosea  cannot  view  it  unmoyed  ;  it 
is  a  sin  in  his  eyes,  and  calls  for  punishment.  He  looks  forward  indeed 
vaguely  to  a  healing  of  the  schism ;  but  he  has  no  formal  revelation  to 
announce  on  this  subject,  and  speaks  rather  as  his  longings  lead  him,  than  as 
directed  to  foretell  a  future  union  of  the  nation  under  one  head  (ch.  i  11 ; 
iii.  5).  The  success  and  prosperity  of  Israel,  and  her  temporary  immunity 
from  foreign  invasion,  had  never  led  to  a  reformation  or  improvement  of 
religion ;  the  notion  of  a  national  repentance  and  a  general  purification  of 
worship  did  not  occur  to  rulers  or  people  as  feasible  or  desirable  ;  and  when 
trouble  befell  them,  instead  of  seeing  therein  the  punishment  of  their  sin 
and  a  motive  for  conversion,  they  were  only  alienated  farther  from  Jehovah, 
and  more  bent  on  departing  from  the  national  devotion  to  the  one  Cktd. 
They  would  not  see  that  the  wrath  of  Ood  was  ready  to  fall  upon  them,  and 
that  their  only  hope  lay  in  averting  his  judgment  by  reversing  the  policy 
of  many  years  and  turning  with  their  whole  hearts  onto  him  whom  they 
had  virtually  rejected. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  Israel  when  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  moved  Hosea 
to  utter  his  warnings,  rebukes,  and  prophecies.  We  may  trace  the  varying 
fortunes  of  Israel  in  his  different  addresses.  Prosperity,  declension,  min,  are 
severally  depicted  in  his  pages.  In  the  two  great  divisions  of  the  work,  the 
first  part  (ch.  i. — iii.)  plainly  was  written  during  the  lifetime  of  Jeroboam, 
and  the  rest  of  the  book  falls  into  the  later  years  of-anarchy  and  immorality ; 
the  former  declaring  how  the  way  for  the  judgments  of  God  was  being  pre- 
pared by  the  laxity,  idolatry,  and  luxury  that  prevailed,  the  latter  containing 
threats,  denunciations,  and  exhortations,  intermingled  with  some  happy 
promises  to  comfort  the  pious  amid  the  announcements  of  the  punishment 
whose  arrival  they  had  already  begun  to  feel.  The  book  is  rather  a  summary 
of  Hosea's  teaching  during  his  long  ministry,  than  an  orderly  collection  of  his 
addresses.  It  seems  to  have  been  gathered  into  a  volame  in  the  beginning 
of  Hezekiah's  reign,  and  committed  to  writing  in  order  to  impress  its  leading 
thoughts  on  his  contemporaries.  Whether  the  prophet  removed  to  Judaea  in 
the  latter  part  on  his  life,  and  there  wrote  the  substance  of  his  prophecies, 
is  uncertain.  It  seems  probable,  at  any  rate,  that  the  collection  soon  found 
its  way  into  the  southern  kingdom,  and  was  there  preserved  among  the 
records  of  the  prophets  when  Ephraim  was  overtaken  by  ruin.  The  analysis 
of  the  latter  division,  which  is  the  chief  portion  of  the  work,  is  very  difficult, 
and  many  commentators  have  given  up  the  task  as  hopeless,  while  others 
have  divided  and  subdivided  in  a  way  and  on  a  plan  of  which  we  may  be 
quite  sure  the  author  knew  nothing. 

The  book  commences  with  a  symbolical  action.    To  show  the  nnfaith- 


INTEODUOTION  TO 


fulness  of  Israel  and  the  wonderful  long-suffering  of  God,  the  prophet  is 
made  to  perform  a  public  act  which  would  demonstrate  the  two  truths  in 
the  most  plain  and  emphatic  manner.  He  is  bidden  to  take  as  wife  one 
Gk)mer,  an  unchaste  woman,  or  one  of  such  a  character  that  she  would  be 
likely  to  prove  unfaithful,  and  to  have  children  whose  legitimacy  might  well 
be  questioned.  From  this  union  are  born  three  children,  whose  names  are 
significative  of  the  fate  of  the  people.  He  then  announces  the  chastisements 
which  God  is  about  to  inflict,  which  will  bring  a  recognition  of  sinfulness 
and  a  return  to  the  Lord,  who  will,  in  consequence,  make  with  them  a  new 
covenant  of  peace  and  righteousness  (ch.  i.,  ii.) ;  and  by  another  symbolical 
action,  wherein  the  adulteress  is  separated  from  all  intercourse,  are  shown  the 
infidelity  of  Israel  and  her  coming  captivity  (ch.  iii.).  This  first  part 
gives  the  key-note  to  the  whole  book,  the  rest  of  which  is  only  an  expansion 
and  elaboration  of  the  facts  and  threats  previously  announced.  The  corrup- 
tion and  idolatry  of  Israel  are  sternly  condemned,  the  destruction  of  the 
kingdom  is  foretold,  and  the  pious  are  briefly  comforted  with  the  hope  of 
eventual  restoration  (ch.  iv. — xiv.).  The  three  stages  of  the  connection 
with  Gomer  represent  the  feeling  of  God  for  the  unfaithful  Israel :  there  is 
first  the  hatred  of  the  sin,  and  its  stern  denunciation ;  there  is  next  the 
punishment  of  it  in  degradation  and  misery ;  and  lastly  there  is  pity  for  the 
repentant  and  assurance  of  ultimate  pardon. 

As  there  is  no  logical  connection  between  the  several  portions  of  this 
section  of  Hosea's  prophecy,  it  is  impossible  to  draw  out  a  regular  argu- 
ment for  it.  We  can  give  only  a  summary  of  the  contents  of  these  "  scattered 
leaves  of  a  sibyl's  book,"  as  Bishop  Lowth  calls  them.  The  prophet  begins 
by  denouncing  the  universal  immorality  of  these  "  children  of  Israel,"  and 
their  idolatry  promoted  by  the  priests,  which  led  infallibly  to  moral  outrages. 
Judah  is  warned  not  to  participate  in  her  sister's  sin  (ch.  iv.).  He  turns 
to  the  priests  themselves,  who  are  only  a  snare  and  a  cause  of  ruin  instead 
of  being  wholesome  guides,  and  upbraids  them  and  all  the  chiefs  who 
thought  to  escape  punishment  by  invoking  foreign  aid,  but  who  by  this 
means  only  rendered  it  more  inevitable  (ch.  v.).  In  view  of  the  chastise- 
ment threatened,  he  calls  on  the  people  to  repent  and  to  turn  to  the  Lord, 
who  punishes  in  love  (ch.  vi.  3).  He  dilates  on  God's  long-suffering  and 
the  various  ways  in  which  he  has  tried  to  lead  them  to  better  things.  But 
in  vain ;  all  ranks  and  classes  are  corrupt ;  the  very  leaders  are  the  chief 
offenders,  and  Judah  follows  in  their  train.  They  had  learned  heathen 
morals,  they  fly  to  heathen  aid,  they  seek  not  protection  from  the  Lord  : 
therefore  "woe  unto  them  !  "  (ch.  vi.  4 — ^vii.  16).  They  have  rejected  the 
covenant,  set  up  princes  for'  themselves,  and  worshipped  Jehovah  under 
unlawful  symbols ;  and  retribution  shall  come  upon  them  by  foreign  inva- 
sion, the  ruin  of  their  cities,  and  captivity  (ch.  viii. — ix..  9).  In  order  to 
show  that  the  vengeance  is  richly  deserved,  the  prophet  recounts  the  bless- 
ings which  God  has  poured  upon  them  and  the  ill  return  which  they  have 
made,  and  announces  the  overthrow  of  the  centres  of  idolatry  and  cruel 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA, 


treatment  at  the  hands  of  enemies  (ch.  ix.  10 — x.  15).  He  returns  to  the 
contrast  between  God's  dealings  and  the  people's  ingratitude,  which  merited 
the  severest  punishment;  but  even  here  God's  love  and  pity  protest 
against  his  justice:  "How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraimp  how  shall  I 
deliver  thee,  Israel  ?  My  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  compassions  are 
kindled  together."  They  must  indeed  pay  the  penalty  of  their  sin,  but, 
when  they  have  profited  by  this  stern  lesson,  in  due  time  they  shall  be  for- 
given and  restored  (ch.  xi.  1 — 11).  And  once  more  Hosea  rebukes  the 
degenerate  nation,  and  sadly  shows  how  it  is  ripe  for  judgment.  He  sets 
before  them  the  example  of  their  father  Jacob,  and  laments  that  they  have 
fallen  away  from  his  obedience  and  piety  into  Canaanitish  ways  which  shall 
bring  destruction  upon  them  (ch.  xi.  12 — xii.).  Their  obstinate  persistence 
in  idolatry,  notwithstanding  the  forbearance  and  goodness  of  God  toward 
them,  will  prove  their  ruin.  But  there  is  hope  of  salvation  (ch.  xiii.). 
Only  let  Israel  return  unto  the  Lord  with  humility  and  entire  faith,  con- 
fessing her  guilt  and  casting  away  her  trust  in  false  gods,  and  God  will 
receive  her  and  bless  her  largely.  "  Who  is  wise,"  concludes  the  prophet, 
"  and  he  shall  understand  these  things  ?  prudent,  and  he  shall  know  them  p 
For  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  right,  and  the  just  shall  walk  in  them  :  but 
transgressors  shall  fall  therein  "  (ch.  xiv.  9). 

To  the  question — Does  the  book  contain  prophecies  of  the  Messiah  P  we 
must  return  a  qualified  answer.  Hosea  seems  barely  to  mention  Messiah  him- 
self, but  he  has  many  allusions  to  the  Messianic  epoch,  both  in  its  human 
and  its  Divine  idea.  The  restoration  of  Israel  is  conceived  as  a  return  to 
the  promised  land  after  due  chastisement  and  probation,  and  a  return 
to  God's  favour  under  a  second  David  (ch.  iii.  5).  This  restoration  is  pre- 
sented under  various  figures.  It  is  the  remarriage  of  an  adulterous  wife 
after  a  course  of  severe  discipline ;  it  is  Israel's  resurrection  from  the  dead 
after  she  has  been  fast  bound  in  the  chains  of  judicial  death ;  it  is  a  banished 
son's  recall  from  weary  exile.  And  this  restoration  is  accompanied  with 
blessings  material  and  spiritual,  peace  and  fertility  in  the  land,  an  out- 
pouring of  God's  Spirit  upon  the  people.  The  writers  of  the  New  Testament 
regarded  Hosea's  prophecy  as  containing  much  that  was  distinctly  Messi- 
anic. Our  blessed  Lord  himself  twice  cites  ch.  vi.  6 :  "  I  desire  mercy, 
and  not  sacrifice,"  as  containing  the  true  genius  of  his  religion  (see  Matt, 
ix.  13;  xii.  7).  The  terrors  of  the  last  day  are  expressed  in  Hosea's 
language :  "  They  shall  say  to  the  mountains.  Cover  us;  and  to  the  hills. 
Fall  on  us  "  (see  Luke  xxiii.  30 ;  Bev.  vi.  16).  Looking  on  Israel  as  a 
type  of  Christ,  St.  Matthew  quotes  Hosea's  saying,  "  I  called  my  son  out 
of  Egypt "  (ch.  xi.  1),  and  applies  it  to  the  Incarnation,  the  flight  into 
Egypt,  and  the  return  to  the  Holy  Land  (Matt.  ii.  16).  For  a  proof  of  the 
calling  of  the  Gentiles  in  gospel  days,  St.  Paul  (Bom.  ix.  25,  etc.)  refers  to 
ch.  i.  10;  ii.  23.  When  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Christ  "rising  again  the 
third  day  according  to  the  Scriptures  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  4),  some  think  that 
he  is  alhiding  to  Hosea's  prophecy  (ch.  vi.  2),  "  After  two  days  will  he 


INTEODUOTION  TO 


revive  n*  t  in  the  third  day  he  will  raise  ns  np,  and  we  shall  lire  in  hi* 

sight" 

§  II.  Author  ind  Dati. 

The  genuineness  of  the  prophecies  of  Hosea  has  never  heen  widely  called  in 
question,  nor  has  the  book  that  bears  his  name  been  successfully  distributed 
among  several  authors  differing  in  character,  culture,  and  date— -a  division 
of  labour  which  has  played  a  great  part  in  the  criticism  of  other  prophets. 
All  we  know  about  Hosea  is  supplied  by  himself,  and  the  information  is  of 
tbe  Bcaatiest  nature.  His  name,  written  in  the  Septaag^nt  'Oatji,  and  in  the 
Latin  Vnlgfate  Osee,  signifies  "  help,"  "  deliverance,"  or,  if  taken  as  Jerome 
views  it,  as  an  abstract  for  concrete,  "helper,"  "saviour."  It  occurs 
twice  elsewhere — ^first  as  borne  by  Joshua,  in  Numb.  xiii.  8,  16  (9, 17, 
Hebrew),  and  secondly  as  the  name  of  the  last  king  of  Israel  (2  Kings  zv. 
30,  eic.),  and  is  a  shortened  form  of  the  word  "  Jehoshea,"  which  would 
mean,  "  the  Lord  is  my  help."  St.  Jerome  says  that  in  some  manuscripts, 
both  Greek  and  Latin,  he  found  the  name  written  "  Ause,"  which,  he  adds, 
is  unintelligible.  But  this  variation  may  be  explained  by  the  Assyrian 
monuments,  in  which  the  name  assumes  the  form  of  "  Ausi."  Hosea  was  the 
son  of  Beeri,  whom  the  Jews  erroneously  identified  with  Beerah,  prince  of 
the  Reubenites,  who  was  carried  into  captivity  by  Tiglath-Pileser  (1  Ghron. 
V.  6),  and  whom  they  supposed  to  be  a  prophet,  because  they  held  the 
opinion  that  when  a  prophet's  father  is  mentioned  by  name,  the  latter 
himself  belongs  to  the  prophetical  class.  Pseudo-Epiphanins  ('De  Vit. 
Proph.,'  xL)  and  Pseudo-Dorotheus  ('  De  Vit.  Proph.,'  i.)  assign  him  to  the 
tribe  of  Issachar,  and  assert  that  he  was  bom  at  a  place  named  Belemoth, 
which  Jerome  calls  Bethsemes  (Beth-shemesh),  within  the  territories  of 
that  tribe,  now  identified  with  the  ruined  site,  Ain  esh  Shemsiyeh,  in  the 
Jordan  valley  ('  Twenty-One  Tears'  Work  in  the  Holy  Land,'  p.  223). 
There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  he  belonged  to  the  northern  kingdom,  and 
exercised  his  office  there.  Topographical  and  dther  allusions  make  this 
clear.  Thus  he  says,  "  Ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  and  a  net  spread 
abroad  upon  Tabor "  (ch.  v.  1)  ;  Samaria  is  continually  mentioned ;  the 
writer  is  familiar  with  Gilead  (ch.  vi.  8),  OUgal  (ch.  xii.  11),  Lebanon 
(ch.  xiv.  5 — 7),  and  Beth-el,  which  he  names  Beth-aven  (ch.  iv.  15).  He 
calls  the  kingdom  of  Israel  simply  "  the  land  "  (ch.  i.  2),  and  the  King  of 
Israel  "  our  king  "  (ch.  vii.  6).  He  shows  an  intimate  acquaintance  with 
the  history  and  circumstances  of  Israel.  His  whole  oracle  is  directed  towards 
Ephraim  ;  and  Judah  is  named  only  in  passing  and  incidentally.  That  the 
kings  of  Judab  are  mentioned  in  the  heading  (oh.  i.  1)  is  probably  owing, 
as  Keil  says,  to  the  inward  relation  which  Hosea  assamed  towards  that 
kingdom  in  common  with  all  true  prophets.  Seeing  there  the  only  legiti- 
mate  representative  of  the  theocracy,  while  recognizing  the  civil  authority 
of  other  rulers,  he  fixes  the  date  of  his  prophecy  primarily  by  the  era  <rf 
tbe  kings  of  the  people  of  God. 


THB  BOOK  OF  HOSKA.  ^ 


The  only  fact  im  the  prophet's  life  with  which  we  are  acquainted  is  his 
marriage  with  a  woman  called  Gomer  at  QoA'a  command  (ch.  i.  2,  etc.):  "  Qo, 
take  nnto  thee,"  said  God  to  him,  "  a  wife  of  whoredoms  and  children  of 
whoredoms,"  by  which  union  he  was  to  offer  to  his  people  a  symbolical 
representation  of  their  unfaithfulness  and  of  God's  forbearance.  The  trans- 
action has  seemed  to  many  so  unnatural  and  revolting  that  they  have 
refused  to  admit  the  literal  fulfilment  of  the  command,  and  relegate  the 
whole  matter  to  the  regions  of  allegory,  drama,  or  vision.  Bat,  as  Dr.  Pnsey 
says  ('  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  4),  "  there  is  no  ground  to  justify  our  taking 
as  a  parable  what  Holy  Scripture  relates  as  a  fact.  There  is  no  instance 
in  which  it  can  be  shown  that  Holy  Scripture  relates  that  a  thing  wa?  done, 
and  that  with  the  names  bf  persons,  and  yet  that  God  did  not  intend  it  to 
be  taken  as  literally  true.  There  would  then  be  left  no  test  of  what  was 
real,  what  imaginary ;  and  the  histories  of  Holy  Scripture  would  be  left  to 
be  a  prey  to  individual  caprice,  to  be  explained  away  as  parables  when  men 
misliked  them."  So  we  must  believe  that  Hosea  took  this  woman  as  wife, 
and  became  by  her  the  father  of  three  children,  to  whom  at  God's  command 
he  g^ve  symbolical  names.  The  first  was  caUed  Jezreel,  in  commemoration  of 
the  evil  memories  attached  to  that  place  now  to  be  visited  for ;  the  second,  a 
daughter,  Lo-ruhamah,  "  Not  pitied,"  in  token  of  the  universal  destruction 
threatened ;  and  the  third,  Lo-ammi,  "  Not  my  people,"  a  warning  of  the 
rejection  and  dispersion  of  Israel.  After  a  time,  the  evil  of  Gomer's  nature 
reasserted  itself.  She  fled  from  her  husband,  and  proved  unfaithful  to  him. 
But  her  paramour  did  not  long  care  for  her ;  and  Hosea,  seeking  her,  found 
her  deserted  and  despised,  perhaps  sold  as  a  slave.  Yet  his  love  was  not 
yet  wearied  out.  He  purchased  her  freedom,  and  took  her  to  his  house,  no 
longer  to  enjoy  the  privileges  of  an  honoured  wife,  which  she  had  flung 
away,  but  to  repair  the  past  and  atone  for  the  sin  by  mortification,  seclu- 
sion, and  tears.  The  chief  di£Scalty  in  regarding  this  transaction  as  real 
and  historical  is  that  it  would  have  taken  some  years  to  accomplish.  But, 
op  the  other  hand,  it  was  more  impressive  for  the  people  to  have  this  acted 
parable  placed  before  their  eyes  for  a  long  continuance.  Nor  were  snch 
lengthened  symbolical  actions  unusual  in  the  domain  of  prophecy  (comp. 
Isa.  XX.  3;  Ezek.  iv.  5,  6,  9).  A  merely  recounted  vision  must  have 
had  a  far  weaker  effect  than  this  piece  of  real  life.  If  Gomer  was  known 
to  be  of  loose  character,  her  conversion  into  the  chaste  wife  of  a  holy 
prophet  must  have  led  people  to  think  and  to  inquire  into  the  cause  of  this 
seemingly  anomalous  proceeding.  "Neo  culpandus  propheta,"  says  St. 
Jerome,  "  si  meretricem  converterit  ad  pndicitiam,  sed  potius  laudandus 
quod  ex  mala  bonam  fecerit.  Non  enim  qui  bonus  permanet  ipse  polluitur, 
si  societur  malo ;  sed  qui  mains  est  in  bonum  vertitur,  si  bona  exempla 
sectetnr.  Ex  quo  intelligimus  non  prophetam  perdidisse  pndicitiam  fomi- 
carisa  copulatnm,  sed  fomicariam  assumsisse  pudicitiam  quam  antea  non 
habebat." 

We  know  nothing  of  the  latter  days  of  Hosea.     It  is  probable  that  he 


Tffl  INTRODUCTION  TO 

finished  his  life  in  Judeea,  as  the  preservation  of  his  book  amid  the  min  of 
Samaria  is  thus  more  easily  acconpted  for.  The  place  and  date  of  his  death 
are  eqnally  unknown.  A  tomb  is  shown  as  his  between  Nablns  and  Es-salt ; 
but  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  it  has  ever  contained  the  prophet  s 
remains. 

Hosea  stands  first  in  the  book  of  the  minor  prophets,  which  some  have 
supposed  to  be  arranged  in  chrbnological  order.  But  closer  investigation 
does  not  confirm  all  the  details  of  this  arrangement.  We  may  safely  say 
that  the  books  are  distributed  chronologically  thus  far :  first  are  placed 
those  seers  that  prophesied  in  the  Assyrian  period,  viz.  Hosea  to  Nahum ; 
then  those  in  the  Chaldean  era,  Habakknk  and  Zephaniah;  and  lastly, 
those  in  post-exilian  times.  To  Hosea  is  assigned  the  foremost  place, 
because,  although  not  the  longest  of  the  twelve  (for  Zechariah  is  somewhat 
more  lengthy,  the  Masorites  reckoning  one  hundred  and  ninety-seven  verses 
for  Hosea,  and  two  hundred  and  eleven  for  Zechariah),  it  is  the  most 
important  of  those  in  the  first  cycle.  Joel  and  Amos  were  probably  prior 
to  Hosea;  but  he  exercised  his  office  much  longer  than  any  of  the  others, 
and  this,  perhaps,  was  one  reason  for  giving  him  the  position  which  he 
occupies  in  the  Hebrew  Bible.  A  mistranslation  has  played  some  part  in 
the  matter.  The  first  clause  of  the  second  verse,  "  The  beginning  of  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  by  Hosea,"  which  is  a  kind  of  heading  to  the  first  part  of 
the  book,  has  been  rendered,  "  The  beginning  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  by 
Hosea,"  as  if  the  sentence  referred  to  his  priority  compared  with  the  other 
prophets,  whereas  it  appertains  only  to  the  predictions  to  which  it  is 
prefixed. 

In  the  title,  the  genuineness  of  which  is  generally  allowed,  Hosea  is  said 
to  have  prophesied  "in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah, 
kings  of  Jndah,  and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Joash,  King  of 
Israel."  The  statement  seems  to  be  plain  enough  till  it  is  examined  care- 
fully ;  it  is  then  seen  to  need  some  elucidation.  Uzziah  began  to  reign  (if 
we  accept  the  dates  ascertained  by  Assyrian  monuments)  B.C.  792,  and 
died  in  B.C.  740,  and  sixteen  years  each  being  allotted  to  Jotham  and  Ahaz, 
and  Hezekiah's  first  regnal  year  being  assumed  to  be  B.C.  708, — thus, 
supposing  that  Hosea  began  his  career  in  Uzziah's  first  year,  at  the  age  of 
twenty  (which,  indeed,  is  at  least  ten  years  too  young),  and  continued  it 
for  a  year  or  two  in  Hezekiah's  time,  he  must  have  been  one  hundred  and 
five  in  the  early  part  of  that  monarch's  reign,  and  his  ministry  must  have 
lasted  between  eighty  and  ninety  years ;  while,  if  we  consider  that  he 
prophesied  till  the  close  of  Hezekiah's  life,  the  duration  of  his  ministry  is 
inconceivable  and  absurd.  But  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  suppose  that 
Hosea's  prophetic  activity  extended  over  the  entire  reigns  of  the  kings 
named  in  the  title.  A  limitation  is  added  by  the  introduction  of  the  name 
of  Jeroboam  II.,  who  reigned  from  B.C.  790  to  B.O.  749 ;  so  that  we  may 
conclude  tihat  Hosea  entered  upon  his  office  during  some  part  of  Usziah's 
reign  wliioh  was  contemporary  with  Jeroboam,  or  about  B.a  755,  which  was 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


■om«  rix  yean  before  its  close.  This  reckoning  wonld  allow  aboat  fifty 
yean  for  (he  duration  of  Hosea's  prophetical  life.  But  late  discoveries 
have  given  reason  to  Bnppose  that  Jotham  was  joint  sovereign  with  his 
father,  and  that  Ahaz  also  was  sole  monarch  for  a  very  short  time.  This 
alters  Hezekiah's  date  from  B.o.  708  to  B.O.  728,  and  allows  for  the  prophet's 
ministry  some  thirty  years.  Oar  view  of  the  prophet's  date  is,  however,  not 
dependent  wholly  npon  the  title  of  the  book.  Further  information  can  be 
derived  from  the  contents.  First,  as  to  the  close  of  his  ministry.  Though 
he  foretold  the  fall  of  Samaria  (oh.  z.  5 ;  xiii.  16),  he  does  not  mention 
the  capture  of  the  city  and  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  in  the 
sixth  year  of  Hezekiah,  B.O.  722,  an  event  of  such  overwhelming  importance 
that  he  could  not  have  passed  it  over  unnoticed,  nad  he  been  alive  when 
it  occurred.  The  predictions  concerning  this  event  seem  to  have  been 
uttered  about  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Hoshea,  the  last  king,  which 
would  be  just  at  the  time  of  the  accession  of  Hezekiah.  Secondly,  as  to 
the  commencement  of  his  prophetical  office.  He  could  not  have  prophesied 
long  under  Jeroboam.  The  long  and  prosperous  reign  of  that  king,  when 
the  fortunes  of  Israel  were  raised  to  an  unprecedented  height,  could  never 
have  given  occasion  to  the  descriptions  of  confusion,  anarchy,  and  disaster 
which  frequently  occur  (comp.  ch.  vii.  1,  7 ;  viii.  4).  Such  allusions  seem 
rather  to  belong  to  an  interregnum  that  followed  on  the  death  of  Jeroboam, 
or  to  the  time  of  his  successors  in  the  kingdom.  The  first  portion  of  the 
book  (ch.  L — iii.)  was  written  in  Jeroboam's  time,  since  it  speaks  of  the  fall 
of  the  house  of  Jehu  as  still  future  (ch.  i.  4),  and  the  kingdom  of  Israel  as 
still  prosperous.  But  the  remainder  belongs  to  times  subsequent,  when  a 
rapid  decline  had  begpin,  and  events  were  leading  up  to  the  fatal  consum- 
mation. The  prophet,  indeed,  complains  in  an  early  chapter  (ii.  16,  17)  of 
the  dishonour  done  to  the  Lord  by  confounding  him  with  local  Baalim,  but 
he  does  not  denounce  the  g^ss  moral  corruption  of  the  people  tiU  he  is 
constrained  to  do  so  by  the  view  of  their  condition  and  actions  after  Jero- 
boam's  death. 

When  we  said  above  that  the  genuineness  of  the  title  is  generally  allowed, 
we  did  not  mean  that  it  had  never  been  questioned,  but  that  the  balance  of 
authority  was  greatly  in  its  favour.  Of  late  years,  Kuenen,  Dr.  Chejne  in 
his  commentary,  and  Professor  W.  R.  Smith  ('  The  Prophets  of  Israel,' 
lect.  iv.),  have  thrown  discredit  on  the  heading  as  being  a  careless  combi- 
nation of  two  distinct  traditions  referring  to  different  parts  of  the  prophet's 
writings.  The  mention  of  Jeroboam,  they  say,  rightly  fixes  the  date  of  the 
first  part  of  the  prophecy ;  the  rest  of  the  heading  was  added  by  a  scribe 
during  the  exile,  probably  the  same  who  wrote  the  names  of  the  same  four 
kings  of  Judah  at  the  beginning  of  Isaiah ;  and  it  is  argued  that,  as  it  is 
plain  that  when  oh.  xiv.  3  was  written  the  Jews  had  not  finally  broken 
with  Assyria,  the  reigns  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah  could  not  synchronize  with 
any  part  of  Hosea.  But  the  final  rupture  with  Assyria,  which  led  to  the 
fall  of  Samaria,  took  place  b.o.  722,  in  Hezekiah's  sixth  year ;  and  Hosca'i 


IHTBODUOTIOK  TO 


propheoj  might  hare  been  written  in  the  earliest  portion  of  Hesekiah'B 
reign,  which,  as  we  said  above,  would  be  sufficient  to  proye  the  correctness 
of  the  title.  The  notion  of  the  scribe's  blander  is  a  mere  conjectnra,  in 
itself  improbable,  and  certainly  not  required  bj  any  internal  oonsideration. 

§  in.  GnniBiii  OBASAom. 

"Osee,**  says  St.  Jerome,  "commaticus  est,  et  quasi  per  sententias 
loquens  " — "  Hosea  is  concise,  and  speaks  in  detached  sentences."  This  is 
one  reason  of  the  obscurity  of  his  writings.  Conciseness,  combined  with  a 
fulness  of  meaning  which  needs  much  expansion  to  be  intelligible,  occasions 
perplexity  and  confusion.  The  truth  is  that  the  prophet  feels  too  deeply  to 
express  himself  calmly ;  the  sorrow  and  the  indignation  within  him  force 
utterance,  without  regard  to  logical  connection  or  careful  arrangement. 
Terse  is  bound  to  verse  simply  by  identity  of  feeling ;  the  prevalence  of 
one  pathetic  colouring  unites  the  several  parts  of  the  picture.  He  cannot 
■toop  to  the  niceties  of  parallelism  and  to  the  scrupulous  balancing  of 
clauses ;  his  grief,  his  upbraidings,  his  pleadings,  are  artless  and  untram- 
melled. In  his  vehemence  he  oversteps  the  bounds  of  grammatical  propriety, 
and  hurries  the  hearer  along,  regardless  of  rules  which  a  less  feeling  writer 
would  have  been  careful  to  observe.  Abruptly  he  passes  from  one  image  to 
another  without  fully  developing  either;  he  draws  his  figures  from  the 
field,  the  mountain,  the  forest.  Ood's  loud  call  to  repentance,  awful  and 
far-reaching,  is  the  roar  of  a  lion  (ch.  zi.  10) ;  in  the  fierceness  of  his 
anger  he  is  swift  as  the  leopard,  furious  as  the  she-bear  bereft  of  her  whelps 
(oh.  xiii.  7,  8).  At  another  time  he  uses  mild  chastisements,  as  the  moth 
frets  a  garment  (ch.  v.  12) ;  or  he  sends  blessing  like  the  gentle  spring 
and  autumn  rain  (ch.  vi.  4)  even  upon  Ephraim,  whose  goodness  is  a 
morning  cloud,  which  glistens  in  the  sun  and  soon  disappears.  The  repentant 
Israel  shall  receive  the  dew  of  Grod's  grace,  and  shall  grow  pure  as  the  lily, 
strong  as  the  cedar,  ever  beautiful  as  the  olive  tree,  fragrant  and  sweet  as 
the  wine  of  Lebanon  (ch.  xiv.  5 — 7).  Such  accumulations  of  figures,  unex- 
plained and  isolated,  tend  to  obscurity.  Another  cause  that  occasions  the 
same  result  is  the  use  of  peculiar  words  and  unusual  constructions.  Hosea, 
too,  is  very  fond  of  paronomasias.  "  Shoot  {tremacK)  brings  no  fruit 
(Jc&mach) "  (ch.  viiL  7) ;  the  altars  in  Gilgal  are  as  "  heaps  of  atones 
(galUm)  "  (ch.  xii.  11) ;  Beth-el, "  the  house  of  God,"  has  become  Beth-aren, 
"  the  house  of  vanity  "  (ch.  x.  6). 

Yet,  with  all  his  obscurity,  how  touching  and  winning  is  his  utterance ! 
Amid  all  his  threats  and  denunciations  his  tender  love  for  Israel  beams  forth. 
He  rejoices  when  he  has  a  message  of  mercy  to  deliver ;  and  his  style  loses 
its  stem  abruptness,  and  he  dwells  with  placid  delight  on  the  prospect 
before  him ;  his  impetuous  boldness  sobers  down  into  the  gentle  flow  of  calm 
confidence.  But  this  happier  aspect  of  his  prophecy  is  rarely  seen.  His 
message  is  generally  full  of  mourning  and  woe.    The  prophets  of  Judah 


THE  BOOK  OF  H08KA. 


could  look  forward  to  a  restored  people  and  a  repaired  polity.  The  ten 
tribes  had  no  separate  fatare.  Their  temporal  punishment  was  irrerersible. 
It  was  only  as  associated  with,  and  absorbed  in,  Jadah  that  they  conid  hope 
for  restored  vitality.  This  feeling  colours  all  the  prophet's  language  and 
darkens  his  mental  view.  His  love  is  disquieted  and  saddened  by  the 
prospect ;  yet  his  trust  in  Jehovah  triumphs  over  all.  His  confidence  in 
the  spiritual  mercies  which  are  in  store  for  Israel  is  unshaken,  and  abides 
with  him  as  a  living  certainty.  To  this  confidence  he  is  guided  by  his 
unalterable  conviction  of  the  Lord's  love  for  his  people;  he  Ijas  learned 
that  "  Gk»d  is  love."  Hosea's  wedded  life  is  the  outward  symbolizing  of  this 
truth,  and  taught  that  man  should  in  like  manner  love  his  fellow.  Those 
who  were  embraced  in  the  arms  of  one  Father  should  love  as  brethren  ;  they 
should  have  that  filial  affection  to  Jehovah  which  none  could  feel  for  a 
heathen  deity,  and  that  affection  for  one  another  which  can  reign  only  in 
a  united  family.  These  ideas  will  be  found  to  run  through  the  whole  book, 
and  to  underlie  each  rebuke,  prophecy,  and  expostulation. 

If  we  come  to  consider  what  influence  earlier  Israelite  literature  exercised 
upon  Hosea,  we  have  but  few  facts  on  which  to  rest.  References  to  past 
Jewish  history,  such  as  the  story  of  Jacob  (ch.  xii.  3, 4,  12),  the  wanderings 
in  the  wilderness  (ch.  xiii.  6),  the  exodus  (ch.  xii.  9, 13),  the  destruction  of 
Sodom  and  the  other  cities  (ch.  xi.  8),  the  transactions  connected  with 
Achor  (ch.  ii.  16),  Gibeah  (ch.  x.  9),  and  Baal-peor  (ch.ix.  10),  presuppose 
acquaintance  with  Genesis,  Joshua,  and  Judges,  as  we  know  of  no  other 
sources  whence  such  information  could  be  obtained.  Many  paralleliams  of 
idiom  and  language  are  found  in  Hosea  and  the  Pentateuch,  which  show 
that  the  latter  was  extant  in  the  northern  kingdom,  and  can  only  be 
accounted  for  by  its  existence  in  a  written  form.  The  prophet  himself 
refers  to  the  Pentateuch  when  he  introduces  God  as  saying  (ch.  viii.  12), 
"Though  I  wrote  for  him  my  Law  in  ten  thousand  precepts,  they  were 
counted  as  a  strange  thing."  The  "  manifold  [or,  •  ten  thousand,'  according 
to  the  '  Chethib ']  precepts  "  is  a  rhetorical  exaggeration  for  the  numerous 
laws  contained  in  the  Pentateuch,  of  which  the  Jews  reckoned  two  hundred 
and  forty-eight  affirmative  and  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  negative.  The 
parallelisms  have  been  noticed  by  many  commentators.  The  following  are 
a  few  of  them :  Ch.  i.  2,  "  The  land  hath  committed  great  whoredom ; "  and 
Lev.  XX.  6,  "  All  that  go  a-whoring  after  them,  to  commit  whoredom  with 
Molech."  Ch.  i.  10,  "  The  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be  as  the 
Band  of  the  sea; "  and  Gen.  xxii.  17  and  xxxii.  12.  Ch.  iv. 8,  " They  eat  up 
the  sin  offering  of  my  people ; "  according  to  Lev.  vi.  17.  Ch.  iv.  10,  "  They 
shall  eat,  and  not  have  enough ; "  and  Lev.  xxvi.  26.  Ch.  xi.  1,  "  I  called 
my  son  out  of  Egypt ; "  and  Exod.  iv.  22,  "  Say  unto  Pharaoh,  Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  Israel  is  my  son."  Ch.  v.  6,  "  With  their  flocks  and  with  their  herds 
they  shall  go  to  seek  the  Lord ; "  and  Exod.  x.  9,  "  With  our  flocks  and  with 
our  herds  will  we  go;  for  we  must  hold  a  feast  unto  the  Lord."  Ch. 
ii.  17,  "  I  will  take  away  the  names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  mouth,  and  they 


rH  INTRODUOTION  TO 


shall  no  more  be  remembered  hj  their  name;"  and  Exod.  zxiiL  13. 
Gh.  vi.  2,  "We  shall  Uve  in  his  sight;"  and  Qen.  ZTii.  la  Oh.  ziL  S 
(6,  Hebrew),  "  Even  the  Lord  God  of  hosts ;  the  Lord  is  his  memorial ; " 
and  Exod.  iii.  15,  "  This  is  my  ITame  for  ever,  and  this  is  my  memorial." 
Ch.  ix.  4,  "  Bread  of  mourners ; "  and  Deut,  xxvi.  14.  Oh.  xii.  9,  "  Will  yet 
make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles ;  "  and  Lev.  xxiii.  43.  Oh.  viii.  13,  "  They 
shall  retnm  to  Egypt;  "  and  Deut,  xxviii.  68,  "The  Lord  shall  bring  thee 
into  Egypt  again."  Oh.  ix.  10,  "  I  found  Israel  ...  in  the  wildemeas ;  " 
and  Deut.  zxzii.  10. 

Other  books  beside  the  Pentateuch  have  had  some  influence  on  the 
writings  of  Hoaea.  He  was  certainly  cognizant  of  the  Song  of  Songs. 
The  relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah  under  the  figure  of  a  wife  with  her  loving 
spouse,  which  runs  through  Hosea's  prophecy,  is  equally  familiar  to  us  in 
the  Canticles.  The  expressions  at  the  end  of  the  book,  "  He  shall  grow  as 
the  lily  ...  his  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as  Lebanon," 
recall  the  description  of  the  bride  in  Oant.  ii.  2  and  iv.  11,  "As  the  lily 
among  thorns,  so  is  my  love  among  the  daughters  .  .  .  the  smell  of  thy 
garments  is  like  the  smell  of  Lebanon."  So  again,  "Plead  with  yonr 
motber,  plead,"  reminds  one  of  the  passage  (Cant.  viii.  2)  where  the  bride 
desires  to  lead  the  bridegroom  into  her  mother's  house.  Amos,  too,  Hosea's 
immediate  predecessor,  was  not  unknown  to  him.  He  reproduces  Amos's 
allusion  to  Beth-aven  (ch.  iv.  15,  etc.;  Amos  i.  5;  v.  5).  He  borrows 
(ch.  viii.  14)  the  formula  with  which  Amos  concludes  his  seven  denuncia- 
tions (Amos  i.  11),  "  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities,  and  it  shall  devour 
the  palaces  thereof."  He  uses  Amos's  figure  of  the  lion's  roar  for  the  voice 
of  Gh>d's  vengeance  (comp.  ch.  xi.  10  with  Amos  L  2  and  Joel  iiL  16,  which 
is  similar). 

I  IV.   LiTEBATOkl. 

As  Hosea  Is  the  first  of  the  ndnor  prophets,  it  will  be  useM  to  name  the  chief  commen- 
tators upon  the  whole  twelve,  or  many  of  them,  before  meDtioning  those  who  have 
treated  the  particular  book  before  us. 

In  this  category,  of  the  Fathers  and  early  writers  we  may  cite  St.  Bphraem  Syrns, 
who  annotates  seven  of  the  twelve ;  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  followed  in  a  great  measure 
by  Theophylaot  in  his  commentary  on  five  of  the  twelve ;  Theodoretus  of  Gyms ; 
St.  Jerome,  epitomized  by  Haimon  (Migne,  •  Patres  Lat.,'  torn,  oxvii.).  Of  medisaval  and 
later  writers,  the  most  useful  are :  Albertus  Magnus,  Ribera,  Arias  Montantia,  Rupertus, 
Cornelius  &  Lapide,  Sanctius  (Sanchez),  (Lyon,  1621),  Luther,  Oalvm,  (Ecciampadius, 
Calmet,  Cocceius ;  RosenmttUer,  '  Scholia  in  Vet.  Test.'  (Lips. :  1812) ;  J.  Lightfoot, 
'  Versiones,'  Works,  x. ;  Staudlin  (Stutg. :  1786) ;  Hitzig,  •  Die  zwolf  Klein.  Proph.,'  4th 
edit,  by  Steiner  (1881);  Henderson, '  The  Book  of  the  Twelve  Minor  Prophets '  (Loud. : 
1845);  Archbishop  Newcome,  *An  Attempt,'  etc.,  new  edit.  (1836);  Hengstenberg, 
•  Ohnstology ; '  Umbreit, '  Die  Klein.  Proph. '  (Hamb. !  1844) ;  Keil,  translated  in  Clarke's 
'Theol.  Lib;'  Dr.  Pusey,  'The  Minor  Prophets'  (Oxf. :  1860—1877);  Reinke,  'Die 
Messianish.  Weissag.'  (Giessen:  1861,1862);  Sohegg,  'Die  Klein.  Proph.' (Regensburg : 
1862);   Cowles  (New  York:  1867);   Trochon,  in  'La  Sainte  Bible  aveo  comment.' 

Kris :  1886) ;  Knabenbauer,  hi '  Cursus  Scripturje  Sacraa '  (Paris :  1886) ;  Ewald,  •  Die 
phet.  d.  Alt.  Bundes '  (1868,  etc.) ;  W.  R.  Smith, '  The  Prophets  of  Israel '  (Edin- 
burgh :  1882).  There  are  a  few  Jewish  commentators  which  will  be  found  useful,  viz. 
Jarchi,  tran&lated  into  Latin  by  Breithaupt  (Gotha :  1713);  Kimchi,  and  Aben  Ezra  all 


THE  BOOK   OP  HOSEA.  xii3 


in  BuxtorPs '  Rabbinical  Bible,'  vol.  iii.  (Amst. :  1724 — 1727).  Of  special  commentaries 
devoted  to  Hosea,  we  note  the  following :  Origen, ' Selecta  in  Oseam,'  Migne,  xi. ;  Bphraem 
Syrus, '  Explanatio  in  Oseam,'  Opera,  ▼, ;  Luther,  '  Enarratio ; '  Abarbanel, '  Comment. 
in  Hoa.'  (L.  Bat. :  l(j87);  Burroughes,  •  Exposition '  (Lond. :  1643);  Schmidt  (Franof.  : 
1687);  Pocock,  'Commentary'  (Oxf.:  1685);  Van  der  Hardt,  'Hoseas  Tllustrat,' 
(Helmsb. :  1702) ;  Neale, '  Transl.  and  Comm.'  (Lond. :  1771) ;  Kuinoel '  Hose*  Oraoula ' 
(Lips. :  1792) ;  Bishop  Horsley  (Lond. :  1801—1804) ;  Stuck, '  Hoseas  Propheta '  (Lips. : 
1828);  Simson, 'DerProph.  Hos.erklart'(Hamb.:  1851);  Schroder  (Leipz. :  1829); 
Wunsche,  '  Dor  Proph.  iibers.'  (Leipz.:  1868,  1869);  Drake,  'Notes'  (Camb.:  1853); 
Prof.  Cheyne,  in  the  'Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools'  (1884).* 

•  As  Professor  Given  died  while  this  volume  was  passing  tlirough  the  press,  this  Intri*- 
duotion  was  written  by  the  Bev.  W.  J.  Deane,  M.A. 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  L 


Ver.  I. — The  word  of  the  Lord  that  oamo 
nnto  Hosea,  the  Eon  of  Beeri.  The  proplieta 
are  divided  into  the  former  (risTionim,  Zceh. 
i.  4)  prophets  and  the  later  prophets.  The 
writings  of  tlie  former  prophets  comprise 
most  of  the  historical  hooks,  for  the  Hebrew 
conception  of  a  prophet  was  that  of  an 
indiTidnal  inspired  by  God  to  iiistru(  t  men 
for  the  present  or  inform  them  of  the  future, 
whether  orally  or  by  writing;  the  Utter 
were  the  prophets  properly  so  called,  while 
these,  again,  are  subdivided  into  the  greater, 
consisting  of  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel, 
and  the  lesser,  or  minor,  including  the  re- 
maining twelve.  The  designation  "  minor  " 
does  not  imply  any  inferiority  in  importance 
of  subject  or  value  of  contents,  but  has 
respect  solely  to  the  smallness  of  their  size 
as  compared  with  the  larger  discourses  of 
the  others.  The  twelve  minor  prophets 
were  added  to  the  canon  before  its  comple- 
tion as  a  single  book, "  lest,"  says  Kinichi,  in 
his  commentary  on  this  verse,  "  a  book  of 
them  should  be  lost  because  of  its  smallness, 
if  each  one  of  them  sliould  be  kept  separate 
by  itsoJf."  They  were  accordingly  reckoned 
as  one  book — 5ii5f/to  eV  fioiiopi$\tf,aB  Eusebius 
expresses  it.  The  name  Hosea,  like  otlier 
Hebrew  names,  is  significant,  and  denotes 
"deliverance," or" salViition;"or, the  abstract 
being  put  for  the  concrete,  "deliverer,"  or 
"  saviour."  It  is  i  adically  the  same  name  as 
Joshua,  except  that  the  prefix  of  the  latter 
implies  the  name  of  Jehovah  as  tUo  Author  of 
snch  deliverance  or  salvation ;  wliile  the 
Greek  form  of  Joshua  is  Jesus,  which  in  two 
passages  of  the  Aulhorized  Version  stands 
for  it.  The  form  of  the  name  in  the  original 
is  closely  connected  with  Hosanna  (hoshia 
lia),"6ave  now,"  which  occurs  in  PB.cxviiL  25. 
In  the  days  of  XTzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and 
Eezekiah,  IdngfB  of  Jndah,  and  in  the  days  of 
Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash,  king  of  Israel. 
The  period  of  Hosea's  prophetic  activity  is 
one  of  the  longest;  if  not  the  longest,  on 

HUBEA. 


record.  It  continued  during  the  reigns  of 
the  four  kings  of  Judah  above  mentioned, 
and  during  that  of  Jeroboam  II.  King  of 
Israel,  which  was  in  part  coincident  with 
that  of  Uzziah.  Uzzliih  and  Jeroboam 
reigned  ooutemporaneousl}*  for  twenty-six 
years.  Somewliere  during  or  rather  before 
the  end  of  that  period  Hosea  oiimmenced  his 
ministry.  Uzziah  survived  Jeruboam  some 
twenty-six  years,  then  Jotham  and  Ahaz 
in  succession  reigned  each  sixteen  yearB. 
During  all  these  fifty-eight  years  Hosea 
continued  his  ministerial  labours.  To  these 
must  be  added  a  few  years  for  the  beginning 
of  his  prophetic  career  during  the  reign  of 
Jeroboam,  and  some  two  or  three  years 
before  its  close  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah ;  for 
the  destruction  of  Bamaria,  wliich  took 
place  in  t)ie  fourth  year  of  that  king,  the 
prophet  looks  forward  to  as  still  future. 
Thus  for  three  score  years  and  more — 
probably  nearer  three  score  years  and  ten, 
the  ordinary  period  of  human  life — the 
prophet  persevered  in  the  discharge  of  his 
onerous  duties.  It  may  seem  strange  that, 
though  Hosea  exercised  his  prophetic  func- 
tion in  Israel,  j  et  the  time  during  which  he 
did  so  is  reckoned  by  the  re  igns  of  the  kings 
of  Judaii.  The  single  exception  of  Jeroboam 
II.  is  accounted  for  in  a  rabbinic  tradition 
on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  credit  or  act 
on  the  evil  report  which  Amaziah  the  priest 
of  Bethel  preferred  against  the  Prophei 
Amos,  as  we  read  (Amos  vii.  10),  "Then 
Amaziah  the  priest  of  Bethel  sent  to  Jero- 
boam King  of  Israel,  saying,  Amos  hath 
conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst  of  tha 
house  of  Israel ;  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear 
all  his  words"  (see  also  vers.  11 — 13  of  the 
same  oiiapter).  The  real  reason  for  the 
reckoning  by  the  kings  of  Judah,  and  foi 
the  exceptional  case  of  Jeroboam,  was  not 
that  assigned  by  the  rabbins;  neither  was 
it  an  indication,  on  the  part  of  the  prophet, 
of  the  legitimacy  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah 
on  the  one  band,  and  evidence,  on  the  other 
hand,  of  the  performance  of  God's  promiai 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


jm.  u  1—11. 


to  Jehn  that  Ub  Bona  would  alt  npon  the 
throne  to  the  fourth  generation,  while  Jero- 
boam, Jehu's  great-grandson,  was  the  last 
king  of  that  dynasty  by  whom  God  vouch- 
safed help  to  Israel,  his  son  and  Bnocessor 
Zechariab  retaining  possession  of  the  king- 
dom only  for  the  short  space  of  six  montlra. 
The  true  cause  is  rather  to  be  sought  in  the 
regicides,  usurpations,  occasional  anarchy, 
and  generally  unsettled  state  of  the  northern 
kingdom,  inasmuch  as  such  instability  and 
uncertainty  furnished  no  sure  or  satisfactory 
basis  for  chronological  calculation.  Thus 
we  find  that,  on  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II., 
there  was  an  interregnum  of  some  dozen 
years,  dnring  which,  of  course,  a  state  of 
anarchy  prevailed.  At  length  Zechariab 
succeeded  to  the  throne;  he  had  reigned 
only  six  months  when  he  waa  murdered  by 
Shallum.  Shallum's  reign  only  lasted  a 
month,  when  be  was  put  to  death  by  Mena- 
hem.  During  bis  reign  of  ten  years  occurred 
the  invasion  of  Ful,  Menahem's  son, 
Pekachiah,  had  only  reigned  two  years 
when  he  was  murdered  by  Pekah,  in  whose 
reign  Tiglath-pileser  invaded  the  land. 
Hoshea  slew  Pekah.  Next  followed  an  in- 
terval of  anarchy  lasting  eight  years.  Then, 
after  Hoshea's  short  reign  of  nine  years,  the 
kingdom  was  destroyed.  Thus  it  was  only 
in  the  Bouthern  kingdom  that  a  sufficiently 
firm  foundation  for  chronological  reckoning 
was  availiible,  while  under  these  circum- 
stances Jeroboam's  reign  was  necessary  to 
show  the  prophet's  connection  with  Israel, 
and  also  that  the  prediction  of  the  fourth 
verse  preceded  the  event  foretold.  The 
general  heading  of  the  whole  book  is  con- 
tained in  this  verse ;  and  Divine  authority 
is  tlius  claimed  for  tlie  whole,  as  the  prophet 
to  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  ia  only 
Jehovah's  spokesman. 

Ver.  2. — The  beginning  of  the  word  of  the 
Lord  by  (literally,  in)  Hosea.  These  words 
may  be  rendered  at  once  more  literally  and 
more  exactly,  (1)  "  The  beginning  (of  that 
wliicb)  Jehovah  spoke  by  Hosea."  Thua 
Gesenius  translates,  understanding  aeher, 
which  is  often  omitted  as  a  pronoun  in  the 
nominative  or  accusative,  indicating  relation, 
and  as  including  the  antecedent  personal  or 
demonstrative  pronoun.  When  the  pronoun 
thus  supplied  is  in  the  genitive,  the  preced- 
ing noun  is  in  the  construct  atate,  as  here, 
(2)  Boaenmiiller,  without  necessity,  takes 
the  noun  in  the  adverbial  sense ;  thus : "  In  the 
beginning  Jehovah  spake  by  Hosea."  He 
also  suggests  the  possibility  of  dibber  being 
a  noun  of  the  same  meaning  as  dabar,  but  of 
different  formation;  while  in  two  manu- 
scripta  of  De  Bosai  and  one  of  Kennicott 
the  regular  form  of  tlie  construct  atate  of 
davar  is  expressed.  {?>  Keil  takea  the  noun 
BS  an  accusative  of  time,  and  accounts  for 


Ita  construct  atate  by  the  Bnbstantlval  Idea 
of  the  succeeding  subordinated  clause ;  thus ; 
"  At  the  commencement  of  '  Jehovah  apake,' 
Jehovah  said  to  him."  But  what  ia  the 
beginning  here  mentioned  f  It  cannot  mean 
ihat  Hosea  waa  the  first  of  the  prophets  by 
whom  God  made  known  his  will  to  Israel,  or 
the  first  of  the  minor  prophets ;  for  Jonah, 
as  is  lightly  inferred  from  2  Kings  xiv.  25, 
preceded  him ;  Joel  also  is  usually  regarded 
as  before  him  in  point  of  time ;  neither  can 
it  denote  his  priority  to  Isaiah  and  Amos, 
who  also  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Uzziah. 
The  plain  meaning  is  that  which  becomes 
obvious  when  we  adopt  the  right  rendering 
of  Gesenius,  as  given  above,  that  is,  the 
beginning  of  the  prophecies  which  Hosea 
was  commissioned  by  Jehovah  to  make 
known.  The  peculiarity  of  the  expression, 
"tn  Hosea,"  as  the  word  literally  means, 
deserves  attention.  Maurer  compares  Numb, 
xii.  2,  6,  and  8,  to  prove  that  the  expression 
signifies  speaking  to  rather  than  tn  or  by ;  be 
also  cites  other  passages  to  the  same  purpose. 
But  while  the  verb  "  to  speak,"  followed  by  6', 
and  the  verb  constructed  with  it,  may  coin- 
cide in  signification  at  a  certain  point,  it  does 
not  thence  follow  that  they  are  everywhere 
and  always  synonymous.  Long  ago  Jerome 
drew  attention  to  the  distinction  which  this 
difference  of  construction  suggests.  "  It  is 
one  thing,"  says  that  Father,  "  for  the  Lord 
to  speak  in  Hosea,  another  to  speak  to  (il) 
Hosea:  when  it  ia  tn  Hosea  he  does  not 
speak  to  Hosea  himself,  but  by  Hosea  to 
others ;  but  speaking  to  Hosea  denotes  com- 
munication to  himself."  So  in  the  New 
Testament  (Heb.  i.  1)  we  find  the  corre- 
sponding Greek  expression,  via.  6  ©fbs  \a\ii- 
(ras  4v  vpoipiiTais,  which  the  Bevised  Version 
rightly  renders,  "  (lod  having  .  .  .  spoken 
...  in  the  prophets."  The  first  verse  is  the 
general  heading  for  tho  whole  book ;  the 
first  clause  of  the  second  verse  is  the  special 
heading  of  the  first  section  of  the  book, 
which  extends  to  the  end  of  the  third 
chapter.  And  the  Lord  said  to  Hosea,  Go, 
take  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  and 
children  of  whoredoms.  Whether  the  trans- 
actiou  here  enjoined  is  to  be  understood  as 
a  reality,  or  a  vision,  or  an  allegory,  htts  been 
keenly  debated.  "To  enter  fully  into  the 
discussion  of  this  point  would  lead  us  too 
far  from  our  purpoe ;  nor  could  it  minister 
to  edification.  Though  high  authorities 
have  maintained  it  to  be  a  real  occurrence, 
we  do  not  see  our  way  to  concur  with  their 
view.  A  canon  of  interpretation  sanctioned 
by  Augustine  forbids  the  literal  acceptation 
of  this  command,  for,  according  to  the  canon 
referred  to,  if  the  language  of  Scripture 
taken  literally  would  involve  something 
incongruous  or  morally  improper,  the  figura- 
tive sens*  must  be  preferred.    Again,  ws 


0>.  L  1— IL] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


can  scarcely  underBtand  it  of  a  vision ;  for 
there  is  no  mention  of  or  reference  to  any- 
thingof  tliat  kind  in  the  passage,  nor  does  the 
context  countenance  the  notion  of  a  vision. 
Keil  regards  it  ag  Buch  when  he  speaks  of  it 
as  "an  inward  and  spiritual  intuition  in 
which  the  word  of  God  was  addressed  "  to 
the  prophet.  We  are,  therefore,  shut  up  to 
that  interpretation  which  explains  the  whole 
as  an  allegorical  or  imaginary  narrative, 
which  is  thus  constructed  in  order  to  impart 
greater  vividness  to  the  prophet's  declaration. 
The  Chaldee  paraphrase  understands  it  in 
this  Bense.  "Go,"  says  the  paraphrait, 
"  declare  a  prophecy  against  the  inhabitants 
of  the  idolatrous  city,  who  persist  in  sin." 
Jerome  also  explains  it  allegorically,  and 
urges  against  the  literal  sense  that  passage 
in  Gzek.  iv.  4 — 6,  where  the  prophet  is  com- 
manded by  God  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  tlie 
house  of  Israel,  and  to  lie  upon  his  left 
side  three  hundred  and  ninety  days — a 
thing  impossible  according  to  tiie  literal 
understanding  of  the  injunction ;  he  accord- 
ingly ooncludeB,  in  reference  to  the  particu- 
lars here  commanded,  that  "  sacramenta 
indicant  futurorum."  Calvin  liglitly  under- 
stands it  in  the  sense  of  a  paiabolic  repre- 
sentation as  follows :  "  The  Lord  liad  hidden 
him  (the  prophet)  to  relate  tliis  parable,  so 
to  speak,  or  this  similitude,  that  the  people 
miglit  see,  as  in  a  living  portraiture,  their 
turpitude  and  perfidiousness.  It  is,  in  short, 
an  exhibition  in  which  the  thing  itself  is 
not  only  set  forth  in  words,  but  is  aCo  placed, 
as  it  were,  before  their  eyes  in  a  visible 
form."  Kimohi  considers  it  to  he  a  pro- 
phetic vision;  while  some  of  the  older 
Hebrew  interpreters  viewed  it  in  the  light 
of  an  actual  transaction.  Kimohi's  words 
are:  "And  the  whole  took  place  in  the 
vision  of  prophecy,  not  that  Hosea  the 
prophet  had  taken  to  himself  a  wife  of 
whoredoms;  although  it  is  found  in  the. 
words  of  our  rabbins  that  the  meaning  it 
according  to  the  literal  signification  of  the 
words."  By  "a  wife  of  whoredoms"  we  under- 
stand a  woman  addicted  to  whoredoms,  and 
thus  likely  to  prove  an  unfaithful  wife,  as  "  a 
woman  of  quarrels  "  is  a  quarrelsome  woman, 
"a  man  of  bloods"  is  a  bloody  man, "  a  man  of 
sorrows"  a  sorrowful  man ;  while  "children 
of  whoredoms"  are  children  who  follow  in 
the  footsteps  of  their  mother's  lewdness,  or 
children  on  whose  birth  their  mother's 
licentiousness  had  left  a  stigma  so  that  their 
legitimacy  is  questionable.  The  construc- 
tion of  the  verb  "  take,"  with  both  objects,  is 
an  example  of  the  figure  zeugma,  by  which 
one  word  does  duty  to  two  clauses,  though 
it  undergoes  a  modification  of  sense  in  its 
application  to  the  second.  The  meaning 
here  is  clearly  that  the  prophet  should  take 
•  wife  of  the  character  indicated,  and  beget 


children  by  her,  not  take  such  a  wife  and 
such  children  aheady  bnrn  to  her.  This 
view  is  favoured  by  the  Vulgate,  Sume  tibi 
uxcrrem  fomicationum  et/ac  tibi  filioi  fomi- 
eatiomim;  though  Keil  maintains  that 
Hosea  was  to  take  children  of  prostitution 
as  well  as  a  wife  who  had  lived  by  prostitu- 
tion. Tor  the  land  hath  committed  great 
whoredom,  departing  from  the  Lord.  This 
is  more  exactly  rendered,  for  the  land  liath 
utterly  gone  a-whoring  from  after  (that  is, 
from  follmning)  the  Lord.  From  this  we 
learn  the  symbolic  import  of  the  command, 
in  whatever  way  that  command  is  inter- 
preted, whether  as  a  reality,  or  vision,  or 
allegory.  The  prophet's  marria^^e  to  an  un- 
faithful wife  sets  forth  Jehovah's  marriage 
to  an  unfaithful  nation.  God  often  conde- 
scends— graciously  condescends — to  repre- 
sent his  relation  to  his  people  as  a  marriage 
covenant;  while  unfaithfulness  on  their 
part  is  spiritual  adultery.  The  mother  and 
the  children  may  represent  the  country  and 
its  inhabitants,  or  the  nation  as  a  whole 
and  its  several  members,  or  generally  the 
people  and  their  posterity  in  succeeding 
generations.  The  father  of  the  Hebrew  race 
liad  served  other  gods  on  the  other  side  of 
the  flood,  that  is,  in  Ur,  in  the  land  of  the 
Chaldees,  whence  God  had  called  Abra- 
liam.  When  taken  iuto  covenant  relation- 
ship, how  often  had  they  fallen  into  the 
former  sin  of  idolatry  1  The  fearful  conse- 
quences of  their  sin  is  ^aphically  por- 
trayed in  the  verses  immediately  following, 
symbolized  in  the  names  of  the  prophet's 
children.  They  are — ^national  ruin,  the  loss 
of  the  Divine  favour,  and  the  forfeiture  of 
their  proud  position  as  the  chosen  people  of 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  3. — So  he  went  and  took  Qomer  the 
daughter  of  Diblaim ;  which  conceived,  and 
bare  ^li™  a  soil  Kimchi  conjectures  that 
"Gomer  was  the  name  of  a  harlot  well 
known  at  that  time  ;"  he  also  e;;plaius  the 
name,  according  to  his  view  of  its  symbolic 
import,  as  follows :  "  Gomer  has  the  meaning 
of '  completion ; '  as  if  the  prophet  said,  He 
will  fully  execute  on  them  the  punishment 
of  their  transgressions  that  he  may  forgive 
their  iniquity."  The  names  of  the  children 
bom  to  the  prophet  are  significant  and  sym- 
bolical; and  their  symbolic  significance  is 
explained.  The  names  mentioned  in  this 
verse  are  also  significant,  though  their  sig- 
nificance is  not  expressly  stated,  as  in  the 
former  case ;  the  cause  of  the  omission  being 
the  feet  that  these  names  were  not,  like  the 
others,  now  received  for  the  first  time,  but 
simply  retained.  Gomer  denotes  "com- 
pletion "  or  "  consummation,"  from  a  verbal 
root  signifying  "  to  perfect"  or  "  come  to  an 
end ; "  and  Diblaim  is  the  dual  of  ifbhtldh, 
the  ploial  being  d'hTuUm,  ban  the  verb 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[OB.  t,  l-'U' 


(lahhal,  to  press  together  into  a  mass,  espe- 
cially a  round  mass.  The  meaning  of  the 
word,  then,  is  "two  cakes,"  that  is,  of  dried 
figs  pressed  together  in  lumps.  It  may  be 
observed,  in  passing,  that  the  Greek  waKdSii 
seems  to  cume  from  the  Aramaio  form 
d'lhalta,  by  the  omission  of  the  initial  daleth. 
But  what  is  the  mystic  meaning  which  the 
prophet  veils  under  the  two  names  Consum- 
niatiun  and  Compressed  fig-cakes  (cakes  of 
compressed  figs)?  The  one  may  hint  not 
obscurely  consummation  in  sin  and  in  the 
suffering  which  is  the  ultimate  consequence 
of  sin  ;  while  the  other  may  imply  the  sweet- 
ness of  sensual  indulgences,  especially  such 
as  idolatrous  celebrants  were  prone  to.  If, 
then,  the  symbolical  interpretation  of  these 
names  be  allowable,  we  may  accept  that 
given  by  Jerome.  He  says,  "  Out  of  Israel 
is  taken  typically  by  Hosua  a  wife  consum- 
mated in  fornication,  and  a  perfect  daughter 
of  pleasure  which  seems  sweet  and  pleasant 
to  those  who  enjoy  it."  There  is,  moreover, 
an  obvious  appropriateness  in  the  names 
thus  symbulically  understood.  The  pro- 
phet, whose  name  signifies  "  salvation,"  mar- 
ries a  woman  who  was  a  daughter  of  plea- 
sure and  a  votary  of  sin;  this  alliance 
represents  the  relation  into  which  Jehovah, 
witli  his  saving  power,  had  mercifully  taken 
Israel ;  but  that  people,  unmindful  and  un- 
thankful for  such  mercy,  and  intent  on  the 
indulgence  of  a  sinful  course,  went  from  bad 
to  worse  in  apostasy  and  idolatry  till  God 
at  length  left  them  in  their  impenitence 
and  abandoned  them  to  their  fate.  The  con- 
ception and  birth  of  Gomer's  son  to  the 
prophet,  though  several  authorities  omit 
"  him,"  give  no  countenance  to  the  idea  of 
the  child  being  supposititious;  and  so  lax 
there  seems  to  be  some  confirmation  of  the 
opinion  of  Keil  referred  to  under  ver.  2. 

Ver.  4. — And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,  Call 
his  name  Jezreel.  Tlie  name  which  the 
people  inherited  from  a  distinguished  an- 
cestor was  one  of  honour  and  dignity — 
Israel  or  Yisrael,  "  prince  with  God  ; "  the 
name  imposed  by  their  sins  was  one  of 
reproach  and  disaster — Izreel,  or  Yizreel, 
"  souttered  by  God."  The  Hebrews  had  a 
[leuuliar  fondness  for  a  paronomasia  of  this 
kind ;  thus  Bethel,  "  house  of  God,"  be- 
comes Bethaven,  "  house  of  vanity."  Keil 
regrets  the  uppellative  sense  in  this  passage, 
and  refers  to  the  historical  importance  of 
the  place.  The  latter  view  seems  favoured 
by  tlie  succeeding  explanation  of  the  name. 
For  yet  a  little  while,  and  I  will  avenge 
(visit)  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house 
of  Jehu.  The  verb  here  rendered  "avenge  " 
is  literally  to  "  visit,"  and  is  used  sometimes 
in  a  good  sense,  implying  a  benevolent  pur- 
pose, as  in  Buth  i.  ti,  "  For  she  had  heanl 
in  the  country  of  Muab  how  that  the  Lord 


had  Tisited  his  people  in  giving  them 
bread;"  sometimes  it  ezpiesse*  a  hostile 
intention,  as  in  Exod.  xx.  S,  "  I  the  Lord 
thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the 
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children." 
In  the  present  passage,  as  elsewhere  in  this 
book  (see  ch.  ii.  13 ;  ir.  9),  it  is  taken  in 
the  lense  assigned  it  in  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, with  which  the  Septuagint  and  Syriac 
are  in  accord.  But  what  are  we  to  under- 
stand by  the  blood  of  Jezreel,  which  brought 
down  this  vengeance  on  the  house  of  Jehu  ? 
Some  suppose  that  the  expression  denotes 
the  bloody  deeds  of  Ahab's  bouse,  including, 
not  only  the  murder  of  Naboth,  but  also 
their  bloody  persecution  of  the  servants  and 
prophets  of  Jehovah,  as  we  read  in  1  Kings 
xviii.  4,  that "  Jezebel  cut  olt'  the  prophets 
of  the  Lord ; "  and  in  2  Kings  ix.  7, "  Thou 
shalt  smite  the  house  of  Ahab  thy  master, 
that  I  may  avenge  the  blood  of  my  servants 
the  prophets,  and  the  blood  of  all  the  ser- 
vants of  the  Lord,  at  the  hand  of  Jezebel." 
These  and  like  deeds  of  blood  brought  down 
retribution  on  the  house  of  Ahab;  Jehu, 
the  instrument  of  this  retribution,  was  him- 
self guilty  of  such  enormities  that  the  cry 
of  blood  for  vengeance  was  repeated,  and 
the  criminality  of  the  preceding  dynasty 
continuing,  the  ate  of  Jehu's  was  redoubled. 
This  view  appears  to  us  both  clumsy  and 
far-fetched.  The  plain  meaning  is  that 
which  refers  the  blood  of  Jezreel  to  the 
bloody  massacres  of  Jehu  himself,  when  in 
a  single  day  he  put  an  end  to  the  dynasty 
of  Omri  and  the  wicked  house  of  Ahab.  On 
that  memorable  occasion  he  slew  the  queen- 
mother  Jezebel,  the  seventy  sons  of  Ahab, 
and  forty-two  relatives  of  King  Ahaziah,  also 
all  the  prophets  of  Baal,  all  his  servants 
and  all  his  priests.  The  royal  house  of 
Israel  he  exterminated,  for  he  "slew  all 
that  remained  of  the  house  o'.'  Ahab  in 
Jezreel,  and  all  his  great  men,  and  his  kins- 
folks, and  his  priests,  until  he  left  him  none 
remaining;"  the  royal  house  of  Judah  he 
brought  at  the  same  time  to  the  very  verge 
of  extinction.  The  slaughter  of  Ahab's 
SODS,  of  Jezebel  and  Joram,  and  that  whole 
royal  line,  was,iit  is  true,  in  compliance  with 
God's  express  command ;  and,  for  the  mea- 
sure of  his  obedience  to  that  command, 
Jehu  was  rewarded  by  the  piomise  of  his 
family  occupying  the  throne  of  Israel  to 
the  fourlli  generation.  But  what  wm  the 
motive  that  prompted  this  performance  of 
the  Divine  will  ?  Was  it  really  zeal  for  God, 
as  he  pretended,  and  consequent  diligence 
in  obeying  the  Divine  direction?  Or  did 
human  passion  predominate  and  political 
advantage  hurry  him  on?  We  trow  not. 
Certain  it  is  that  his  subsequent  career 
rendered  the  purity  of  his  zeal  more  than 
duubtfuL    He  exterminated  the  idolatry  of 


OB.  I.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


Baal,  but  he  clave  to  the  oalvea  of  Jeroboam 
at  Bethel  and  Dan — the  fundamental  sin  of 
the  kinga  of  IsraeL  In  what  he  did,  there- 
fore, the  act  itself  was  right,  for  God  com- 
manded it ;  but  the  motive  was  wrong,  for 
it  was  selfish  ambition  that  prompted  it. 
Thui  it  was  with  Baasha;  he  executed 
vengeance  by  command  of  Qod  on  the  wicked 
house  of  Jeroboam  I.,  and  for  so  doing  was 
exalted  to  be  priuco  over  Gkid's  people 
Israel;  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
againat  him,  as  we  read,  "  For  all  the  evil 
that  he  did  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord, ...  in 
being  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam;  and  be- 
cause he  killed  him."  The  Ohaldee  regards 
the  blood  shed  by  Jehu  in  Jezreel,  though 
shed  in  a  righteous  cause  and  for  the  root- 
ing ont  of  the  Baal  idolatry,  aa  innocent 
blood,  because  Jehu  himself  and  his  house 
turned  aside  to  the  idolatry  of  the  calves. 
Jerome  takes  a  similar  view  of  the  matter. 
Kimchi  adopts  the  same ;  his  words,  literally 
translated,  are  the  following:  "And  why 
does  he  call  it  the  blood  of  Jezreel  ?  Be- 
cause it  was  shed  in  Jezreel.  And  though 
in  this  matter  he  did  that  which  was  right 
in  the  eyes  of  Jehovah,  yet,  since  he  did  not 
observe  to  walk  in  the  Law  of  Jehovah,  and 
did  not  turn  aside  from  all  the  sins  of  Jero- 
boam the  son  of  Nebat,  the  blood  which  he 
bhed  was  reckoned  to  him  as  innocent 
blood."  He  then  adduces  as  a  parallel  the 
case  of  Baasha  already  mentioned.  And 
will  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the  house 
of  Israel.  Jeroboam  II.,  the  third  of  Jehu's 
family,  was  now  reigning;  a  fourth  member 
of  the  same  was  to  occupy  the  throne. 
That  fourth  sovereign  was  Zechariah,  whose 
short  inglorious  reign  lasted  only  six 
months,  at  the  expiration  of  which  he  fell 
a  victim  in  the  conspiracy  by  Shallum. 
Thus  ended  the  dynasty  of  Jehu;  while  it» 
overthrow  paralyzed  the  strength  of  the 
northern  kingdom.  And,  though  the  day 
of  its  complete  destruction  was  deferred  for 
half  a  century,  yet  the  disorders,  dethrone- 
ments, anarchy  at  times,  and  repeated 
assassination  of  the  sovereigns,  to  which 
Meuahem  was  the  only  exception,  prepared 
the  way  for  the  final  catastrophe.  The 
overthrow  of  the  house  of  Jeliu  hai  been 
aptly  termed  by  Hengstenberg  "  the  begin- 
ning of  the  end,  the  commencement  of  th« 
process  of  decomposition." 

Ver.  5. — And  it  shall  oome  to  pass  at  that 
day,  that  I  will  break  the  how  of  Israel  in 
the  valley  of  Jezreel.  Here  we  have  a  pre- 
diction of  a  most  momentous  event,  with 
express  statement  of  the  place  where  it 
should  occur,  as  also  the  time  of  its  occur- 
rence. The  event  itself  was  more  than  the 
downfall  of  a  dynasty ;  it  was  the  destruc- 
tion of  a  kingdom.  The  date  of  that  de- 
struction ia  defined  simply  aa  the  period 


when  God  would  punish  the  sins  of  both 
the  princes  and  people  of  Israel  The  close 
of  Jehu's  dynasty  was  at  once  the  prepara- 
tion for  and  the  commencement  of  the  ces- 
sation of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  The  plaoe 
of  this  calamity  was  the  Valley  of  Jezreel. 
This  famous  valley  was  the  cockpit  of 
Palestine.  There  Israel  conquered  the  host 
of  King  Jabin ;  there  Gideon  overthrew  the 
Midianites ;  there  Saul  was  defeated  by  the 
Philistines,  when  driven  up  the  slopes  of 
Gilboa  "  the  beauty  of  Israel  was  slain  in 
thy  high  places ; "  there  a  defeat  equally 
sorrowful  and  not  less  disastrous  was  aggra- 
vated by  the  death  of  good  King  Josiah,  and 
pruved  fatal  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah ;  there, 
too,  in  later  times,  the  last  con  diet  took  place 
between  the  Crusaders  and  the  Moslems,  in 
which  victory  crowned  the  arms  of  Sala- 
din:  there,  also,  was  fought  the  battle,  as 
we  learn  from  this  passage,  which  decided 
the  fate  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  The 
situation  of  this  valley  was  admirably  suited 
for  such  scenes.  This  plain,  or  valley, 
broad  aa  it  is  beautiful,  begins  where  the 
maritime  plain,  interrupted  by  the  ridge  of 
Oarmel,  turns  aside  and  extends  across  the 
centre  of  the  country  &om  the  Mediterranean 
Sea  on  tiie  west  to  the  Jordan  valley  on  the 
east,  and  firom  the  hills  of  Galilee  on  the 
north  to  those  of  Ephraim  or  Samaria  on 
the  south.  The  form  of  this  plain  is  tri- 
angular; its  eastern  side  or  base  is  fifteen 
miles,  reaching  from  Engannim,  now  Jenin, 
to  the  hills  below  Nazareth ;  the  north  side 
along  the  hills  of  Galilee  is  twelve  miles ; 
the  southern,  formed  by  the  hills  of  Sa- 
maria, is  eighteen  miles;  while  the  apex  of 
this  somewhat  irregular  triangle  is  a  narrow 
pasa  through  which  the  river  Kishon — 
"that  ancient  river,  the  liver  Kishon" — 
with  its  winding  stream  mtikes  its  way  to 
the  sea.  On  the  east  there  are  tliree 
branches  in  the  direction  of  the  Jordan, 
which  bear  a  remote  resemblance  to  the 
fingera  of  a  hand.  The  northern  branch 
passes  between  Tabor  and  Little  Hermon, 
or  Jtibel  ed-Dahy;  the  central  one,  which  is 
the  Valley  of  Jezreel  proper,  runs  between 
Shunem  and  Jeireel,  now  Zerin}  the 
southern  between  Mount  Gilboa  and  En- 
gannim, now  Jenin — this  branch,  having  no 
outlet,  loses  itself  among  the  eastern  hills. 
The  name  of  thia  plain  was  derived  from 
the  city  of  Jezreel,  situated  near  its  eastern 
extremity  on  a  spur  of  Mount  Gilboa,  which 
Ahab  chose  as  a  royal  residence,  and 
which  remained  so  for  three  successive 
reigns,  though  in  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II. 
Sapiaria  had  again,  as  in  the  days  of  Umri, 
become  the  royal  citv.  In  this  great  plain, 
called  by  the  Greeks  Esdraelon,  tlic  bow 
of  Israel  was  to  be  broken.  The  bow 
(qesheth,  rad.  qaihah,  hard,  stiff',  unb(ui<l- 


THE  BOOK  OF  HGSEAi 


[oh.  1, 1—11. 


ing)  was  the  warrior'B  •weapon  of  offence 
and  defence — strong  and  powerful;  the 
breaking  of  hie  bow  deprived  him  of  his 
chief  weapon,  and  left  him  at  the  mercy  of 
the  enemy  to  conquer  or  to  kill ;  thus  we 
read,  "  His  bow  abode  in  strength ;  "  and 
again,  "  My  glory  was  fresh  in  me,  and  my 
bow  was  renewed  in  my  hand."  But  while 
such  general  references  prove  the  bow  to 
have  been  an  emblem  of  strength  and 
power,  as  Kimchi  explains  it,  still  there  is 
something  very  special  and  suitable  in  the 
expression  of  the  prophet  here.  "In  one 
im])ortant  respect,"  says  the  author  of  the 
'Jewish  Church,'  "the  ancient  military  glory 
of  Israel  was,  if  not  confined  to  the  northern 
kingdom,  yet  regarded  as  eminently  cha- 
racteristic of  it.  JadBh,  with  all  its  war- 
like qualities,  had  never  been  celebrated 
for  its  archery.  The  use  of  the  bow  was 
there  a  late  acquisition  (2  Sam.  i  18).  But 
in  Benjamin  and  Ephraim  it  had  been  an 
habitual  weapon.  The  bow  of  Jonathan 
was  known  far  and  wide.  The  children  of 
Ephraim  were  characterized  as  'carrying 
bows.'  And  so  the  chief  weapon  of  the 
captaia  of  the  host  of  Israel  was  his  bow. 
The  King  of  Israel  had  always  his  bow  and 
arrows  with  him.  The  sign  of  the  fall  of 
tiie  kingdom  was  the  breaking  of  the  bow 
of  Israel."  The  language  employed  by  the 
prophet  was  thus  singularly  appropriate.  An 
historical  basis,  though  denied  by  some  and 
pronounced  precarious  by  others,  is,  wo 
have  little  doubt,  found  for  this  prediction 
in  ch.  X.  14  of  this  very  book.  The  bow, 
that  is,  the  archery  in  which  Israel  excelled 
so  much,  was  broken  in  tlie  Valley  of  Jezreel, 
when  Shalmon,  identified  with  Shalman- 
ezer,  Xing  of  Assyria  by  Pusey  and  Stan- 
ley, spoiled  Beth-Arbel,  or  Arbela,  the 
city  between  Sepphoris  and  Tiberias,  and 
near  the  middle  of  the  valley,  and  thus 
crushed  Israel  iu  an  overwhelming  defeat. 
If  the  identification  be  sustained,  that  day 
of  battle  was  most  calamitous  to  Israel,  and 
as  cruel  as  calamitous,  for  neither  the  help- 
lessness of  infaucy  nor  the  tenderness  of 
womanhood  was  spared ;  the  infants  were 
dashed  to  death  against  the  stones,  and  the/ 
mothers  then  hurled  in  mortal  agony  upon 
the  dead  bodies  of  their  little  ones.  Eimchi 
explains  it  generally :  "  On  that  day  when 
I  shall  visit  the  blood  of  Jezreel,  I  shall 
break  the  bow  of  Israel,  that  is  to  say,  their 
might  and  power." 

Yer.  6. — And  she  oonoeived  again,  and 
bare  a  daughter.  And  God  said  unto  him, 
Call  her  name  Lo-mhamah,  The  first  birth 
symbolized  the  blood-guiltiness  and  idolatry 
of  Israel,  and  the  consequent  destruction. 
Two  other  births  follow  to  confirm  the 
certainty  of  the  coming  calamity,  to  develop 
it   further,  and    exhibit    the  nation  »rer 


which  it  impended  under  new  phases,  ai 
also  to  show  the  prospect  of  deliverance  to 
be  hopeless.  The  change  of  sex  intiy  in- 
dicate the  totality  of  the  nation,  male  and 
female,  as  Eeil  thinks ;  or  rather  the  weak 
and  defenceless  condition  of  Israel  after 
their  bow  was  broken  and-  their  power 
crushed  by  the  enemy.  They  are  now 
ready  to  be  led  into  captivity,  like  a  female 
helpless  and  powerless  and  exposed  to  all 
the  insults  of  the  conquerors.  The  birth  of 
the  daughter  is  thus  explained  by  Eimolii : 
"After  she  had  borne  a  son,  which  is  a 
proverbial  reference  to  Jeroboam  the  son  of 
Joash  .  .  .  she  bore  a  daughter,  who  refers 
parabolically  to  Zechariah  and  to  Shallum 
son  of  Jabesh,  who  reigned  after  him,  who 
were  weak  as  a  female."  The  name  given 
to  the  child  is  Unpitied,  or  Unfavoured,  if 
ruchamah  be  taken  as  a  mutilated  parti- 
ciple, the  initial  mem  being  dropped,  though 
lo  is  not  found  in  close  conneution  with 
a  participle ;  or,  8he-is-not-pitied,  if  the 
word  be  a  verb.  In  either  case,  the  mercy 
which  if  exercised  would  save  her  from  the 
miseries  of  captivity,  is  clean  gone;  and 
the  love  which,  if  it  existed,  would  prompt 
that  exercise  of  mercy,  is  no  longer  to  bu 
looked  for.  7or  I  will  no  more  have  mercy 
upon  the  hoTise  of  Israel;  but  I  will  utterly 
take  them  away  (margin,  Ihat  I  thovJd 
altogether  pardon  them).  Aben  Ezra 
quotes  the  correct  meaning  as  follows: 
"  Some  say  that  'h'i  is  that  I  have  up  till 
now  forgiven  their  iniquity ;  "  and  Eim- 
chi: "Hithwto  I  have  forgiven  and  par- 
doned them,  because  I  have  had  mercy 
upon  them;  but  I  shall  continue  to  do  so 
no  more."  nij;,  again,  from  Tip,  to  return 
or  repeat.  The  construction  of  the  first 
clause  is  peculiar.  Bosenmiiller  cites  as 
parallel  Isa.  xlvii.  1,  5  and  Prov.  xxiii. 
35 ;  but  more  exact  parallels  are  1  Sam. 
ii.  3  and  ch.  vi.  3,  in  both  of  which,  and 
also  in  the  text,  Eimchi  and  Aben  Ezra 
understand  asher  before  the  second  verb. 
The  last  clause  of  the  verse,  however,  pre- 
sents a  real  difSculty,  as  we  may  infer 
from  the  variety  of  interpretations  to  which 
it  has  been  subjected.  The  LXX.  has  'Ai>ti- 
ratrffiiitvos  ivTiTi^o/jiai  aliTois,  "  But  I  will 
surely  set  myself  in  array  against  them." 
Jerome,  confounding  the  verb  with  7W3, 
translates,  "But  I  will  entirely  forget  thorn." 
Bashi:  "I  will  distribute  to  them  a  por- 
tion of  their  eup  and  of  their  deeds,"  viz. 
as  they  have  deserved  by  their  deeds. 
Kimchi :  "  I  will  raise  up  enemia*  agaimt 
them,  who  shall  carry  them  into  captivity 
and  lay  waste  their  land."  Aben  Ezra : 
"I  will  take  them  away;"  he  quotes  for 
this  meaning  of  the  text  Job  xzxii.  2, 
and  takes  the  prefix  2'  as  the  Aramaic  sign 
of  the  accusative,  giving  as  a  notable  ex- 


OH.  I.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF   HOSEA. 


ample  of  the  same  2  Sam.  ill.  80,  haregu 
httbntit  for  iOti-aimer.  The  Syriac  Veiaion  is 
similar.  A  more  feasible  Tendering,  if  the 
meaning  of  "take  away"  be  retained,  ia 
that  of  Hengstenberg  and  others,  who  trans- 
late it:  "I  will  utterly  take  away  from 
them,  or  with  regard  to  them,"  viz.  every- 
thing. We  prefer  the  sense  of  "pardon," 
OS  given  in  the  Chaldee;  in  the  margin 
af  the  Authorized  Version ;  by  Ewald, 
Wiiosche,  and  Delitzsoh;  and  mentioned 
by  Aben  Ezra  and  KimchL  Thus  it  will 
read :  "  I  will  no  more  favour  them  that  I 
should  verily  forgive  them."  The  first  verb 
literally  means  the  pitiful  yearning  of 
parental  love — the  strong  feeling  of  affection 
which  the  Greeks  expressed  by  (rropyji, 
Paul's  rendering  of  the  word  with  the 
privative  denotes  absence  of  love;  and 
Peter's  the  absence  of  mercy.  Both  notions 
are  contained  in  the  word,  and  their  rela- 
tion is  well  explained  by  Fusey,  who  says, 
"  It  is  tender  love  in  him  who  pitieth ;  merey 
as  shown  to  him  who  needeth  mercy."  Now, 
the  connection  between  such  tenderness  of 
love  and  forgiving  mercy  is  natural  and 
close.  Many  an  instance  of  this  had  been 
experienced  in  the  previous  history  of 
Israel ;  many  a  time  God's  compassion  had 
been  extended  to  his  erring  people,  not- 
withstanding their  manifold  provocations ; 
but  that  day  is  gone — the  Divine  long- 
suffering  is  exhausted.  Once  Israel  is  car- 
ried captive,  there  shall  be  no  return ;  no 
mercy  to  restore  them,  as  in  the  case  of 
Judah. 

Yer.  7. — But  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the 
house  of  Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the 
Lord  their  God.  Thus  the  contrast  ex- 
pressed in  this  verse  increases  the  painful 
feelings  with  which  the  threatened  aban- 
donment and  consequent  destruction  of 
Israel  would  be  regarded.  The  promised 
mercy  to  the  house  of  Judah  is  emphasized 
by  the  peculiar  form  of  the  expression. 
Instead  of  the  pronoun,  the  proper  name  of 
Jehovah  is  employed;  instead  of  saying,  "  I 
will  save  them  by  myself,"  he  says  in  a 
specially  emphatic  manner,  "I  will  save 
them  by  Jehovah,"  adding  at  the  same 
time  the  important  adjunct  of  "  thy  God," 
to  remind  them  of  that  relationship  to 
himself  in  virtue  of  which  he  interposes 
thus  personally  and  powerfully  on  their 
behalf.  An  expression  somewhat  similar 
in  form  occurs  in  Gen.  xix.  24,  "Then 
the  Lord  [Jehovah]  rained  upon  Sodom 
and  upon  Gomorrah  brimstone  and  fire 
from  the  Lord  [Jehovah]  out  of  heaven." 
And  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by 
sword,  nor  by  battle  (liteially,  war),  by 
horses,  nor  by  horsemen.  This  enumeration 
is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  prophet's 
ftyle,  08  may  be  seen  at  a  glance  by  een- 


parlng  oh.  H.  5, 11,  22  ;  iii.  4 ;  and  iv.  13. 
The  manner  of  this  deliverance  is  very 
peculiar  and  unusual;  while  prominence 
is  given  to  the  absence  of  those  means 
of  defence  or  deliverance  on  which  the 
northern  kingdom  so  much  relied.  The 
deliverance  would  be  accomplished  without 
the  ordinary  weapons  of  war — bow  and  sword, 
in  the  use  of  the  former  of  which  Israel  was 
so  celebrated;  also  without  war,  that  is, 
without  its  appliances  md  materiel  of 
whatever  kind — skilful  commanders,  brave 
soldiers,  and  numerous  troops ;  likewise 
without  horses  and  horsemen,  a  great  source 
of  strength  in  those  days  {paraahim,  equi- 
valent to  "riders  on  horses,"  as  distin- 
guished from  Tolcbhim,  riders  on  camels). 
This  deliverance,  in  fact,  was  to  be  entirely 
independent  of  all  human  resources.  All 
this  points  plainly  and  positively  to  the 
deliverance  of  Judah  from  Sennacherib  in 
the  days  of  Hezekiah,  when  in  one  night  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  smote  a  hundred  and 
eighty-five  thousand  of  the  flower  of  the 
Assyrian  host,  and  Jehovah  thus  by  him- 
self delivered  Judah.  Thus,  too,  Judah  is 
saved  from  that  power  before  which  Israel 
had  previously  and  entirely  succumbed. 
(Compare,  on  this  miraculous  deliverance, 
2  Kings  xix.  and  Isa.  xxxvii.) 

Ver.  8. — Kow  when  she  had  weaned  Lo- 
ruhamah,  she  conceived,  and  bare  a  son. 
As  Eastern  mothers  nurse  their  children 
some  two  or  three  years,  the  process  of 
weaning  at  the  end  of  that  period  would 
imply  a  corresponding  interval.  This  may 
be  merely  an  incident  to  complete  the  pro- 
phetic declaration,  and  pleasingly  vary  the 
narrative.  It  is  rather,  we  think,  a  pause  in 
the  progress  of  the  approaching  calamity — 
a  pause  indicative  of  the  Divine  lothness 
to  execute  the  final  sentence.  Or  the 
weaning  may  be  referred,  with  some,  to  the 
entire  withdrawal  of  all  spiritual  nourish- 
ment and  support,  when  promise  and  pro 
phecy,  instruction  and  consolation,  symbol 
and  sacrifice,  would  be  abolished. 

Yer.  9. — Then  said  God,  Call  his  name 
Lo-ommi :  for  ye  are  not  my  people,  and  I 
will  not  be  your  God.  Here  we  have  the 
climax  of  Israel's  fate.-  The  prophet's 
children,  whether  actual,  visionary,  or  alle- 
gorical, symbolized  step  by  step  the  sad 
gradation  in  Israel's  fast-coming  calamity. 
The  name  Jezreel,  whether  taken  to  mean 
their  being  scattered  by  God  or  their  suf- 
fering the  sorrowful  consequences  of  their 
multiplied  delinquencies,  in  either  case 
denotes  the  first  blow  dealt  to  them  by 
Divine  providence.  But  from  that  it  was 
possible  by  repentance  to  recover ;  and, 
though  dispersed,  they  were  not  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  Divine  aompassion,  nor  beyond 
the  power  of  the  Divine  arm  to  collect  and 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[CH.  L  1—11. 


bring  together  again.  But  Lo-ruhammah, 
Unpitied,  or  Unoompassionated,  imports  an- 
otlier  and  a  still  iieavier  blovr ;  and,  thougli 
dispersed  far  and  near,  and  tliongh  left  in 
the  places  of  their  dispersion  without  pity 
and  without  compassion,  still  there  might 
be  a  good  time  coming  in  the  near  or  in  the 
distant  future,  when  a  favourable  change  in 
their  circumatances  would  be  brought  about 
so  tliat  they  would  be  both  collected  to- 
gether, or  comforted  and  compassioiiattd. 
The  name  Lo-ammi,  however,  puts  an  end 
to  Iiope,  implying  as  it  does  a  total  rejection 
and  an  entire  renunciation  of  the  people  of 
Israel  on  the  part  of  the  Almiglty.  The 
national  covenant  is  annulled ;  God  has 
cast  off  his  people,  who  are  thus  left  hope- 
less as  helpless,  because  of  their  sinful  ami 
ungrateful  departure  from  the  Source  of  all 
mercy  and  the  Fountain  of  all  blessing. 
The  expression  of  this  is  very  touching: 
"  Ye,"  says  God,  now  addressing  them 
directly  and  personally,  "  ai  e  not — are  no 
longer,  my  people;  and  I  will  not  be  yours." 
Such  is  the  literal  rendering  of  this  now 
sad  but  once  tender  expression — tender,  un- 
speakably tender,  as  long  as  applicable;  sad, 
inexpressibly  sad,  now  that  its  ejijoymeiit 
is  for  ever  gone. 

Ver.  10. — Yet  the  number  of  the  children  of 
Israel  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which 
cannot  be  measured  nor  numberod.  The 
division  of  the  verses  at  this  pliice  is  faiiUy 
both  in  our  common  HcbrewBibles  and  iu  the 
Authorized  Version.  The  former  connects 
vers.  10  and  11  with  the  second  chapter,  and 
the  latter  closes  the  first  chapter  with  these 
verses,  and  thus  detaclips  them  from  the  fii  st 
verse  of  the  second  chapter.  Tlie  correct 
arrangement  combines  vers.  10  and  11  of 
ch.  i.  with  ver.  1  of  ch.  ii.,  and  concludes 
the  first  chapter  with  these  throe  verses, 
which  are  so  closely  joined  together  in  sen:>e. 
Here  is  the  usual  cycle  of  events— human 
sinfulness,  deserved  punishment,  and  Divine 
mercy.  Had  the  last  element  been  wanting, 
the  promise  of  a  countless  posterity  made  to 
Abraham,  renewed  to  Isaac,  and  confirmed 
to  Jacob,  might  appear  abolished.  Yet,  not- 
withstanding the  rejection  of  Israel,  the 
Word  of  God  remaineth  sure.  But  who  are 
the  children  of  Israel,  whose  multitude,  like 
sea-sand,  defies  numeration  and  measure- 
ment? The  whole  posterity  of  Jacob  or 
Israel  might  seem  included,  as  the  words  of 
the  promise  made  to  that  patriarch  and  tho^e 
of  the  present  prediction  so  closely  corre- 
spond; and  Israel  is  occasionally  taken  in 
this  wide  and  general  sense.  The  context 
is  opposed  to  this ;  especially  does  the  dis- 
tinction BO  shaiply  marked  in  the  succeeding 
verse  militate  against  this.  And  it  shall  oome 
to  paSB,  tliat  in  the  plaoe  where  it  was  said 
unto  them,  Ye  are  not  my  people,  there  it 


shall  be  laid  nnto  them.  Ye  are  the  sons  ot 
the  living  Ood.  The  place  where  this  great 
change  takes  place  is  either  the  place  where 
their  rejection  was  foretold,  or  that  where 
its  fulfilment  became  an  accomplished  fact. 
The  former  was,  as  is  obvious,  Palestine; 
the  latter,  the  place  of  their  exile,  and  so  the 
lands  of  their  dispersion.  Thus  the  Chaldee, 
adopting  tlie  latter,  renders  freely  as  follows : 
"  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  plaoe 
where  they  lived  in  exile  among  the  peoples, 
when  they  transgressed  my  Law  and  it  was 
said  to  them.  Ye  are  not  my  people,  they 
will  turn  and  be  magnified,  and  called  the 
people  of  God."  Once  this  change  takes 
place,  their  true  mission  shall  be  attained 
and  their  relations  to  the  living  God  shall 
be  readjusted.  The  dumb,  dead  idols,  to 
which  they  had  bowed  down  in  the  days  of 
their  apostasy  and  unbelief  shall  be  cast 
aside  and  away  for  ever.  Jehovah  the  Living 
One  alone  shall  be  the  object  of  their  adora- 
tion in  that  day. 

Ver.  11. — Then  shall  the  children  of  Jadah 
and  the  children  of  Israel  be  gathered  to- 
gether, and  appoint  themselves  one  head, 
and  they  shall  oome  np  out  of  the  land.  The 
phiaseology  of  the  older  Scriptures  is  here 
followed.  Thus  we  rend  in  Exod.  i.  10,  in 
the  words  of  Pharaoh,  the  children  of  Israel 
"getting  them  up  out  of  the  laud"  (comp. 
also  Exod.  xii.  38  and  Numb,  xxxii.  11) ;  and 
again,  on  the  report  of  the  spies  when  the 
people  murmured  agaijist  Hoses  and  Aaron, 
"  they  said  one  to  another,  Let  us  make  a 
captain  [head],  and  let  us  return  into 
Egypt."  In  this  way  the  scenes  of  former 
days  were  iu  some  sense  to  be  repeated  :  an 
exodus  of  some  sort  was  again  to  take  place ; 
Egypt  was  to  be  abandoned  and  shivery  left 
behind;  they  might  have  a  wilderness  to 
traverse,  but  here  again  the  prospect  of  a 
land  of  promise  was  to  cheer  them  on  their 
journey  and  compensate  them  at  its  close ; 
in  fact,  another  or  bettor  Canaan  was  before 
them.  Nay,  more,  the  brcnoli  between  Judah 
and  Israel  would  be  heiiled,  and  the  dis- 
ruption which  had  been  so  disastrous  become 
a  thing  of  the  past.  Judah  and  Israel 
would  again  unite  and  rally  together  under 
one  head.  But  the  important  inquiry  re- 
mains as  to  the  how  or  when  this  prediction 
was  to  have  fulfilment.  Even  if  we  admit 
the  return  from  the  captivity  of  Babylou  to 
bo  a  fuifilment,  it  would  bo  but  a  very 
partial,  though  literal,  fulfilment  of  such  a 
grand  prediction.  That  restoration  was  far 
too  meagre  in  its  dimensions  to  come  up  to 
the  requirements  of,  much  less  exhaust,  such 
n  splendid  prophecy.  Some  of  Israel — a 
mere  fragment  of  the  ten  tribes — united  with 
Juilah  iu  the  return  from  Babylon ;  this  poor 
miniature  fulfilment,  if  we  may  so  say,  can- 
not be  regarded,  except  perhaps  typically  oi 


OH.  I.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  07  HOSEA. 


symbolically,  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
phet's vivid  picture.  We  must  look  to  gospel 
times  and  gospel  scenes  for  the  realization  of 
the  glorious  promise  under  consideration. 
Jewish  interpreters  themselves  refer  it  to  the 
times  of  Messiah.  Thus  Eimchi  say s, "  This 
shall  take  place  in  the  gathering  together  of 
the  exiles  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,for  unto 
the  second  house  there  went  up  only  Judah 
and  Benjamin  that  had  been  exiles  in 
Babylon;  nor  were  the  children  of  Judah 
and  the  children  of  Israel  gathered  together ; 
and  they  shall  make  for  themselves  one 
head, — ^this  is  the  King  Messiah ; "  similarly. 
In  the  '  Metsudath  David,'  by  Altschul,  we 
read  on  this  passage, "  They  shall  be  gathered 
together:  this  will  come  to  pass  in  the  days  of 
the  Messiah.  One  head :  this  is  the  King 
Messiah.  And  they  shall  come  up ;  out  of  the 
lands  of  the  captivity  they  shall  go  up  unto 
tlieir  own  land."  We  cannot  possibly  mis- 
take the  objects  of  this  prophecy ;  they  are 
expressly  declared  to  be  "  the  children  of 
Judah  and  the  children  of  Israel " — ^the  two 
distinctive  branches  of  the  Hebrew  race,  the 
two  constituent  elements  of  the  Jewish 
nationality,  and  comprehending  the  whole 
natural  posterity  of  Israel.  There  can  be 
just  as  little  doubt  about  the  primary  and 
proper  application  of'the  prophecy  to  the 
conversion  of  the  people  of  the  Jews.  For 
a  time  they  were  not  to  be  the  people  of 
God ;  but  the  testimony  of  the  prophet  to 
their  again  becoming  the  sons  of  the  living 
God  is  quite  unmistakable.  They  shall 
appoint  themselves  one  head.  "  The  pro- 
phet," says  Calvin,  "  has,  by  the  expression, 
characterized  the  obedience  of  faith ;  for  it 
is  not  enough  that  Christ  should  be  given 
as  a  King,  and  set  over  men,  unless  they  also 
embrace  him  as  their  King,  and  with  rever- 
ence receive  him.  We  now  learn  that,  when 
we  believe  the  gospel,  we  choose  Christ  for 
our  King,  as  it  were,  by  a  voluntary  consent." 
The  words  are  adopted  by  both  Peter  and 
Paul :  the  former  (1  Pet.  ii._  10)  employs 
them  as  an  appropriate  description,  in  Old 
Testament  language,  of  the  happy  change 
of  condition  consequent  on  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth  ;  the  latter  (Bom.  ix.  25)  quotes 
them  more  formally  in  an  extension  of  their 
meaniug  beyond  their  primary  import,  and 
proper  and  literal  application  to  the  Jews, 
as  an  exemplification  of  the  principle  of 
once  not  my  people,  now  my  people.  In  this 
extension  of  their  meaning  they  embrace,  no 
doubt,  the  Gentiles,  though  not  the  objects 
originally  and  chiefly  contemplated  in  the 
prophecy.  (1)  If  the  place  mentioned  in  the 
previous  verse  be  the  place  or  lands  of  their 
dispersion,  on  the  change  indicated  taking 
place,  namely,  their  conversion  to  Christ  as 
King,  then  their  coming  np  out  of  the  land 
under  the  sole  headship  of  ue  Son  of  David, 


the  true  Shepherd  of  Israel,  may  denote  their 
restoration  out  of  all  the  countries  of  their 
dispersion  to  their  ancient  territory,  again 
become  their  own  land,  and  their  own  in 
perpetual  possession.  Thus  the  Targum 
understands  it  of  the  land  of  the  Jews'  cap- 
tivity ;  likewise  Kimchi :  "  They  shall  go  up 
out  of  the  land  of  their  captivity  to  their 
own  land ;  for  the  land  of  Israel  is  higher 
than  all  lands,  and  he  that  goeth  thither 
goeth  up,  and  he  that  goeth  out  of  it  goeth 
down."  The  initial  and  typical  fulfilment 
was  the  return  of  Judah,  joined  by  many 
Israelites,'out  of  Babylon  under  Zerubbabel. 
The  final  fulfilment  may  be  the  restoration 
of  the  Jews,  converted  and  believing  in 
Messiah,  under  Divine  guidance,  to  their 
own  land.  (2)  If,  on  the  otiier  hand,  the 
place  of  the  preceding  verse  be  Palestine, 
the  land  of  their  rejection  and  subsequent 
recognition  as  the  sons  of  God,  the  going  up 
may  refer  to  the  going  up  of  the  inhabitant! 
of  both  kingdoms  to  Jerusalem,  the  dwelling- 
place  of  their  common  king  of  David's  line ; 
not  in  the  sense  of  going  up,  as  Ewald  and 
others  understand  it,  to  do  battle  in  order  to 
widen  the  boundaries  of  their  native  land 
and  make  room  for  the  returning  exile*. 
(3)  But  whether  the  place  be  the  country  of 
Palestine  or  the  lands  of  their  dispersion, 
the  going  up  may  be  understood  spiritually 
of  their  coming  up  to  join  themselves  to  the 
Church,  or  rather  to  the  Church's  Head,  as 
under  the  old  economy  the  tribes  of  Israel 
went  up  out  of  all  parts  of  the  land  to 
worship  at  Jerusalem.  It  will  thas  apply 
properly  enough  to  their  spiritual  journey 
onward  and  upward  to  the  heavenly  Canaan. 
For  great  shall  be  the  day  of  Jezreel.  The 
names  of  the  prophet's  children  were  names 
of  ill  omen — God's  sowing  in  the  sense  of 
God' a  scattering,  Not-my-people,  Not-pitied; 
now  the  evil  is  eliminated,  the  meaning  of 
the  second  and  third  is  reversed,  and  the 
first  is  read  in  a  new  signification,  go  that 
Not-my-people  becomes  My  people,  Unpitied 
becomes  Pitied,  God's  sowing  is  no  longer 
God's  scattering  but  God's  growing.  The 
curse  is  thus  changed  into  a  blessing ;  great, 
then,  shall  be  the  day  so  signalized  by  Divine 
goodness,  so  glorious  in  Divine  grace,  and  so 
conspicuous  for  the  wondrous  works  of  the 
covenant-keeping  God.  Most  of  the  older 
interpreters  take  Jezred  here,  as  in  vers.  4 
and  5,  equivalent  to  "scattered  of  God." 
Aben  Ezra  says,  "  But  the  iniquity  of  the 
house  of  iBiael  is  punished.  And  behold, 
it  is  all  said  by  way  of  reproach,  not 
praise." 

Ch.  ii.  1. — Say  ye  onto  your  brethren, 
Anuni;  and  to  your  sisters,  Bohamah. 
Divine  mercy  being  now  received,  the  re- 
cipients are  urged  to  extend  to  each  other 
the  tight  hand  of  fellowship,  exhorting  on* 


10 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  1. 1—11. 


another,  enooaraging  one  another,  eonflrm- 
ing  each  other  in  the  faith,  and  mutually 
provoking  each  other  to  love  and  good 
worki.   "  Becauae  the  compariBon  deala  with 


a  son  and  a  daughter,  the  propLct  therefore 
adds,  'your  brothers  and  your  tiater*'" 
(Kimchi). 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  sin  oflsrad  sharply  reproved.  The  great  »ln,  the  root-sin  we  may 
call  it,  of  Israel  at  this  time  was  idolatry.  But  that  sin  was  not  alone  ;  it  was  aj<gra- 
vated,  as  usual,  by  accompanying  abominations.  All  along,  from  the  period  of  the 
disruption,  idolatry  had  been  their  besetting  sin.  The  oft-repeated  statement  that 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  "  made  Israel  to  sin"  has  a  special  signiScance  in  this 
regard.  As  long  as  Jerusalem  remained  the  gathering-place  of  the  tribes,  and  Solomon's 
temple  remained  the  national  sanctuary,  Judah  must  have  retained  the  supremacy.  To 
undermine  that  supremacy,  or  rather  to  transfer  it  to  Israel,  required  a  stroke  of  bold, 
unscrupulous  policy ;  but  the  audacity,  or  rather  godlessness,  of  Jeroboam  was  quite 
equal  to  the  occasion.  Under  pretence  of  facilitating  the  religions  service  of  his  subjects, 
as  though  it  was  too  much  for  them  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  but  in  reality  to  prevent 
the  people  turning  ag^iin  in  their  allegiance  to  the  dynasty  of  David,  he  changed  the 
place  of  religious  worship,  appointing  Dan  and  Bethel  at  the  northern  and  southern 
extremities  of  his  kingdom — the  one  on  the  Syrian  and  the  other  on  the  Judaic  frontier. 
But  this  change  of  place  necessitated  other  changes  in  keeping  therewith.  The  mode 
of  worship  had  to  be  changed  firom  that  of  the  true  God  to  that  of  the  calves,  sym- 
bolical representations  of  the  tnie  God.  With  such  symbolic  representation  of  Deity  he 
had,  no  doubt,  become  familiar  in  Egypt,  as  previously  Aaron  and  the  Israelites  had 
carried  it  with  them  on  their  emancipation  from  that  land.  There  was  something  very 
insidious  in  this  change ;  it  was  only  a  half-measure,  but  a  preparation  for  the  whole. 
It  was  not  the  introduction  of  new  gods,  such  as  Baal  and  Ashtaroth,  the  dual  deities 
of  Phoenicia,  of  which  sin  Ahab  was  gvulty ;  it  was  the  worship  of  Jehovah  under  an 
external  form.  It  was  not  the  violation,  at  least  directly,  of  the  first  commandment, 
which  forbids  the  having  of  other  gods ;  it  was  the  transgression  of  the  second,  which 
condemns  the  making  a  graven  image ;  so  that  Stanley  says  of  Jeroboam  that  "  to  keep 
the  first  commandment  he  broke  the  second."  The  people  took  far  too  kindly  to  the 
change,  and  clung  to  it  with  fatal  tenacity  for  two  hundred  years,  subsequently  even  in 
the  time  of  the  Prophet  Hosea,  as  we  learn  from  several  passages  in  this  very  book  the 
calves  were  still  objects  of  idolatrous  worship.  In  our  study  of  these  verses  we  have 
for  consideration  the  following. 

I.  The  person  of  the  prophet.  He  introduces  himself  to  us  by  his  name  and 
surname,  or  patronymic.  His  name,  Hosea  or  Saviour,  is  one  of  good  omen  and  happy 
augury,  at  least  in  his  case ;  his  patronymic  of  Ben-Beeri,  "  son  of  my  well,"  has  also  a 
pleasing  significance  of  its  own.  By  the  former  we  are  reminded  of  that  Saviour  to  whom 
the  prophet  pointed  and  to  whom  he  bore  his  testimony,  and  thus  became  an  instru- 
ment of  salvation ;  while  the  surname  may  call  to  mind  him  who  is  the  Well-spring  of 
salvation  and  the  Fountain  of  living  water,  according  to  his  own  words,  "  Whosoever 
drinketh  of  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  never  thirst;  but  the  water  that  I 
shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  Or 
if  the  name  have  reference  to  the  function  of  the  prophet  himself,  it  may  denote  his 
pouring  out  the  water  of  life  from  the  Divine  Fountain  of  life. 

II.  The  powbb  with  which  he  was  invested.  This,  of  course,  touches  onliis  Divine 
commission,  and  the  corresponding  inspiiation  which  qualified  him  for  the  proper  execu- 
tion of  that  commission.  Like  the  apostles  in  after  times,  he  claims  to  hold  his  com- 
mission from  God,  and  to  be  charged  with  the  commands  of  God.  Thus  in  Luke  iii.  2 
we  read  that  "  the  word  of  God  came  unto  John  the  son  of  Zacharias  in  the  wilder- 
ness;" and  in  Gal.  i.  1  we  find  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  speaking  of  his  commission  in 
the  following  terms :  "  Paul,  an  apostle,  not  of  men,  neither  by  man,  but  by  Jesus  Christ, 
and  God  the  Father,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead."  Thus  in  the  case  of  Paul,  his 
apostolic  authority  was  not  from  (inh)  men,  as  the  source  of  that  authority  by  whom  it 
is  conferred,  nor  by  (SiA)  man,  the  single  representative  of  any  body  of  men,  as  the 


OH.  1, 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  11 

channel  of  that  authority  through  whom  it  is  conveyed.  It  was  through  the  two  Persons 
of  the  blessed  Trinity — Son  and  Father,  agent  and  origin,  medium  and  source — •  direct 
Divine  commission.  So  with  the  prophet  in  this  introductory  passage.  But  he  not 
only  held  his  commission  from  God,  he  had  his  instructions  from  God.  His  position 
was  like  that  of  a  diplomatist  or  amhassador  sent  out  by  an  earthly  sovereign,  who  is 
commissioned  to  represent  his  sovereign,  and  in  that  capacity  to  adhere  faithfully  to  the 
instructions  he  has  received,  correctly  interpreting  the  will  and  wishes  of  his  monarch 
and  scrupulously  communicating  the  same.  Three  several  times  is  tlie  source  of  Hosea's 
instructions  insisted  on.  There  is  the  first  general  statement  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  coming 
to  him;  then  there  is  the  notification  of  the  beginning  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  being  in 
Hosea ;  and  next  we  learn  that  the  Lord  spake  to  him.  The  conveyance  of  these  instruc- 
tions is  presented  under  a  threefold  aspect.  They  come  to  him  from  the  Lord  and  so  with 
Divine  authority ;  they  reach  him  by  direct  communication,  for  the  Lord  himself  spoke 
to  him ;  and  they  are  in  him,  reflected  on  his  mind  and  retained  in  his  memory,  and 
ready  for  present  and  practical  use.  God  made  him  a  depositary  of  his  truth  and  thus 
fitted  him  for  declaring  it  to  others;  he  revealed  his  will  to  him,  and  by  the  inspiration 
of  his  Spirit  qualified  him  to  record  it  without  error  for  the  benefit  of  present  and 
succeeding  generations.  Though  not  possessing  or  presuming  to  pissess  this  special 
inspiration  of  prophets  under  the  Old  and  apostles  under  the  New  Testament,  the  preacher 
of  the  gosper  is  truly  commissioned  and  strictly  commanded  to  declare  the  whole  counsel 
of  God,  not  with  wisdom  of  words,  not  with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  not 
handling  the  Word  of  God  deceitfully,  but  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  commending 
himself  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God. 

IIL  Thb  fbrsevebanob  of  the  prophet.  The  official  life  of  Hosea  reached  the 
length  of  an  ordinary  lifetime,  falling  little  short  of  the  ordinary  three  score  years  and 
ten.  The  summer's  heat  and  winter's  cold  of  all  those  long  and  weary  years  still  found 
him  at  his  post,  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  Many  a  dynastic  change  had  taken  place 
during  that  period:  sovereigns  might  rise  or  sovereigns  fall ;  men  might  come  and  men 
might  go,  but  he  went  on  as  ever.  Faithful  to  his  God,  faithful  to  his  ki  ng  and  country, 
alike  pious  and  patriotic,  he  persisted  in  the  work  to  which  God  had  called  him.  To 
most  men  work  long  continued  at  last  becomes  irksome ;  the  performance  of  duties  in 
incessant  round  and  for  a  lengthened  period  disposes  men  to  seek  respite  or  release ;  age 
itself,  with  its  weight  of  years,  brings  manifold  infirmities ;  but  however  it  may  have  been 
with  the  prophet,  he  does  not  plead  age,  or  infirmity,  or  length  of  service,  or  exhausted 
energies,  or  enfeebled  strength,  or  failing  powers  either  of  mind  or  body,  in  order  to 
obtain  exemption  from  further  service,  or  to  secure  in  the  evening  of  his  days  that  ease 
or  rest  which  he  had  so  well  earned ;  nay,  unceasingly  as  uncomplainingly  he  persists 
in  his  onerous  duties,  and  plies  the  task  which  Providence  assigned  him. 

IV.  The  patibngb  of  the  prophet.  If  our  work  be  pleasant,  and  especially  if  it 
prove  successful,  w«  are  greatly  encouraged  thereby,  and  in  some  sort  enabled  to  per- 
severe. Want  of  success,  on  the  other  hand,  too  often  paralyzes  men's  powers  and  puts 
an  end  to  their  exertions.  Not  so  with  Hosea.  His  efforts  for  the  spiritual  amelioration 
of  his  people  were  ineffectual;  £is  labours  in  that  direction  were  not  crowned  with  the 
desired  success.  Yet  in  shadow  as  in  sunshine,  through  evil  report  as  good  report, 
whether  his  work  was  appreciated  or  despised,  with  fruit  or  wanting  it,  he  had  learnt  to 
possess  his  soul  in  patience.  Many  an  untoward  event,  many  a  froward  or  perverse 
action  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  he  ministered,  manj'  a  hard  speech,  discouraged  his 
heart,  we  are  sure,  from  the  history  of  those  evil  days  and  the  godless  generation  among 
whom  he  lived  and  wrought.  His  patience  was  tried — sorely  tried,  yet  triumphed 
over  alL    What  a  lesson  to  all  who  are  engaged  in  work  for  God  I 

V.  The  pbculiaeitt  of  tecb  period  at  which  he  poblishbd  his  pbediotions.  That 
peculiarity  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  was  a  period  of  unwonted  prosperity.  Had  it 
been  otherwise ;  had  it  been  a  time  of  positive  decline  or  partial  disorganization ;  had  dis- 
integration actually  and  obviously  set  in  as  at  a  later  period,  it  might  have  been  said 
that  coming  events  were  so  casting  their  shadows  before  that  a  sagacious  calculator  of 
probabilities  might  readily  predict  the  coming  catastrophe.  But  in  the  reign  of  Jero- 
boam II.,  son  and  successor  of  Joash,  «nd  largely  by  his  prowess,  the  power  of  Israel 
was  revived.  During  his  reign  of  forty-one  years  he  had  enlarged  his  kingdom  beyond 
all  preceding  limits  from  the  time  of  its  separation  from  Judah;  ho  had  recovered 


12  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  L 1— U. 

Damascus,  the  capital  of  Syria,  though  that  city  had  been  lost  even  in  the  days  of 
Solomon,  together  with  Hamath  on  the  Orontes,  the  key  of  Eastern  Syria,  thus  checking 
if  not  crushing  that  hostile  power.  The  northern  kingdom  had  reached  an  unprecedented 
height  of  wealth  and  power ;  the  Mvereign  had  been  triumphant  in  war,  and  bis  subjects 
were  now  happy  and  prosperons  in  peace.  But  at  this  very  period  of  material  wealth 
and  military  glory,  after  he  had  "  restored  the  coasts  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of  Hamath 
[the  lower  part  of  the  Coelo-Syrian  valley,  from  the  gorge  of  the  Litany  to  Baalbek]  to 
the  sea  of  the  plain,"  amid  the  splendour  of  hia  achievements  and  the  opulence  of  his 
subjects,  the  prophet  foretold,  not  merely  the  decline,  hut  the  actual  downfall,  of  the 
kingdom  of  Israel,  An  important  lesson  connects  itself  with  this.  It  is  not  only 
the  truth  of  the  prediction,  so  contrary  to  all  calculation,  so  opposed  to  all  seeming  pro- 
bability, but  the  warning  thus  fnmished  against  mistaking  temporal  prosperity  for  a 
proof  of  Divine  favour,  or  reckoning  and  resting  on  the  permanence  of  earthly  posses- 
sions. In  the  case  before  us,  however,  a  worm  was  at  the  root  of  the  gourd.  "Ae  moral 
progress  of  the  nation  was  in  the  inverse  ratio  of  its  material  prosperity. 

TI.  The  painful  declabation  of  the  nationaIi  bin.  That  sin  was  more  than 
ordinary  apostasy,  bad  as  such  a  state  of  things  assuredly  is ;  it  was  idolatry  which  is 
spiritual  adultery.  This  was  expressed  by  the  symbol  of  the  prophet,  whether  in  reality, 
vision,  or  parable,  wedding  an  unchaste  woman,  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  by  name  Gomer, 
the  daughter  of  Diblum.  If  such  a  union,  even  in  symbol,  was  humiliating  to  the  pure 
spirit  of  the  prophet,  how  dreadful  for  a  people  to  be  in  a  condition  so  disgustingly 
loathsome  and  feaiifully  sinful,  exposed  to  the  deserved  wrath  of  the  Almighty,  and 
obnoxious  to  the  doom  he  has  pronounced  against  such,  "  Thou  hast  destroyed  all  them 
that  go  a^whoring  from  theet"  If  such  relationship  is  repulsive  in  the  extreme  to 
every  man  of  proper  sentiments  and  virtuous  feeling,  how  unspeakably  hateful  to  the 
infinitely  holy  God  to  stand  in  the  position  of  husband  to  a  people  so  abominably 
faithless  and  impure!  Yet  their  Maker  had  been  their  Husband,  even  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  which  is  his  adorable  name. 

Vers.  4 — ^9. — ITie  mffermgi  of  Imui'tymlbolicoklly  recorded.  The  three  children  of 
the  prophet  by  Gomer  symbouise  at  once  a  degree  of  sin  and  a  period  of  suffering. 
The  forefathers  of  Israel  bad  been  idolaters  in  their  native  land  and  in  Egypt,  as  we 
learn  from  the  admonition  of  Joshua  (xxiv.  14), "  Put  away  the  gods  which  your 
fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood,  and  in  Egypt,"  But  God  took  them  into 
covenant  with  himself  at  Sinai ;  this  new  relation  may  be  represented  by  the  prophet's 
espousing  at  the  Divine  command  Gomer,  notwithstanding  her  previous  impurity  and 
lewdness.  But  though  God  took  the  people  of  Israel  into  such  a  close  and  endearing 
relation  to  himself,  yet  their  posterity,  instead  of  proving  themselves  children  of  Ckxi, 
often  forsook  God  and  fell  into  idolatry,  this  apostasy  of  the  descendants  through 
succeeding  generations  is  set  forth  by  the  children  of  whoredoms  which  the  prophet 
had  by  a  wife  of  whoredoms.  So  with  ourselves  tainted  with  original  sin ;  we  are 
stained  by  many  actual  transgressions.  "  Sin,"  it  has  been  well  said,  "  ia  contagious, 
and,  unless  the  entail  is  cut  off  by  grace,  hereditary." 

L  The  name  of  the  fibst  child  implies  deqengbaot.  Jezreel,  if  taken  in  ita  local 
sense,  reminds  of  bloodshed  as  also  idolatry,  and  of  the  nemesh  that  in  due  time  fol- 
lowed ;  but  if  understood  appellatively,  the  name  of  dominion  implied  in  Israel  degene- 
rates into  that  of  dispersion  included  in  JezreeL  1.  Imperfect  work  i$  imperfectly 
rewarded.  No  work  done  for  God  can  make  him  our  debtor,  yet  he  is  graciously 
pleased  to  reward  honest  work  in  his  service,  the  reward  being  entirely  of  grace  and  not 
of  debt.  Jehu  executed  God's  judgment  on  the  house  of  Ahab,  and  had  his  reward  in 
the  succession  of  his  family  to  the  fourth  generation.  Though  he  pretended  leal  he 
did  not  do  the.  Lord's  work  sincerely ;  his  own  selfish  interests  and  his  own  base  designs 
mingled  largely  with  his  motives,  and  marred  the  worth  of  his  work.  The  obtainment 
of  a  kingdom  for  himself  rather  than  obedience  to  God  was  the  chief  end  on  which 
his  heart  was  set.  Neither  did  he  perform  the  Lord's  work  thoroughly.  He  aboUshed 
the  idolatry  of  Baal,  but  he  adhered  to  the  idolatry  of  the  calves ;  obviously  because 
the  former  served  his  own  ends  and  helped  to  establish  him  in  the  kingdom,  while  the 
latter  tended,  as  he  thought,  to  secure  his  interest  In  the  kingdoni  anr!  keep  his  subjects 
detached  from  J  udah.     2.  Punishment,  though  flow,  is  sure.    Yet  a  little  while  and  iha 


en.  I.  1-11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  IIOSEA.  1« 

dynasty  of  Jehu  became  extinct ;  while  fifty  years  afterwards  the  very  kingdom  over 
which  that  dynasty  had  ruled  ceased  altogether  to  exist.  In  the  interval  that  elaps«d 
between  the  extinction  of  the  dynasty  of  Jehu  and  the  total  cessation  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  a  criuhing  defeat  had  been  sustained  iu  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  when  the 
military  strength  of  Israel  was  completely  broken.  Whether  this  was  the  battle  of 
Betharbel,  in  which  Shalmanezer  was  victorious,  or  some  other  reverse  sustained  in  the 
invasion  by  Tiglath-pileser,  to  the  success  of  which  the  inscriptions  of  that  monarch 
testify,  we  have  not  perhaps  sufficient  means  of  ascertaining.  This  was  the  beginning 
of  the  end,  and  a  premonition  of  what  was  near  at  hand.  The  sins  of  princes  anH 
people  had  gone  on  accumulating  till  at  length  the  day  of  vengeance  came.  As  with 
nations,  so  with  individuals — 

"Though  the  mOIs  of  (3od  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small; 
Though  with  patience  he  stands  waiting,  with  exactnesa  giinds  he  all." 

3.  The  unexpected  tften  ha^ppent.  Nothing  could  have  appeared  more  unlikely  in  the 
reign  of  Jeroboam  U.  than  the  destruction  of  his  kingdom  within  such  a  comparatively 
short  space.  He  had  proved  himself  a  man  of  prowess  and  of  power ;  he  had  extended 
the  boundaries  of  his  kingdom  outwardly,  and  had  consolidated  its  resources  inwardly. 
He  had  restored  the  northern  boundary  of  Israel  to  what  it  was  in  the  days  of  Solomon ; 
he  had  extended  his  kingdom  southward  by  the  sea  of  the  plain,  and  to  the  valley  of 
willows  (Isa.  XV.  7)  between  Moab  and  Edom ;  he  had  recovered  what  had  been  lost 
by  the  victories  of  Hazael ;  he  had  recaptured  Damascus.  He  was,  in  fact,  "  the 
greatest  of  all  the  kings  of  Samaria.  As  if  with  a  forecast  of  his  future  glory,  he 
was  named  after  the  founder  of  the  kingdom — Jeroboam  II."  Yet  then,  while  King 
Jeroboam  was  at  the  zenith  of  his  fame,  and  the  kini;dom  at  the  height  of  its  pros- 
perity, the  word  of  the  Lord  went  forth  against  it.  God,  who  seeth  not  as  man  seeth, 
directed  the  eye  of  his  servant  the  prophet  to  sin  unrepented  of  and  unforsaken — that 
internal  moral  weakness  and  rottenness  which  no  amount  of  material  prosperity  or 
power  could  either  rectify  or  remove. 

IL  The  nahb  of  the  second  child  imfobts  extreme  desolateness  of  condition. 
Israel  is  pictured  as  liO-ruhamah,  and  thus  represented  as  a  woman,  worthless ;  for  she 
is  one  of  the  children  of  whoredom,  weak,  an  easy  prey  to  the  spoiler,  a  victim  of 
injury  and  insult,  unpitied  and  unprotected,  impenitent  and  unpardoned.  Applied 
nationally,  the  conquered  people  are  uncompassionated,  and  waiting  to  be  carried  intu 
captivity.  Applied  personally,  how  dreadful  is  the  state  of  that  individual  who,  by  a 
long  course  of  iniquity,  has  sinned  away  the  day  of  mercy,  and  against  whom  God  has 
shut  up  the  bowels  of  bis  compassion  I  1.  To  Israel  as  a  nation,  so  to  each  of  us  God 
has  showed  great  and  manifold  mercies ;  let  us  beware  of  abusing  our  mercies,  and 
thereby  forfeiting  them.  If  we  forsake  our  own  mercies  for  lying  vanities,  as,  alas  I  so 
many  do,  we  may  expect  that  those  mercies  will  forsake  us,  being  withdrawn  in  the 
providence  of  God.  How  sad  the  condition  of  those  who  are  in  affliction,  and  yet  can 
have  no  reasonable  assurance  of  the  mercy  of  Gkid;  who  are  afBicted,  and  yet  cannot 
plead  the  Divine  pity,  or  hope  for  Divine  sympathy  and  succour  1  Sadder  still  is  the 
case  of  those  whom  death  surprises  in  the  condition  indicated  as  not  having  obtained 
mercy  1  God,  it  is  true,  is  infinite  in  compassion,  and  his  mercy  everlasting  to  thein 
that  fear  him ;  but  to  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving  there  is  a  limit  to  his  mercy 
somewhere;  while  to  such  nations  and  individuals  alike  the  time  may  come  when  he 
will  say,  "  I  will  have  no  more  nflercy  upon  them,  no  more  pity,  and  no  more  pardon." 
2.  An  aggravation  of  their  misery  is  the  natural  consequence  of  the  contrast  with 
Judah  in  ver,  7.  Our  blessed  Lord  very  touchingly  applies  a  similar  contrast  when  he 
says,  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teetli,  when  ye  shall  see  Abraham,  and 
IsaM),  and  Jacob,  and  all  the  projmets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  you  yourselves 
thrust  out."  The  Revised  Version,  which  has  "cast  forth  without,"  makes  it  yet 
stronger  and  more  striking.  3.  The  salvation  of  Judah  at  this  time  was  their  ddiver- 
amee  from  Sennacherib.  To  this  great  event  of  Jewish  history  we  find  frequent 
reference  elsewhere.  Thus  Isaiah,  at  the  close  of  ch.  x.  and  the  commencement  of 
ch.  zi.,  ,ha8  a  very  striking  contrast  between  the  crash  of  mighty  cedars  and  the 
springing  up  of  a  young  shoot  frqm  a  withered  stump— the  downfall  of  the  great  con- 
quers with  his  men  of  might,  and  the  uprising  of  a  righteous  Saviour  out  of  the 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  ROSEA.  [ot.  1. 1— 11 

lowliness  of  the  royal  house  of  Judah ;  in  other  words,  the  Assyrian  and  the  Saviour. 
This  contrast  is. couched  in  the  following  jwetic  language:  "The  Lord  of  hosts  shall 
lop  the  bough  with  terror  [».e.  terrific  force] :  and  the  high  ones  of  stature  »b»ll  be 
hewn  down,  and  the  haughty  shall  lie  low;  and  he  shall  cut  down  the  thickets  of  the 
forest  with  iron,  and  Lebanon  shall  fall  by  a  mighty  one.  And  there  shall  come 
forth  a  shoot  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his: roots." 
The  same  prophet,  in  ch.  xxix.,  pictures  the  formidable  military  operations  of  the 
Assyrian,  together  trith  the  suddenness  of  the  disappearance  and  completeness  of  the 
destruction  of  his  mighty  host.  Of  the  former  he  speaks  in  the  first  person,  as 
the  Assyrian  was  only  the  rod  of  his  anger  for  the  purpose  of  chastigement,  and  says, 
"  I  will  camp  against  thee  round  about,  and  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  mount, 
and  will  raise  forts  against  thee ; "  while  of  the  sudden  disaster  that  would  overwhelm 
them  he  adds,  "  And  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that  fight  against  Ariel  [Lion  of 
God],  even  all  that  fight  against  her,  and  her  munition,  and  that  distress  her,  shall  be  as 
a  dream  of  a  night  Tision ; "  a  little  before  he  had  said,  "  The  multitude  of  the  terrible 
ones  shall  be  as  chaff  that  passeth  away :  yea,  it  shall  be  at  an  instant  suddenly."  In 
the  following  chapter  (xxx.),  naming  him  by  name,  he  intimates  that  he  had  been  a 
rod  of  chastisement  in  the  Lord's  hand,  and  when  that  purpose  had  been  serred,  the 
rod  itself  would  be  broken  by  the  voice  of  the  Almighty :  "  And  through  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  shall  the  Assyrian  be  broken  down  that  smote  with  a  rod  " — ^the  latter  was 
chastisement  and  discipline,  the  former  destruction.  Several  of  the  psalms  also 
contain  allusions  to  the  events  of  Hezekiah's  reign  connected  with  this  great  deliverance 
— the  forty-fourth  to  Babshakeh's  blasphemy  in  the  words,  "  The  shame  of  my  face 
hath  covered  me,  for  the  voice  of  him  that  reproacheth  and  blasphemeth ; "  the  seventy- 
tiiird,  a  psalm  of  Asaph,  to  Sennacherib's  destruction,  "  How  are  they  brought  into 
desolation,  as  in  a  moment  I  ...  As  a  dream  when  one  awaketh ;  so,  0  Lord,  when 
thou  awakest,  thou  dost  despise  their  image."  Li  like  manner  the  whole  of  the 
seventy-sixth  applies.  The  third  verse  enumerates  the  peculiar  weapons  of  the  Assyrian, 
and  affirms  their  destruction :  "  There  brake  he  the  arrows  of  the  bow,  shield  and 
sword  and  battle ; "  the  fifth  and  sixth  depict  that  sleep  of  death  that  overtook  them 
so  calmly,  so  noiselessly,  and  so  awfully :  "  They  slept  their  sleep,  and  none  of  the 
men  of  might  found  their  bands.  .  .  .  Both  chariot  and  horse  fell  into  a  deep  sleep ;  " 
the  eighth  verse  adds  the  solemn  awe  in  which  all  at  last  was  hushed :  "  The  earth 
feared,  and  was  still."  The  ninety-first  psalm,  which  mentions  the  terror  by  night  and 
the  pestilence  walking  in  darkness,  and  thousands  perishing,  may,  whatever  was  the 
actual  occasion  of  its  composition,  apply  to  the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  army  at 
the  eventful  time  when  Judah  was  so  miraculously  saved. 

III.  Thk  namb  of  the  THraD  DENOTES  DEFLOBABLB  DEORADATiON.  Before  this 
third  and  last  stage  is  reached  there  is  a  respite — some  time  intervenes.  1.  Speaking 
after  the  manner  of  men,  we  may  say  with  reverence  that  God  seems  to  repent  of  his 
resolution  to  cast  off  his  people ;  he  shows  reluctanee  to  renounce  them  at  once  and  for 
ever.  Hence  the  delay.  So  in  this  very  book  he  questions  with  himself:  "  How  shall 
1  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel?  how  shall  I  make 
thee  as  Admah?  how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me, 
my  repentiugs  are  kindled  together."  He  pauses  before  proceeding  to  extremities. 
2.  Once  they  were  the  people  of  God,  a  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  holy 
nalion,  a  peculiar  people;  now  they  have  lost  that  high  position — ^they  are  degraded, 
and  that  degradation  must  ere  long  issue  in  destruction.  God,  addressing  them  directly 
and,  as  it  were,  face  to  face,  tells  them  plainly, "  Te  are  not  my  people,  and  I  will  not  be 
your  God."  The  word  "  Gh>d  "  is  here  supplied,  and  the  original  expression  is  peculiarly 
tender.  It  is  literally,  "  I  will  not  be  youri — your  Father  and  Friend,  or  your  Husband 
and  Head,  or  your  Sovereign  and  Saviour,  or  your  Patron  and  Protector."  '•  I  will  not  be 
to  you"  as  the  words  still  more  literally  taken  mean,  "  I  will  not  be  to  yon  what  I  once 
was,  what  I  long  continued  to  be  in  spite  of  your  numberless  provocations,  what  I  would 
still  be  but  for  your  gross  unfaithfulness,  what  you  need  no  longer  expect  me  to  be  in 
consequence  of  your  base  ingratitude.  The  bond  is  broken.  I  have  no  interest  in  you 
nor  you  in  mc ;  I  have  no  honour  from  you,  nor  shall  ye  have  benefit  by  me.  You  have 
withheld  from  me  the  observance  that  was  due  to  me  and  the  obedience  which  I 
claimedj  I  shall  withdraw  all  my  mercies  and  loving-kindnesses  from  you.    So  more 


CH.1. 1— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  15 

shall  I  send  you  my  prophets,  no  more  make  known  to  you  my  promises ;  In  a  word," 
and  including  the  whole,  "  I  will  no  more  be  your  God."  Similar  to  the  original  words 
is  that  beautiful  expression  in  Canticles, "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his  "  (ant  Modi 
Vdodi  li). 

Vers.  10, 11. — There  it  salvation  in  store  for  loth  Israel  and  Judah.  1.  We  must 
here  premise  our  belief  that  the  two  divisions  of  the  Hebrew  people — the  ten  tribes  and 
the  two — have  been  long  amalgamated.  Even  during  the  Captivity  a  considerable 
amalgamation  of  tribes  may  have  taken  place.  Though  we  have  the  list  of  families 
that  accompanied  Zerubbabel  and  Ezra  from  Assyria  and  Media  to  Jerusalem,  yet  the 
tribal  heads  of  those  families  are  not  given,  as  though  their  genealogy  had  been  already 
lost.  It  has  been  conjectured,  with  some  degree  of  probability,  that  the  somewhat 
indefinite  phrases,  "  Judah  and  Benjamin  "  are  used  by  Ezra  to  denote  "  the  more  promi- 
nent actor8;"while  "Israel"  designates  "thewhole  nation  collectively,"including  persons 
belonging  to  all  the  tribes.  It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  in  the  Book  of  Esther  the 
Hebrews  belonging  to  all  the  tribes  are  no  longer  called  "  children  of  Israel "  or  "  children 
of  Judah,"  but  simply  "Jews."  But  besides  this  fusion  of  tribes  during  the  Captivity, 
there  would  be  a  considerable  admixture  of  such  Hebrews  as  remained  behind  with 
their  heathen  neighbours;  this  might  be  expected  from  their  readiness  to  contract 
heathenish  intermarriages  even  In  Ezra's  time.  Many  of  the  original  stock  of  Israel 
may  thus  be  found  in  Chaldea  and  the  adjacent  countries  whither  they  had  been 
carried  captives,  while  others  migrated  into  regions  more  remote.  The  so-called  lost 
tribes  may  thus  comprehend,  not  only  those  Israelites  that  were  at  so  early  a  period  as 
that  of  the  Captivity  incorporated  with  the  children  of  Judah,  but  also  those  that 
intermingled  with  or  were  absorbed  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Chaldean  provinces, 
and  whose  descendants  are  represented  by  the  Nestorians,  Yezidees,  and  other  tribes  ; 
and  in  case  of  those  who  had  removed  to  greater  distances,  by  the  inhabitants  of 
Afghanistan,  the  Jews  of  Malabar  and  elsewhere  in  India,  the  black  Jews  of  Cochin  China, 
the  Jews  of  Taitary, and  even  the  North  American  Indians.  2.  This  passage  of  Hosea 
before  us,  and  that  in  the  second  chapter  towards  the  end,  which  refer  to  the  natural 
posterity  of  Abraham,  consisting  of  1  srael  and  Judah,  and  composing  one  nationality,  are 
applied  in  the  New  Testament  to  Gentile  believers.  Hengstenberg  draws  attention  to 
the  paradoxical  fact,  that,  notwithstanding  the  disinheritance  of  the  natural  Israel  and 
in  spite  of  their  vast  excision,  yet  "  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  should  be  as 
the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  measured  nor  numbered ;  who,  from  being  not 
God's  people,  should  be  called  sons  of  the  living  God ;  that  the  children  of  Judah  and 
the  children  of  Israel  should  be  gathered  together  and  appoint  themselves  one  Head, 
and  come  up  out  of  the  land  [of  their  captivity] ;  and  that  great  should  be  this  day  of 
Jezreel  [or  sowing]."  He  then  proceeds  to  explain  this  as  "  first  fulfilled  in  the  Messi- 
anic time,  and  as  in  part  still  to  be  fulfilled,  when  the  family  of  Abraham  receives,  and 
will  .yet  more  fully  receive,  an  innumerable  inciease,  partly  by  the  reception  of  an 
innumerable  multitude  of  adopted  sons  [Gentiles],  and  partly  by  the  exaltation  of 
[Isfaelitish]  sons  in  an  inferior,  to  sons  in  the  highest  relation,"  in  other  words,  by  the 
incorporation  of  the  multitudinous  believing  Gentiles  with  the  iaithfulremnantpf  Israel, 
thus  coiistituting  one  sublime  Israel  of  God ;  one  family  of  Abraham,  now  the  father 
of  many  nations,  the  heir  of  the  world.  3.  But  the  sense  of  the  passage  is  not  thus 
exhausted ;  more  is  to  be  expected.  At  present  Gentiles  supply  the  place  of  the 
rejected  portion  of  the  natural  seed  ;  the  ultimate  recovery,  however,  of  this  rejected 
and  disinherited,  because  still  unbelieving,  portion  itself  is  also  included,  as  we  believe, 
in  this  passage.  But  whether,  with  their  conversion  to  God  and  submission  to 
Messiah,  they  shall  be  restored  to  the  "  covenant  land  "  from  which  their  sin  expelled 
them,  is  another  question,  and  one  not  so  easily  answered.  Indeed,  there  has  been 
much  conflict  of  opinion  in  regard  to  that  answer.  There  is,  at  least,  a  presumption 
that  with  the  pardon  of  their  sin  they  shall  be  favoured  with  the  "  ancient  token  of 
reconciliation — their  return  to  the  delightsome  land."  4.  In  an  able  work  on  '  The 
Future  of  the  Jewish  Nation,'  we  find  the  following  statement :  "  The  connection 
uniformly  held  forth  in  Scripture,  in  the  case  of  the  Jews,  between  defection  and  dis- 
persion, and  between  reconciliation  and  restoration,  constitutes  strong  ground  for 
expecting  that  the  final  conversion  of  the  Jews  will  be  accompanied  by  a  final  restora- 


16  THE   BOOK   OF   HOSEA.  [cH.  L  1—11. 

tion  to  their  fatherland."  It  is  also  added  in  the  same  work  that  the  restoration 
advocated  is  "  no  voluntary  return  in  a  state  of  unbelief,"  but  "  a  restoration  regarded 
as  God's  public  token  of  reconciliation  to  his  ancient  and  now  believing  people  .  .  . 
neither  are  we  contending  for  such  a  restoration  as  involves  separation  and  seclusion 
from  other  nations  in  the  little  nook  of  Palestine  .  ,  .  but  while  the  head-quarters, 
the  proper  home  of  the  nation,  will  be  in  Palestine,  there  may  be  an  abundant  repre- 
sentation of  the  roving  race  in  all  the  places  of  their  present  dispersion." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Ver.  1. — The  prophet  and  his  worTc.  This  subject  may  be  appropriately  introduced 
with  some  remarks  about  the  minor  prophets.  They  are  "  minor,"  not  because  their 
work  was  of  less  consequence  than  that  of  the  four  major  prophets,  but  simply 
because  the  Scriptures  which  they  wrote  are  shorter.  The  contents  of  the  minor 
prophets  are  very  unfamiliar  to  many  Christians.  Possibly  the  pulpit  is  partly  to 
blame  for  this. 

I.  The  person  of  Hosba.  1.  Eis  name  and  descent.  Our  names  are  mere  arbitrary 
labels  afBxed  to  us ;  but,  among  the  Jews,  names  were  often  given  in  allusion  to 
circumstances  in  character  or  destiny.  "  Hosea  "  means  "  salvation."  To  some  readers 
this  name  may  appear  to  stand  in  direct  contrast  to  his  message,  seeing  that  he 
denounced  national  ruin.  Yet  it  was  appropriate,  after  all ;  for  Hosea's  ultimate  pro- 
phetic word  was  the  redeeming  mercy  of  Jehovah.  We  know  nothing  of  his  father, 
Beeri ;  or  of  his  own  life,  except  as  reflected  in  his  book.  He  was  a  native  and  citizen 
of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  (ch.  i.  2  ;  vii.  5).  He  loved  his  fulherland  with  the 
deep  love  of  a  patriot ;  and  his  life-messnge  was  to  "  Bphraim."  He  is  the  only  prophet 
of  that  Iviniidom  who  has  contributed  to  the  Bible  a  book  which  is  really  a  prophecy. 

2.  His  lengthened  ministry.  Hosea  must  have  been  a  young  man  when,  during  tha 
powerful  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  he  began  his  life-work ;  and  he  maintained  his  testi- 
mony throughout  the  turbulent  [leriod  which  ensued  after  the  death  of  that  prince,  and 
indeed  nearly  to  the  time  of  the  deportation  of  Israel  into  Assyria.  He  thus  laboured 
bravely  during  more  than  two  generations.  He  did  not  withdraw  from  his  ministry 
after  thirty  or  forty  years'  work,  upon  the  plea  of  long  service.  Nor  did  he  retire  on 
the  ground  of  his  non-success,  although  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  made  a  convert, 
or  enjoyed  the  sympathy  of  even  "  a  very  small  remnant "  of  his  fellow-countrymen. 

II.  His  TIMES.  Hosea  lived  in  the  eighth  centnry  before  Christ,  about  the  time 
when  Rome  was  being  built.  He  must  have  begun  his  labours  some  years  before 
Isaiah  in  the  southern  kingdom.  His  times  were  characterized  by :  1.  Deep  spiritual 
apostasy.  Indeed,  his  life  extwadM  over  th«  darkest  period  of  the  whole  histsry  of 
Israel.  God  bad,  la  great  grace,  espoused  the  Hebrew  people  to  himself,  and  had 
called  himself  their  Husband.  But  they  had  been  miserably  unfaithful  to  him.  The 
kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  especially,  had  "  committed  great  whoredom"  (ver.  2).  Its 
very  existence  as  a  separate  kingdom  was  a  course  of  adultery.  Its  political  flirtations 
with  Egypt  and  Assyria,  when  it  ought  to  have  relied  wholly  on  Jehovah,  were  acts 
of  adultery.  The'  calf-worship  at  Jeroboam's  two  "  chapels  of  ease  "  was  adultery. 
The  Baal-»orship  introduced  by  Jezebel,  with  its  shameful  rites,  was  adultery.  The 
nation,  in  fact,  had  cast  off  all  fear  of  God,  and  lost  all  knowledge  of  him.  2.  Fearfid  moral 
corruption.  Wherever  the  foundations  of  religion  are  undermined,  immorality  becomes 
gross  and  rampant.  Hosea  contemplated  almost  with  despair  the  universal  secularity 
and  violence  and  dissoluteness  (or  rather,  dissolution)  of  society  in  his  day.  Riot  and 
drunkenness  prevailed  everywhere.  Sensuality  was  observed  as  a  sacrament  in  the 
temples  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth.     Rivers  of  blood  flowed  through  the  land  (oh.  iv.  1 — 6). 

3.  Hopeless  political  anarchy.  After  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.,  the  flames  of  revolution 
burst  forth,  and  were  never  entirely  quenched  until  the  nation  was  suddenly  carried 
into  captivity.  There  was  often  confusion  in  the  government,  and  sometimes  utter 
anarchy.  Kings  perished  by  the  hand  of  the  assassin,  and  factions  strove  one  with 
another  until  they  were  mutually  devoured.  Soon  came  the  final  rush  of  ruin ;  and' 
Hosea  must  have  lived  almost  to  see  it. 

III.  His  LiFE-woBK.    Hosea  is  the  Jeremiah  of  the  northern  kingdom.    But  his 


OB.  1. 1—11.]  THH  BOOK  OF  H08BA.  17 

isolation  was  more  complete,  his  sorrow  more  tragic,  and  his  prophetic  work  more  barren 
of  results  than  even  Jeremiah's.  1.  He  denounced  Ephraim's  sin.  The  nation  had 
rejected  Jehovah  as  its  Husband,  and  gone  a-whuring  after  other  gods.  So  Ilosea  was 
raised  up  on  purpose  to  rebuke  this  unfaithfulness  in  all  its  forms :  the  Baal-worship, 
the  calf-worship,  the  rampant  licentiousness,  the  revolt  from  the  house  of  David,  a.nt\ 
tlie  leaning  for  aid  upon  heathen  powers.  2.  He  pronounced  Ephraim's  doom.  When 
he  began  his  ministry  there  were  as  yet  no  signs  of  ruin.  Hosea's  thunderbolts  dropped 
at  first  out  of  a  clear  sky.  It  was  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.,  when  the  kingdom  was  in 
the  zenith  of  its  prosperity.  But  from  first  to  last  the  prophet  warned  the  ten  tribes 
that  their  commonwealth  would  soon  become  a  total  wreck.  They  would  be  carried 
away  into  perpetual  exile.  God  would  sot  their  kingdom  aside  on  account  of  its  sins, 
and  not  for  seventy  years  only  (as  would  be  the  case  with  Judah),  but  for  ever.  3. 
He  announced  redeeming  love  in  store/or  Ephraim.  For,  after  all,  Hosea  was  not  a 
despairing  pessimist.  lie  spoke  with  confidence  of  the  continuance  of  the  Divine  tender 
mercy  towards  Israel.  The  northern  kingdom,  as  such,  must  perish ;  but,  notwith- 
standing, Jehovah  will  yet  have  a  people  for  himself,  who  shall  be  gathered  out  of  all 
the  twelve  tribes.  So  Hosea  mingled  with  his  menaces  urgent  calls  to  repentance. 
His  appeals  are  surcharged  with  the  tenderest  pathos.  It  has  been  pointed  out  that  he 
is  the  first  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  who  calls  God's  affection  for  his  people  by  the  name 
of  "  love ; "  the  first  clearly  to  forecast  the  Christian  conception  of  the  fatherhood  of 
God,  with  the  infinite  tenderness  implied  in  it.  Hosea's  message  of  grace  was  that 
God  has  still  the  heart  of  a  husband  towards  Israel,  and  the  heart  of  a  father  towards 
her  children. 

IV.  His  book.  It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  a  prophet's  life-work  and  his 
contribution  to  Holy  Scripture.  1.  The  arrangement.  This  book  is  by  no  means  a 
methodical  record  of  Hosea's  long  ministry.  It  comprises  only  a  few  notes  indicative 
of  its  burden  and  spirit.  Yet  the  order  of  the  book  seems  to  be  chronological.  The 
first  three  chapters  tell  of  the  "  word  "  given  him  before  the  fall  of  Jehu's  house,  and 
while  the  kingdom  still  seemed  strong  and  flourishing.  The  other  chapters  reflect 
those  vicissitudes  of  frightful  anarchy  and  feeble  misrule  which  characterized  the  fifty 
J  ears  that  followed  (see  Pusey's  Introduction,  p.  5).  2.  The  speaker.  It  is  worthy  of 
notice  that  throughout  the  booli  the  speaker  is  generally  the  Lord  in  his  own  person.  The 
whole  prophecy  contemplates  Israel's  disobedience  to  "  the  first  and  great  command- 
ment ; "  and  so  the  first  personal  pronouns  usually  refer  to  Gk)d  himself.  The  Lamen- 
tations of  Jeremiah  is  a  sad  book,  but  the  Book  of  Hosea  reverberates  with  even  a 
profounder  bass  of  sorrow;  it  is  the  saddest  book  of  Holy  Scripture,  being  in  effect  the 
lamentations  of  Jehovah.  Hosea  shows  us  the  Divine  heart  as  it  were  agitated  witli 
such  conflicts  of  passion  as  a  good  man  might  experience  whose  conjugal  and  parental 
love  had  been  cruelly  blighted.  Z.  The  style.  Hosea  is  really  a  poem.  Itissoevenin 
literary  form ;  for  only  ch.  i.  and  iii.  are  written  in  prose.  The  first  three  chapters 
constitute  a  symbolical  introduction,  while  the  body  of  the  book  (ch.  iv. — xiv.)  is  a 
dirge,  composed  of  mingled  wailings,  entreaties,  threatenings,  and  promises.  The  style 
is  abrupt,  sententious,  laconic,  and  "  rather  to  be  called  Hosea's  sayings  than 
Hosea's  sermons  "  (Matthew  Henry).  But  "  a  verse  may  find  him  who  a  sermon  flies." 
4.  The  profitableness  of  the  hook  to  its.  Although  Hosea  was  raised  up  primarily  for 
Israel,  his  prophecy  has  its  place  as  an  elect  stone  in  the  temple  of  Divine  revelation. 
It  teaches  the  politician  that  only  "righteousness  exalteth  a  nation."  It  reminds  the 
moralist  that  a  sound  and  pure  ethics  can  rest  only  upon  a  foundation  of  living  religion. 
It  warns  the  Christian  of  the  danger  of  harbouring  idols  within  his  heart.  Hosea  is  by 
no  means  a  shallow  book.  It  is  not  for  superficial  minds.  It  requires — ^as  its  epilogue 
(ch.  xiv.  9)  suggests — very  deep  and  diligent  study. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  2, 3. — Hosea's  marriage  and  prophetic  training.  When  this  text  is  announced, 
possibly  some  may  say,  "  What  a  shocking  subject  to  preach  about!"  Well,  it  is 
shocking  indeed.  God  intends  it  to  be  so.  But  to  our  feelings  spiritual  adultery  should 
be  even  more  revolting  than  the  literal  whoredom  which  the  Holy  Spirit  presents 
here  as  its  prophetic  symbol.  And  we  must  not  forget  that  this  painful  passage 
records  "  the  beginning  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Hosea." 

L  Hosea's  conjugai.  dishonoub.    How  are  we  to  expMn  the  narrative  portions 

0 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.i.1— IL 

(ch.  i.  and  iii.)  of  this  book?  The  most  interesting  problem  of  Hosea's  life,  and  the 
"  vexed  question"  in  the  exposition  of  his  prophecy,  lies  in  the  meaning  of  tliis  story 
of  his  domestic  experiences.  There  have  been  three  principal  interpretations.  At  the 
one  extreme  is  the  severely  literal  view ;  viz.  that  Hosea,  in  obedience  to  a  Divine 
command,  united  himself  in  marriage  vdth  a  woman  notorious  for  her  impurity 
(Augustine,  Pusey,  Dean  Stanley,  etc.).  At  the  other  extreme  is  the  purely  allegorical 
view;  yiz.  that  the  narrative  is  to  be  regarded  merely  as  a  parable;  or,  at  most,  that 
the  marriage  took  place  in  prophetic  vision  only  (Jerome,  Calvin,  Hengstenberg,  etc.). 
Tine  exegesis  which  the  writer  of  this  homily  prefers  lies  between  these  two ;  viz.  that 
Hosea's  marriage  was  real,  but  that  Gomer  did  not  become  profligate  until  after  she  had 
borne  the  prophet's  three  children  (Bwald,  Professor  A.  B.  Davidson,  Dr.  Kobertson 
Smith,  etc.).  No  view  which  it  is  possible  to  take  is  free  from  difficulties ;  but  this 
last  one  is  not  exposed  to  the  insurmountable  objections  which,  in  the  writer's  judg- 
ment, adhere  to  the  two  extreme  interpretations.  It  also  furnishes  an  appropriate 
parallel  in  Hosea's  experience  to  the  love  of  God  for  his  people  IsraeL  The  prophet, 
accordingly,  contracted  a  marriage  which  turned  out  to  be  unhappy.  Gomer  did  not 
love  God.  Her  heart  became  contaminated  with  the  moral  miasma  which  was  poisoning 
the  social  life  of  the  whole  nation.  Hosea's  quiet  home,  his  simple  occupations,  and  his 
devout  sabbath-keeping,  grew  distasteful  to  her.  She  felt  her  life  intolerably  slow. 
After  the  birth  of  her  third  child  she  was  directly  tempted,  and  wandered  and  fell. 
Gomer  joined  the  throng  of  the  priestesses  of  Ash  toreth,  took  part  in  the  abomi  nable  rites 
of  the  PhiEnician  idolatry,  and  left  her  poor  husband  to  "  cry  to  vacant  chairs  and 
widowed  walls  "  that  she  had  made  his  home  desolate.  Hosea's  love  for  his  spouse  had 
been  very  deep  and  tender,  and  be  felt  that  he  loved  her  still,  despite  the  fierce  conflict 
which  his  affection  had  now  to  wage  against  his  outraged  honour.  It  would  almost 
seem  too,  from  the  ominous  names  given  to  the  children,  that  they  also,  as  they  grew 
up,  followed  for  a  time  in  their  mother's  evil  ways.  So  Hosea  begins  his  book  by 
showing  that  it  was  the  blighting  of  bis  fireside  joys  and  the  breaking  of  his 
household  gods  that  first  made  him  "  a  man  of  sorrows." 

"  Now  I  sit 
All  lonely,  homeless,  weary  of  my  life, 
Thick  darkness  round  me,  and  the  stars  all  dmnbi 
Tfaat  erst  had  sung  their  wondrous  tale  of  joy. 
And  thou  hast  done  it  all,  0  faithless  one  I 
O  Gomer  I  whom  I  loved  as  never  wife 
Was  loved  in  Israel,  all  the  wrong  is  thine  I 
Thy  hand  hath  spoilM  all  my  tender  vines, 
Thy  foot  hath  trampled  all  my  pleasant  fruits, 
Thy  sin  hath  laid  my  honour  in  the  dust." 

(Dean  Plumptre.) 

II.  God's  pbovidbncb  in  this  dishonoub.  The  shipwreclj  of  his  home-happiness 
taught  Hosea  very  solemn  spiritual  lessons.  He  heard  in  it  the  voice  of  Jehovah  point- 
ing out  to  him  his  life-work.  Looking  around,  he  perceived  that  his  experience  was 
not  an  isolated  one.  Bather,  his  home  was  a  picture  of  the  moral  state  of  the  entire 
northern  kingdom.  The  land  was  reeking  with  sensuality.  And  with  that  sin  the 
sin  of  idolatry  was  closely  intertwined.  So  Hosea  became  very  deeply  convinced  that 
all  the  crime  and  vice  of  the  age  sprang  from  one  spiritual  root :  "  The  land  had  com- 
mitted great  whoredom,  departing  from  the  Lord."  He  reflected  that  his  own  bitter 
experience  was  but  a  parable  of  God's  experience.  What  Gomer  was  to  him,  the 
Israelitish  nation  had  been  to  Jehovah.  She  had  been  betrothed  to  God  "  in  the  days 
of  her  youth,  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ; "  and  the  nuptials  had  been 
celebrated  at  Mount  Sinai.  But,  alas  1  she  had  fallen  now  into  foul  and  shameless 
idolatry.  Hosea,  from  his  own  sad  experience,  could  have  sympathy  with  God.  Him- 
self a  victim — and  not  an  eye-witness  merely — of  the  wickedness  of  his  age,  he  realized 
more  fully  than  he  could  otherwise  have  done  the  odiousness  of  Israel's  apostasy. 
When  he  thought  of  Gomer,  he  could  understand  the  words  of  the  second  command- 
ment, "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God."  And  thus  his  conjugal  dishonour  was 
his  birth  as  a  prophet    It  was  "  the  beginning  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  Hoaett," 


OH.  1. 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  la 

The  Book  of  Hosea  is  a  poem ;  and  while,  of  course,  "  the  poet  is  born,  not  made,''  events 
in  his  own  life  are  oftentimes  needed  to  strike  from  him  the  poetic  fire.  Although  the 
poet  is  "  dowered  with  the  hate  of  hate,  the  scorn  of  scorn,  the  love  of  love,"  it  is  also 
true  tlutt 

"  Most  wretched  men 
Are  cradled  into  poetry  by  wrong : 
They  learn  in  suffering  what  they  teach  in  song." 

(Shelley.) 

It  wag  notably  so  with  Hosea.  Affliction  was  his  one  prophetical  school.  So,  when  lie 
now  sits  down  to  begin  liis  book,  he  recounts  at  the  outset  his  domestic  wrongs,  in  tho 
light  of  his  ripe  experience  of  their  Divine  meaning.  God  had  "  girded  "  him,  though 
at  first  he  had  "  not  known  "  it.  The  Lord  had  said,  in  his  own  Divine  plan  of  Hosea's 
life,  "  Go,  take  unto  thee  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  and  children  of  whoredoms."  The 
event  had  taught  him  that  his  desolate  home  was  a  type  of  Israel's  ruin  ;  and  his 
pity  for  Gomer — which  longed  to  restore  her  from  her  wasted  life — a  faint  shadow  of  the 
yearning  love  of  God  for  liis  apostate  people. 

III.  Lessons  for  ounsELVES.  1.  Ood  himself  is  the  supreme  end  of  our  life.  He 
is  so :  (1)  To  the  individual.  "  Man's  chief  end  is  to  glorify  God."  The  life  which 
does  nqt  do  this  is  a  failure.  (2)  To  the  family.  This  sad  story  reminds  us  of  the 
blessedness  of  household  piety,  and  of  a  pure  family  life.  Hcly  Scripture  everywhere 
magnifies  the  family,  and  enjoins  that  the  fear  of  God  be  enthroned  in  its  very  heart. 
"  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it."  (3)  To  the 
nation.  National  religion,  on  the  part  of  a  self-governing  people,  depends  upon  the 
spiritual  state  of  the  persons  and  households  which  compose  the  nation.  "Departure 
from  the  Lord,"  whether  in  the  case  of  the  individual,  or  the  family,  or  the  common- 
wealth, is  idolatry  and  adultery ;  and  it  leads  inevitably  to  ruin  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  27).  2. 
All  of  us  require  to  repent  of  Oom.er's  sin.  Our  evil  hearts  have  gone  a-whoring  from 
our  God ;  our  wrong  words  and  actions  are  the  children  born  of  our  adultery.  Each  uf 
us  may  say— 

"  Thou,  my  soul,  wast  loved, 

Af  bride  by  bridegroom,  by  the  eternal  Lord ; 

And  thou,  too,  hast  been  false." 

(Dean  Flumptre.) 

3.  A  course  of  affliction -affords  a  valuable  prophetic  curriculum.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  "  all  the  Lord's  people  "  should  be  "  prophets."  But,  before  we  can  be  fully  qualified 
and  accomplished  to  teach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  we  must  be  washed,  nut  only  iu 
his  blood,  but  incur  own  hearts'  blood  also. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  3 — 9. — Eosea's  children.  Not  only  was  the  prophet's  marriage  to  be  a  sign  ; 
the  children  were  to  be  for  signs  also.  So,  afterwards,  were  Isaiah's  sons  in  Judah 
(Isa.  vii.  3,  14;  viii.  3).  Hosea's  ill-starred  children  were  cursed  in  the  very  names 
which  they  bore ;  and  each  of  these  was  to  be  as  a  sermon  to  the  nation.  It  may  be  that 
they  personally  walked  for  a  time  in  their  mother's  evil  ways ;  but  whether  or  not,  the 
names  which  they  received  concentrate  into  a  focus  Hosea's  message  of  judgment. 

L  Jezbebl.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  "Jezreel"  was  the  name  of  the  great  plain  in  the 
heart  of  the  northern  kingdom  which  was  the  glory  of  Palestine  for  its  beauty  and 
richness,  and  which  has  been  in  all  ages  a  battle-field  of  nations.  It  was  also  the 
name  of  the  fair  city  which  stood  near  the  eastern  end  of  the  plain,  where  Ahab  had 
his  ivory  palace,  and  where  Jezebel  and  he  committed  so  many  infamous  murders. 
Now,  Hosea's  firstborn  was  called  "  Jezreel : "  1.  To  recall  the  blood  spilt  there,  which 
was  still  crying  for  vengeance.  (Ver.  4.)  This  must  mean  the  blood  shed  by  Ahab 
and  Jezebel — the  murder  of  Naboth  and  his  sons,  and  the  massacre  of  the  Lord's 
prophets.  But  it  probably  includes  also  the  revolting  cruelties  of  Jehu,  by  which  he 
exterminated  the  whole  family  of  Ahab.  Divine  retribution  may  slumber  for  man) 
generations ;  but  it  will  awake  some  day,  and  do  its  dreadful  work.  Jehu  had  destroyed 
«he  house  of  Ahab  in  obedience  to  a  Divine  command,  and  God  had  commended  him 
for  it  (2  Kings  x.  30).  But,  while  his  act  was  in  accordance  with  his  commission,  his 
motive  was  not.    He  had  complied  with  vAQ  will  of  God  only  in  so  far  as  he  judged  that 


20  THE  BOOK  OP  SOSfiA.  t™-  »•  1— ll« 

compliance  would  advance  his  own  political  ends.  His  "  zeal  for  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings 
X.  16)  was  only  a  thin  veneer  overlaying  his  zeal  for  Jehu.  So,  although  he  overturned 
the  altar  of  Baal,  he  clave  to  the  calves  of  Jeroboam.  Calvin  refers  here  to  Henry  VIII. 
of  England  as  having  been  a  modern  Jehu.  Henry  broke  with  the  pope,  not  that  he 
might  repudiate  the  errors  of  the  papacy,  but  because  he  was  determined  to  divorce  Queen 
Catherine.  He  suppressed  the  monasteries,  not  because  they  were  dens  of  vice,  but 
that  he  mi°;ht  deliver  a  blow  at  the  papal  power,  and  at  the  same  time  fill  his  own 
coffers  with  the  treasures  of  the  monks.  But,  again,  Hosea's  firstborn  was  called 
"  Jezreel : "  2.  To  suggest  that  Israel  vms  about  to  he  scattered  hy  Ood  for  its  sins. 
(Vers.  4,  5.)  "  Jezreel "  in  Hebrew  sounds  and  spells  like  "  Israel ; "  and  the  play  of 
sound  suggests  the  thonght  that  the  nation  which  had  "  seen  God,"  and  been  a  "  prince 
that  prevailed  with  God,"  was  to  become  "  Jezreel "  in  the  sense  of  being  "  God-scattered  " 
among  the  heathen.  The  Impending  ruin  of  Jehu's  dynasty  was  to  be  the  beginning 
of  the  end.  For  although  the  northern  kingdom  continued  for  half  a  century  after- 
wards, it  was  constantly  distressed  with  civil  war,  or  distracted  with  revolution  and 
inarchy,  until  at  last  -Assyria  came  and  subverted  it  altogether.  Not  only  so,  but 
Israel  was  to  lose  its  prowess  and  meet  its  overthrow  "in  the  valley  of  Jezreel"  itself, 
Iiitherto  the  theatre  of  its  military  glory.  That  smiling  plain  had  been  to  Israel  what 
Marathon  was  to  Greece,  or  what  Bannockburn  is  to  Scotland.  Deborah  and  Barak, 
Gideon,  Saul,  Ahab,  had  all  gained  great  victories  there.  Yet  "  in  the  valley  of  J«zreel " 
"the  bow  of  Israel,"  which  still  seemed  so  strong,  was  to  be  irreparably  broken. 
Hosea  himself  lived  to  witness,  at  least  in  part,  the  fulfilment  of  this  oracle  (ch.  x. 
14).  And  illustrations  may  be  readily  multiplied  from  history  of  how  God  can  break 
the  pride  of  an  ungodly  nation  at  the  innermost  shrine  of  its  glory.  He  did  so  with 
Nineveh,  with  Babylon,  with  Tyre.  He  did  so  again  and  again  at  Jerusalem.,  He  did 
so  a  few  years  ago  in  France,  when  the  victorious  German  army  entered  Paris  by  the 
Arc  de  Triomphe,  and  when  King  William  of  Prussia  was  crowned  the  first  Emperor 
of  United  Germany  in  the  palace  of  Versailles. 

II.  Lo-KUHAMAH.  (Vors.  6,  7.)  This  second  child  of  Hosea  and  Gomer  was  a 
daughter.  Her  name,  meaning  "  Not-pititd,"  brought  a  still  sadder  message  to  the 
guilty  nation  than  the  name  "  Jezreel "  did.  To  be  unpitied  by  God  is  a  worse  calamity 
than  even  to  be  "  God-scattered."  Hitherto  Jehovah  had  at  least  always  compassionated 
his  erring  children.  And  does  not  the  whole  of  revelation  tell  us  that  the  heart  of  God 
yearns  with  infinite  tenderness  over  frail,  suffering  humanity  ?  "Can  a  woman  forget 
her  sucking  child  ? .  . .  Yea,  they  may  forget,  yet  will  1  not  forget  thee."  Why,  then, 
was  Israel  called  "  Lo-ruhamah "  ?  Not  because  the  Divine  heart  had  changed,  but 
simply  because  she  herself  insisted  upon  not  being  "  his  own."  She  persistently  "  would 
none  of"  him.  And  so,  at  last,  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  allow  her  to  "  eat  of  the 
fruit  of  her  own  way."  Hosea's  daughter  was  to  be  a  living  witness  by  her  name  that 
the  Divine  patience  was  now  at  length  exhausted.  And  the  presage  of  this  name  would 
be  fulfilled  in  the  total  and  irremediable  deportation  of  the  ten  tribes  into  Assyria. 
In  case,  mortover,  the  people  should  cling  to  any  false  hope,  the  opposite  lot  of  the 
kingdom  of  Judah  is  referred  to  (ver.  7)  by  way  of  contrast.  Judah  was  not  so 
ihoroughly  and  hopelessly  dissolute  as  Israel.  The  southern  kingdom  had  not  deserted 
the  temple  and  the  sacrifices.  When  it  was  spiritually  at  the  worst,  it  possessed  at  least 
"a  very  small  remnant."  So  Judah  would  receive  chastisement  rather  than  judgment. 
And  God  would  "  save  "  Judah,  although  not  "  by  bow,  nor  by  sword."  There  would 
soon  be  the  marvellous  deliverance  from  Sennacherib.  Then,  after  the  seventy  years' 
exile,  the  return  from  Babylon.  And,  last  of  all,  in  the  fulness  of  the  time,  the  spiritual 
salvation  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  all  the  while,  alas  I  the  northern  kingdom,  as  such,  was 
to  be  unsaved.  For  Ephraim's  apostasy  had  been  unanimous  and  universal.  Not  one 
of  its  kings  was  a  godly  man.  And  the  people  would  not  hearken  to  God's  prophets, 
but  settled  down  in  cunfirmed  wickedness  and  impenitence.  So  now  at  length  there 
was  no  refuge  fur  Israel  even  in  the  compassion  of  God  itself. 

III.  Lo-AMMi.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The  name  of  this  third  child,  meaning  "Not-my- 
peoph,"  presaged  still  worse  disaster  than  either  of  the  preceding.  The  third  instalment 
of  judgment  would  plunge  the  nation  into  the  lowest  depth  of  all.  The  withdrawal 
of  the  Divine  favour  could  only  lead  to  positive  rejection.  What  though  the  Jews  kept 
boasting  that  they  were  the  Lord's  chosen  people,  wheu  "  by  their  works  they  denied 


OH.  I.  1—11.]  THE  BOuK  OP  HOSEA.  21 

him  "  !  The  life  of  the  nation  was  such  as  at  length  to  allow  him  no  alternative  but 
to  declare  that  he  would  not  be  their  God.  Jehovah  must  dissolve  his  covenant  relation 
to  them.  He  is  compelled  to  disown  and  disinherit  them.  Henceforth  they  are  to  be 
no  longer  a  sacred  people ;  they  are  to  differ  in  nothing  from  the  profane  Gentiles.  A 
dreadful  doom !  Yet  still  that  nation  is  finally  out  off,  and  that  soul  is  lost  for 
ever,  to  whom  God  says  these  withering,  woeful  words  (ver.  9),  "I  will  not  be 
yours." 

Conclusion.  If  we  can  conceive  what  a  dreadful  trial  it  must  have  been  to  Hosea 
to  give  his  children  these  mystic  names,  so  ominous  of  woe,  we  shall  be  enabled  in 
some  measure,  as  he  was,  to  sympathize  with  the  Lord's  sorrow  for  those  in  his  human 
fiimily  who  live  and  die  in  obdurate  impenitence,  and  over  whom  his  wailing,  despairing 
lament  is,  "  How  often  I  would  have  gathered  you  together,  but  ye  would  not  1 " — 0.  J. 

Ver.  10 — ch.  ii.  1. — The  curse  reversei.  The  "  yet "  with  which  this  passage 
opens  is  a  blessed  yet.  It  introduces  suddenly  an  announcement  of  salvation  for  Israel. 
Hosea  cannot  think  of  everything  as  being  always  for  the  worst.  His  children  are  not 
to  be  living  witnesses  merely  of  approaching  vengeance.  So  the  prophet's  sobs  of 
agony  are  stilled  for  a  little,  to  give  place  to  the  inspiring  strains  of  Messianic  promise. 
He  points  out  three  blessings  which  lie  on  the  other  side  of  the  dreadful  doom  of  the 
northern  kingdom. 

L  Realization  op  the  covenant  puomise.  (Ver.  10.)  Some  one  might  naturally 
ask  the  question — If  Israel  is  to  be  "  scattered,"  "  unpitieii,"  and  "  rejected,"  what  is  to 
become  of  the  promises  given  to  Abraham  and  the  fai  hers  of  the  Hebrew  race  (Gen.  xxii. 
17;  xxxii.  12)?  The  prophet  rei'lics  that  these  will  be  in  no  wise  cancelled  by  the 
rejection  of  the  ten  tribv-'s.  The  people  of  the  northern  king.lom  are  to  be  dispersed 
among  the  nations  ;  but  God's  purpose  is  to  gather  his  Church  from  the  Gentile  world 
as  well  as  from  the  Jewish.  The  promises  given  to  Abraham  were  not  so  much  national 
as  spiritual.  While,  therefore,  the  symbolic  one  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  shall 
be  "  sealed,"  there  shall  stand  with  them  before  the  throne  the  "  great  multitude,  which 
no  man  could  number"  (Rev.  vii.  4,  9). 

II.  Recovbky  of  the  national  unity.  (Ver.  11.)  In  the  past  there  had  always 
been  more  or  less  of  enmity  between  Judah  and  Israel.  Long  before  the  disruption  of 
the  kingdom,  Ephraim  "  envied"  Judah.  And  for  two  hundred  years  now  these  tribes 
had  also  been  sundered  politically.  But,  in  the  good  time  coming,  the  twelve  tribes 
shall  again  become  one  rod  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  16, 17).  The  oracle 
before  us  implies,  further,  that  prior  to  this  reunion  Judah  also  shall  have  been  rejected 
and  carried  into  exile  lor  its  sins.  To  whom  are  we  to  refer  this  notable  prophecy  of 
the  "  one  head  "  ?  1.  It  refers  typically  to  Zeruhbahel,  the  head  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
at  the  return  from  the  exile.  Among  those  who  went  up  with  him  were,  at  least,  a 
few  belonging  to  the  ten  tribes;  so  that  a  partial  miniature  of  this  union  was  presented 
in  the  return  from  Babylon.  2.  It  refers  antitypically  to  Jesus  Ghiist,  the  "  One  Head  " 
of  redeemed  humanity.  The  literal  Judah  and  Israel  shall  be  reunited  in  him,  altmg 
with  the  spiritual  Israel  of  the  whole  Gentile  Church.  He  receives  the  appointment, 
of  couvse,  fiom  his  Father;  but  also  from  his  people,  in  the  sense  that  they  accept  and 
rejoice  in  it.  The  lesson  here  is  that  only  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  to  be  found  the 
true  basis  of  the  brotherhood  of  the  human  race.  The  name  of  Jesus  is  the  one  adequate 
symbol  of  life  and  libeity.  Only  his  body,  the  Church,  can  communicate  to  the  world 
the  blessings  of  the  ideal  republic — liberty,  equality,  fraternity.  Union  among  men 
can  only  spring  from  their  common  union  with  God. 

HI.  Rf.stouation  to  the  Divine  favour.  In  the  names  of  Hosea's  three  children  God 
had  denounced  woe  upon  Israel.  But  these  very  names  may  also  be  understood  so  that 
they  shall  convey  an  assurance  of  mercy  and  redemption.  It  may  be^  imieed,  tliat  after 
following  for  a  season  in  the  evil  ways  of  their  mother  Gomer,  the  three  young  people 
were  themselves  converted,  and  thus  became  qualified  in  character  to  illustrate  their 
father's  prophetic  message  on  its  side  of  promise.  1.  "  Jpzreel "  will  mean  "Ood  sowt." 
(Ver.  11.)  This  name  shall  be  purified  from  its  baser  associations,  and  be  understood 
again  in  accordance  with  its  richest  meaning.  Originally  suggestive  of  the  beauty  and 
fertility  of  the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  its  application  shall  be  extended,  in  the  spiritual 
sense,  to  the  whole  of  Palestine  and  of  the  world  (Isa.  xxxv.  1,  2).     When  God  sowa 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  HuSBA.  [OH.  1. 1— U. 

there  is  sure  to  be  a  glorious  harvest ;  hence  the  Messinnic  promise,  "  Great  shall  he  the 
dayof  Jezreel."  2.  "  Not-my-peojale"  mil  become  "  My  people."  (Ver.  lOandch.  ii.  1.) 
la  the  good  time  coming,  the  men  of  Israel  are  to  salute  one  another  no  longer  as 
"  Lo-ammi ; "  but,  joyfully  dropping  the  negative,  as  "  Ammi,"  i.e.  those  whom  the 
Lord  has  again  called  to  be  his  people.  This  name  anticipates  "  the  adoption  of  sons  " 
under  the  New  Testament.  Hence  we  find  the  Apostle  Peter  applying  this  passage  to 
the  Jews  of  the  dispersion  (1  Pet.  ii.  10) ;  and  the  Apostle  Paul  to  the  reception  of  the 
Gentiles,  in  opposition  to  the  Jews  (Rom.  ix.  25,  26).  The  words  of  the  latter  are  not 
merely  an  ingenious  adaptation  of  the  prophecy  to  the  heathen  nations ;  they  are  an 
argument  based  upon  the  fundamental  thought  of  it.  Israel,  through  its  apostasy,  had 
fallen  from  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  had  taken  its  place  Bpiritually  as  part  of  the 
Gentile  world,  which  served  dead  idols.  So  the  re-adoption  of  Israel  carried  with  it 
the  adoption  also  of  the  Gentiles  as  the  spiritual  children  of  Gk)d,  3.  "Not-pitied  "  will 
hecome  "  Pitied."  (Ver.  1.)  The  word  "  Ruhamah  "  will  be  applied  to  the  daughters 
of  the  people,  to  express  the  climax  of  the  Divine  love.  Israel  is  again  to  be  the  object 
of  the  Lord's  tender  and  yearning  affection.  On  the  other  side  of  all  the  sin  and  doom 
Hosea  discerns  the  sovereignty  of  Jehovah's  compassion  and  loving-kindness,  and  he 
calls  upon  the  people  rapturously  to  celebrate  it. 

CoNCHJsiON.  How  great  the  encouragement  which  these  three  verses  afibrd  to  any 
of  us  who  feel  that  we  have,  in  our  own  lives,  grievously  departed  from  the  living 
God !  We,  in  this  age,  should  understand  more  clearly  than  even  Hosea  did  the 
nnspeakable  mercy  of  Jehovah.  The  prophet  says  nothing,  for  example,  about  the 
ground  or  method  of  the  Divine  forgiveness.  But  God  has  imfolded  this  "  in  these 
last  days"  in  speaking  "  unto  us  by  his  Son"  (Heb.  i.  2).  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
come  as  the  Prophet  of  the  Church  to  emphasize  and  carry  forward  Hosea's  message — 
"  Jezreel,"  "  Ammi,"  "  Ruhamah."— C.  J. 

Ver.  11. — "  Oreat  shall  be  the  day  of  Jezreel."  Jezreel  means  "  sown  of  God,"  or 
"God's  sowing "  (ch.  ii. 22,  23).  These  words  embody  a  rich  Messianic  promise  which 
has  already  been  partially  fulfilled,  but  the  complete  realization  of  which  is  yet  in  the 
future.  The  import  of  this  oracle  was  not  exhausted  by  the  return  from  Babylon ;  we 
may  reasonably  apply  it  still  to  every  "  high  day  "  in  the  history  of  the  Church.  Some 
of  these  "  days  of  Jezreel "  are  as  follows : — 

I.  The  DAT  OF  THE  Incarnation.  On  that  day  Jesus  Christ  was  sown  in  the  earth, 
"  the  Seed  of  the  woman."  He  fell  into  the  soil  of  our  humanity,  that  he  might  make 
it  bring  forth  and  bud,  and  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit.  The  manifestation  of 
God  in  the  flesh  has  cut  history  in  twain.  Behind  the'  Incarnation  lies  a  moral  wilder- 
ness ;  before  it  stretches  the  summer  and  harvest  of  the  world. 

IL  The  day  of  the  Passion.  Then  the  "  com  of  wheat  fell  into  the  ground  and 
died,"  that  it  might  "  bring  forth  much  fruit."  And  has  not  the  Lord's  death  been 
fruitful  indeed  ?  It  possesses  healing  virtue  for  every  sin-wounded  soul.  It  is  the  spring 
of  all  right  thinking  and  of  all  noble  living  among  men.  Jesus  "  with  his  pierced 
hand  has  lifted  empires  off  their  hinges,  has  turned  the  stream  of  centuries  out  of  its 
channel,  and  still  governs  the  ages  "  (J.  P.  Bichter). 

III.  The  DAT  or  the  Eesdbrection.  Christ  is  "  the  First-begotten  of  the  dead," 
and  "  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  slept."  Because  he  lives,  his  people  shall  live  also. 
His  resurrection  both  secures  and  illustrates  the  quickening  of  the  souls  and  bodies  of 
the  saints.  The  weekly  return  of  the  Lord's  day  commemorates  the  great  truth  that 
His  resurrection  has  brought  with  it  the  new  creation  of  the  world. 

IV.  The  DAT  or  Pentecost.  That  was  the  birthday  of  the  New  Testament  Church. 
The  events  which  took  place  on  it  presaged  an  illustrious  career  for  the  cause  of  the 
Redeemer.  On  that  day  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  in  the  fulness  of  his  saving  power ; 
and  the  gospel  seed  which  was  then  sown  yielded  an  immediate  and  copious  harvest, 
typical,  too,  of  its  destiny  ultimately  to  cover  the  earth  (Acts  ii.  9 — 11). 

V.  The  DAT  OF  salvation.  This  day  has  already  lasted  for  eighteen  centuries.  We 
are  living  in  the  streaming  noontide  of  it.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  2). 
The  day  of  grace  embraces  every  occasion  regarding  which  it  may  be  said,  "  Behold, 
a  sower  went  forth  to  sow."  And,  as  the  result  of  all,  "  a  seed  shall  serve  him."  "  He 
shall  see  his  seed." 


OH.  1. 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  23 

VI.  The  day  op  kbvivaIi.  Sometimes  the  Church  loses  its  spiritual  freshness,  li 
becomes  parched  and  barren  and  desolate.  But  Goil  pours  out  upon  it  the  plentiful 
rain  of  his  Spirit;  and  soon  conversions  are  multiplied,  and  the  whole  Church  smiles 
again  with  the  verdure  of  piety  and  righteousness,  like  a  spiritual  valley  of  Jezreel. 
"  I  will  pour  water  upon  liim  that  is  thirsty,"  etc.  (Isa.  xliv.  3,  4). 

VII.  The  day  op  missionary  triumph.  It  is  the  speci&,l  function  of  the  Church 
to  bring  the  heathen  nations  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  This  work  God  will  bless. 
"  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy."  The  fruit  of  the  "  handful  of  corn  "  "shall 
shake  like  Lebanon."  The  spiritual  wilderness  "  shall  blossom  abundantly ; "  and  in 
our  times  we  see  the  fields  "  white  already  to  harvest." 

VIII.  The  DAT  OF  millennial  globy.  The  Church  is  to  enjoy  a  lengthened  period 
of  prosperity  in  the  latter  days  before  Christ's  second  coming.  While  the  millennium 
lasts,  "the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  shall  come  in,"  and  the  Jews  shall  be  reingrafted 
into  their  own  olive  tiee.  Over  all  the  world  "  Not-my-peo|ile  "  shall  become  "  My 
people,"  and  "  Not-beloved  "  shall  become  "  Beloved."  The  whole  earth  shall  be  God- 
sown,  and  shall  "  yield  her  increase." 

IX.  i'HE  DAY  OP  THE  NEW  CREATION.  At  the  "  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord  " 
the  Church  will  be  conducted,  through  the  final  baptism  of  fire,  to  "  the  restitution  of 
all  things."  There  are  to  be  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,"  adapted  to  the  resur- 
rection-bodies of  the  saints,  and  fitted  for  the  habitation  of  the  glorified  Church.  What 
a  great  day  that  shall  be,  when  Paradise  shall  be  restored,  and  the  garden-city  of  the 
New  Jerusalem  shall  come  down  out  of  heaven  from  God  1 

"  There  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow, 
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly ;  but  it  lies 
Deep-meadowed,  happy,  fair  with  orchard-lawns, 
And  bowery  hollows  crowned  with  summer  sea." 

(Tennyson.) 

CoNCLtJSiON.  This  grand  picture  is  only  still  beginning  to  be  realized.  But  the  work 
is  God's,  and  so  we  are  confident  that  no  part  of  it  shall  fail.  "  Jezreel "  is  "  Ood's 
sowing."  The  seed  is  his.  He  is  also  the  Sower.  He  will  bless  the  springing  thereof. 
He  will  fill  the  face  of  the  world  with  fruit,  and  at  last  gather  the  wheat  into  hi.s 
garner. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  4,  5. — Divine  retribution.  The  political  anarchy  and  social  degradation  of 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  during  the  time  of  Hosea  arose  from  causes  too  deep  to  be 
reached  by  the  panaceas  of  politicians,  or  by  the  nostrums  of  political  economists. 
Wilful  and  persistent  disobedience  to  Divine  Law  was  the  secret  source  .of  these  dis- 
orders, wliioh  called  for  a  radical  change  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  This,  however, 
it  seemed  hopeless  to  expect  from  the  nation  at  large.  It  was  given  over  to  its  impeni- 
tence and  hardness  of  heart.  Hence,  while  there  are  words  of  promise  for  individual 
penitents,  which  break  upon  our  ears  like  songs  in  the  storm,  there  are  none  for  the 
nation.  Over  it  was  creeping  the  darkness  of  a  night  which  would  have  no  dawn,  the 
dreariness  of  a  winter  which  would  never  be  followed  by  a  spring.  The  intensity  of 
feeling  with  which  a  patriot  like  Hosea  would  utter  such  denunciations  accounts  in 
some  degree  for  his  obscurity,  his  sentences  sounding  sometimes  as  though  broken  by 
sobs.  The  degraded  condition  of  those  he  addressed,  demanding  as  it  did  a  style  of 
teaching  which  would  compel  attention,  necessitated  the  bold  sketches  and  ^ring 
colours  which  abound  in  his  prophecy.  From  the  passage  before  us  we  learn  the 
following  lessons : — 

I,  That  a  literal  obedience  to  a  Divink  command  may  ultimately  bring 
PUNISHMENT  INSTEAD  OF  REWARD.  "  I  wiU  avcuge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the 
house  of  Jehu."  The  reference  is  to  one  of  the  greatest  tragedies  in  history,  recorded 
in  2  Kings  ix.  and  x.  Jehu  destroyed  the  guilty  house  of  Ahab,  and  the  powerful 
hierarchy  of  Baal  and  Astarte,  in  obedience  to  God's  command.  Why,  then,  was  this 
blood  to  be  avenged  upon  his  house?  Because,  as  Calvin  puts  it,  "  the  massacre  was 
a  crime  so  far  as  Jehu  was  concerned,  but  with  God  it  was  a  righteous  vengeance." 
In  other  words,  an  act  which  is  commanded  by  God  may  be  so  done  as  to  become  a 
crinw  to  the  man  who  does  it.    Lei  us  take  Jehu  as  an  example  of  this.    1,  Jeha 


24  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  toH.i.1— IL 

sinned  in  his  obedience  hecause  he  was  seeking  his  own  ends,  and  not  OocP$.  He  slew 
the  princes  of  Ahab's  house  because  they  might  rebel  against  himself;  and  destroyed 
the  priesthood  of  Baal  and  Astarte  because,  as  they  owed  their  position  to  Jezebelj  they 
would  foment  dissension,  and  use  their  influence  against  his  usurpation.  God  does  not  seek 
such  obedience  as  this.  He  teaches  us  to  pray,  "  Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is 
done  in  heaven,"  though  tlie  answer  to  the  prayer  may  destroy  our  own  cherished  plans. 
The  highest  exemplification  of  this  spirit  we  see  in  our  Lord,  who,  being  in  an  agony 
in  Gethsemane,  prayed,  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done."  In  later  times  the 
Pharisees  sinned  just  as  Jehu  had  done ;  and  Christ,  who  read  their  hearts,  declared 
that,  although  they  obeyed  the  Law,  they  were  condemned  by  God  in  their  obedience, 
because  they  sought  not  his  honour,  but  their  own.  Such  sin  is  possible  to  you.  If 
you  do  what  is  right  in  business  merely  because  "  honesty  is  the  best  policy,"  and 
trade  depends  on  a  good  reputation ;  if  you  give  to  the  poor  for  the  sake  of  the  popu- 
larity you  can  win ;  if  you  abstain  from  a  sinful  indulgence  because  you  can  no  longer 
afford  it,  or  fear  you  may  lose  some  prestige; — you  have  in  all  these  things  "your 
reward  ;"  you  will  gain  what  you  seek,  but  nothing  more.  Yours  is  the  sin  of  Jehu, 
who  won  the  throne  because  he  obeyed;  but  at  last  had  this  curse  because  he 
wrongly  obeyed.  Seeing,  then,  that  you  have  to  do  with  him  who  decides  unerringly 
about  the  motive  of  every  act,  put  up  the  constant  prayer,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart, 
0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  2.  The  sin  of  Jehu  also  appeared  in  this, 
that  he  loved  and  practised  the  very  sins  he  had  leen  called  upon  to  punish  in  others. 
(2  Kings  X.  31.)  He  refused  to  worship  Baal  and  Astarte,  not  because  they  were 
idols,  but  because  their  worship  was  associated  with  the  house  of  Ahab.  But  he  did 
wiirship  the  calves  (and  so  was  equally  idolatrous),,  because  this  cultus  served  his 
political  ends,  and  seemed  essential  to  the  independent  existence  of  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  (see  1  Kings  xii.  25 — 33).  He  hated  the  sinners,  but  he  loved  their  sins;  the 
very  reverse  of  what  was  true  of  our  King,  who  hated  sin,  but  loved  us  and  died  for  us 
"while  we  were  yet  sinners."  Now,  if  we  punish  a  person  for  wrong-doing,  and  yet 
do  the  wrong  ourselves,  we  are  not  only  inconsistent,  but  we  prove  that  we  are  sinning 
against  the  light,  and  so  aggravate  our  offence.  Suppose,  for  example,  that  a  parent 
rebukes  his  child  for  swearing:,  while  he  himself  is  guilty  of  that  sin,  though  right  in 
the  actual  reproof,  he  is  wrong,  as  Jehu  was,  in  its  insincerity.  Paul  contemplates 
this  in  Rom.  ii.  3,  where  he  asks,  "  Thinkest  thou  this,  0  man,  tliat  judgest  them  which 
do  such  things,  and  doest  the  same,  that  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  God  ? " 
Such  were  the  two  elements  of  sin  in  Jehu's  outward  obedience,  which  called  for  the 
threat,  "  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  Jehu." 

II.  That  departing  feom  God  is  the  beginning  op  all  sin.  Calf-worship  (a 
modification  of  Egyptian  idolatry)  was  less  hideous  and  degrading  in  its  ritual  than 
that  which  desecrated  the  groves  of  Astarte  or  the  high  places  of  Baal.  But  it  paved 
the  way  for  these  grosser  idolatries.  Indeed,  even  in  itself  it  was  not  so  innocent  as 
some  declare  it  to  have  been ;  for  the  calf  did  not  represent  Jehovah,  but "  nature,"  so  this 
was  the  worship  of  the  creature,  as  opposed  to  that  of  the  Creator.  In  less  gross  forms 
this  idolatry  ajipears  in  modern  times.  Many  talk  of  "nature"  till  they  forget  God 
ill  his  works,  and  are  in  spirit  followers  of  shrewd,  irreligious  Jeroboam,  who  set  up 
the  calves  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  and  so  made  Israel  to  sin.  In  that  false  worship  were 
found  the  germs  of  other  sins.  Spiritual  adultery  was  followed  by  carnal  adultery. 
Faithlessness  towards  God  led  to  unfaithfulness  towards  man.  So  men  became 
entangled,  as  they  ever  do,  in  the  meshes  of  sin,  till  they  were  "drowned  in  destruction 
and  perdition."  It  is  because  we  are  fearful  of  the  consequences  of  departure  from 
God  that  we  are  anxious  about  marjy  who  are  dear  to  us.  They  have  contracted 
no  notorious  vices  and  are  unstained  in  reputation;  but  they  have  no  safeguard 
against  the  worst  sins  and  woes,  so  long  as  it  is  true  that  "  God  is  not  in  all  their 
thoughts."  They  are  as  much  exposed  to  danger  as  the  sheep  on  the  fields  of  Bethle- 
hem were  before  David,  their  shepherd,  rich  in  his  heroism  and  strength,  slew  both 
the  lion  and  the  bear.     An  estranged  life  is  an  endangered  life. 

HI.  That  a  time  op  outward  phosperity  may  be  a  time  op  approaohino 
DESTRUCTION.  "  I  wiil  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the  house  of  Israel."  Never  had 
the  realm  seemed  more  jirosperous  than  when  Hosea  uttered  this  prophecy.  It  was 
during  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  IL,  a  brave  and  able  man,  who  had  regained  all  that 


OIL  I  1—11.3  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  26 

Hazael  had  conquered,  had  subdued  Moab  and  recovered  Damascus.  The  kingdom 
seemed  strong,  but  it  was  on  the  eve  of  disruption.  So  has  it  often  been.  When  the 
King  of  Babylon  was  feasting  with  his  nobles,  Cyrus  was  marching  up  the  bed  of  the 
river,  transforming  the  city's  means  of  defence  into  its  means  of  destruction.  When 
the  people  of  the  Roman  empire  were  giving  way  to  luxury,  as  men  who  could  afford 
to  relax  the  old  toil  and  strain,  the  Goths  were  at  their  gates.  L«t  any  nation  fail 
in  moral  strength  amidst  material  prosperity,  and  forget  that  it  is  "rigliteoiisness 
which  exalteth  a  nation ;  "  let  it  in  spirit  say  to  itself,  "  Thou  hast  much  goods  laid  up 
for  many  years,"  then  there  sounds  from  heaven  the  warning  words,  "  Thou  fool,  this 
night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee  !  "  Nor  ought  a  Christian  Church  to  consider 
that  its  wealth  and  numbers  constitute  a  pauge  for  its  stability  and  spiritual  strength, 
for  not  infrequently  its  tiuest  prosperity  lias  been  seen  in  the  days  of  persecution  for 
righteousness'  sake.  To  ourselves  also  let  us  fearlessly  apply  the  same  principle.  Our 
peril  may  be  greatest  in  our  hours  of  success  and  prosperity.  Woe  is  nearest  when  all 
men  speak  well  of  us ;  for  it  is  when  we  have  eaten  and  are  full  that  we  must  beware 
lest  we  forget  the  Lord  our  God. 

IV  That  a  scene  of  mbmobable  victories  mat  become  the  scene  of  final 
DEFEAT.  "  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of  Je/.reel."  The  "  bow"  is 
always  in  Scripture  an'  emblem  of  strength,  and  here  denotes  the  military  and 
political  power  of  Israel,  which  would  be  broken  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel.  No  place 
was  more  distinguislied  than  this  for  the  execution  of  Divine  judgments  against  the 
foes  of  his  people.  There  the  hosts  of  Sisera  were  scattered  by  Barak,  andthere  the 
Midianites  slept  securely  in  their  camp  till,  in  the  dead  of  night,  Gideon  with  his  three 
hundred  swept  down  the  hillside  like  an  avalanche  and  overwhelmed  them.  This 
place,  made  memorable  by  former  victories,  was  to  become  the  scene  of  final  defeat  to 
God's  people  who  had  become  God's  foes.  This  dreadful  change  was  strikingly  set 
forth  by  the  two  contrasted  names,  "  Israel "  and  "  Yidsreel,"  names  which  implied 
that  it  was  brought  about  by  change  in  character ;  for  the  people  were  no  longer 
"Israel,"  having  power  with  Ood,  but  had  become  "YiAsveel,"  scattered  by  God, 
from  him  and  from  each  other.  Israel's  bow  should  be  broken  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel. 
What  is  the  bow  of  our  strength  ?  If  it  be  not  in  Jehovah  it  will  be  broken ;  for  the 
day  of  retribution  must  come  upon  all  that  sets  itself  against  God,  or  dares  to  take  his 
place.  We  are  hastening  on  to  a  final  conflict  which  will  test  us  to  the  utmost.  In  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  our  fathers  have  exclaimed,  "  Now  thanks  be  unto  God 
which  giveth  us  the  victory ; "  but  if  we  forsake  God  as  Israel  did,  that  place  of  holy 
memories  will  be  to  us,  not  the  place  of  conquest  and  song,  but  of  defeat  and  shame,  for 
there  that  in  which  we  have  foolishly  trusted  will  be  broken,  like  the  bow  of  Israel 
in  the  valley  of  Jezreel. — A.  B. 

Ver.  7. — Divine  ddiveranee.  "  But  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah, 
and  will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their  God,  and  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by 
sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen."  The  contrast  between  the  king- 
doms of  Judah  and  of  Israel,  in  their  nature  and  destiny,  is  here  expressly  declared.  For 
Israel  there  was  no  hope;  although  pardon  awaited  any  man  amongst  that  people  who 
turned  unto  the  Lord,  for  no  nation  has  been  so  godless,  no  family  so  vicious,  but  that 
every  penitent  in  it  may  come  with  confidence  to  God.  As  for  the  kingdom,  however, 
it  was  founded  in  rebellion  against  David's  house,  and  therefore  against  the  Divine 
purpose.  Its  distinguishing  mark  was  idolatry ;  the  calves  at  Bethel  and  Dan  indicated 
its  limits,  and  the  counsels  of  God,  through  his  prophets,  had  been  ostentatiously  rejected. 
Hence  the  time  had  come  when  the  people  should  be  given  over  to  the  heathen  whose 
worship  they  had  chosen,  and  the  words  of  the  preceding  verse  announced  their 
irrevocable  doom.  "  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  but  I  will 
utterly  take  them  away."  Very  diiferent  was  the  position  of  the  house  of  Judah. 
With  all  their  imperfections  and  sins,  the  Jews  still  frequented  the  sacred  temple,  and 
there  by  appointed  worship  bore  witness  to  the  existence  and  unity  of  the  living  and 
true  God.  Judah  was,  therefore,  still  to  be  God's  ark,  borne  down  the  stream  of  time 
amidst  the  debris  of  fallen  empires,  until  he  should  come  forth  from  it  who  was  the 
King  of  Judah,  the  Son  of  David,  the  Kedeemer  of  the  world.  The  Jews  were  to  be 
humiliated  and  piiniished  for  sin,  yet  they  should  not  as  a  people  be  destroyed ;  and  so 


26  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA,  [oh.  l  1— IL 

they  were  cheered  by  the  promise,  "I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and 
will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their  God."  The  earlier  lulfilraent  of  these  words  is 
recorded  in  2  Kings  xix.,  where  we  read  of  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem,  not  by  brave 
defence,  nor  by  bribes,  nor  by  auxiliaries,  but  by  the  unseen  pestilence  which  slew 
a  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  in  the  crowded  camp  of  the  Assyrians.  Nor  was 
the  promise  exhausted  then,  but  was  again  fulfilled  when  the  Jews  of  the  Captivity, 
to  their  own  amazement,  were  restored,  not  by  revolt  or  stratagem,  but  by  the  free 
oifer  of  the  magnanimous  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.  2,  3).  Our  text,  however,  has  more  than 
a  local  and  temporary  interest.  The  principle  of  Divine  deliverance,  through  other 
than  human  means,  perpetually  asserts  itself  in  Old  Testament  history.  It  was  the 
first  lesson  the  Israelites  were  tauglit  after  leaving  Egypt,  when  at  the  Bed  Sea  Moses 
said,  "  Stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  1  He  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye 
sliall  hold  your  peace."  And  this  lesson,  emphasized  in  the  wilderness,  was  repeated 
immedialely  Canaan  was  entered,  when  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  before  the  strength 
of  an  army  which  lifted  up  no  weapon  against  it.  In  elucidating  this  principle  of 
Divine  deliverance  we  observe— 

I.  That  it  is  man's  natural  tendency  to  tbt  to  do  without  God,  to  trust  the 
bow,  and  the  chariots  of  human  providing.  The  story  of  the  prodigal  is  repeated  con- 
stantly. Every  man  says  in  effect,  "  Father,  give  me  my  portion ;  let  me  see  how  I  can 
do  for  myself  without  thee."  It  is  only  by-and-by,  when  he  finds  that  there  are  worse 
friends  than  the  Father,  and  wearier  places  than  the  home,  that,  clothed  in  rags,  with 
failing  hrart  and  many  a  tear,  he  says,  "  I  will  arise,  and  go  to  my  Father."  1.  Israe'. 
showed  this  tendency.  They  confided  in  their  bravery  and  patriotism  and  in  the 
strength  of  Egypt,  believing  that  unitedly  they  could  construct  a  dam  against  which 
this  great  sea  of  Assyria,  surging  in  so  ominously,  would  break  in  vain.  It  was  not  an 
unreasonable  expectation  from  the  human  point  of  view ;  for  it  seems  still  accepted 
as  an  axiom  that  "Providence  is  on  the  side  of  big  battalions,"  and  that  the  destinies 
of  peoples  are  decided  by  their  material  resources.  Hosea  would  be  rebuked  as  a 
prating  preacher  who  was  going  beyond  his  province,  when  he  urged  that  righteousness 
and  godliness  were  elements  which  demanded  consideration ;  by  the  lowest  subaltern 
and  by  "the  highest  general  his  counsels  would  be  laughed  to  scorn,  though  events 
showed  that  he  was  right.  2.  Temptations  to  this  were  nrvtr  stronger  than  novo.  In 
proportion  as  our  powers  develop,  our  liability  to  trust  to  them,  and  not  to  him  who 
gave  them,  increases.  In  our  day  physical  sciences  have  grown,  and  the  principles  so 
educed  have  been  swiftly  and  boldly  applied  to  our  necessities.  We  are  pointed  to 
evidences  in  every  direction  of  the  constancy  of  law  and  the  absence  of  fortuity. 
Indeed,  the  religious  fallacy  of  Judah  has  been  formulated  into  the  philosophy  of 
Positivism,  which  recognizes  nothing  but  that  which  the  intellect  can  prove,  and 
excludes  eveiytliing  spiritual  and  supernatural.  It  points  out  that  in  human  distresses 
we  should  turn  to  science,  not  to  God ;  and  that  the  study  of  political  economy  and 
natural  science  may  fairly  supersede  the  preaching  of  righteousness  as  a  means  of 
salvation  to  a  people.  We  do  not  disparage  scientific  discoveries,  but  rather  rejoice 
that  they  are  made  so  frequently  and  fearlessly.  We  only  ask  men  to  recognize 
that  there  is  another  sphere  not  discoverable  by  the  intellect,  which  underlies  and 
impinges-  upon  the  sphere  of  sensuous  life,  and  that,  while  things  seen  are  temporal, 
there  are  things  unseen  which  are  eternal.  Well  may  one  of  the  characters  in  '  The 
New  Ee|  ublic'  be  represented  as  saying  to  such  teachers,  "Your  mind  is  so  occupied 
with  subduing  matter,  that  it  is  entirely  forgetful  of  subduing  itself — a  thing,  trust 
me,  that  is  far  more  important."  But  the  disappointment  of  men's  shrewdest  abJui- 
pations  proves  that  the  race  is  not  always  to  the  swilt,  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong. 
"The  shields  of  the  earth"  (the  means  of  defence,  temporal  and  spiritual)  "belong 
to  the  Lord." 

II.  That  the  discipline  of  life  is  intended  to  kbadioate  this  tendency  to 
FORGETFULNESS  OF  GoD.  God  rarely  disappoints  expectations  which  are  founded  on 
a  study  of  natural  law  ;  for  to  act  in  accordance  with  natural  law  is  to  put  ourselves 
in  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,  law  being  the  expression  of  will.  Yet  there  should 
be  no  idolatry  of  law,  because  it  works  in  an  orderly  way.  Law  without  God  is 
a  body  without  life,  a  machine  without  motive  power.  To  bring  about  a  belief  in 
this,  "  time  and  chance  happen  to  all ; "  in  other  words,  things  occur  which  are  oot 


0^1.1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  27 

expected  and  could  not  have  been  foreseen.  1.  In  history  we  tee  that  God  hat  often 
haffled  man.  He  has  defied  probabilities,  and  chosen  things  which  were  weak  to 
confound  things  which  were  mighty.  Take  as  an  example  the  destinies  of  Assyria 
and  Judah,  which  were  utterly  unlike  what  man  would  have  predicted.  Assyria, 
in  Eosea's  time,  was  the  strongest  creation  of  military  force,  and  political  genius. 
In  the  magnificence  of  her  wealth,  and  the  splendour  of  her  palaces,  she  rose  before 
men's  thoughts  gloriously  as  the  image  Daniel  saw  in  his  vision.  But  no  politician 
would  have  expected  what  the  prophet  foresaw — that  a  stone  cut  without  hands 
would  come  from  the  mountain  and  smite  that  gigantic  fabric  to  the  dust;  that 
those  richly  peopled  plains  would  become  the  haunts  of  the  bittern  and  owl,  and  the 
lair  of  wild  beasts.  Meantime  Judah,  a  little  despised  kingdom,  tossed  helplessly 
between  the  opposing  forces  of  Egypt  and  Assyria,  like  a  piece  of  seaweed  between  two 
enormous  waves,  was  to  be  "  saved  by  the  Lord  her  God."  And  thence,  in  the  fulness 
of  time,  there  came  forth  One  whom  men  recognized  as  possessing  the  highest  power, 
and  amidst  the  ruins  of  a  greater  empire  than  Assyria  herself,  Uljrist,  the  true  Ruler, 
founded  a  kingdom  which  never  shall  be  moved.  The  world's  expectations  were  set 
at  nought.  2.  Have  not  our  previsions  often  leen  falsified,  and  our  best  plans  frustrated, 
so  that  the  old  adage  has  reasserted  itself,  "  Man  proposes,  God  disposes  "  ?  Happy 
is  it  if,  amidst  the  ruins  of  our  enterprises,  we  can  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good." 

III.  That  hobal  victoeies  are  prepared  fob  by  quiet  waitino.  God  appoints 
quiet  times  for  the  recuperation  of  all  life.  The  winter  prepares  for  the  spring.  Sleep 
makes  us  ready  for  toil,  and  without  it  the  world  would  go  mad.  So  in  the  moral 
world.  Work  has  been  done  most  bravely  and  successfully  by  those  who  have  had 
seasons  of  trust  and  waiting.  Elijah  had  to  learn  that  there  was  more  power  in  the 
"  still  small  voice  "  than  in  wind,  or  earthquake,  or  fire.  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  to  rein 
in  his  fiery  spirit,  and  for  three  years  was  learning  God's  answer  to  his  question, "  Lord, 
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  Neither  Luther  in  the  Wartburg  nor  Bunyan  in 
the  prison  was  wasting  time,  but  gaining  strength.  Let  us  learn  to  wait  as  well  as  to 
work ;  and  instead  of  being  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things,  sit  at  Jesus'  feet 
to  hear  his  word,  and  "in  quietness  and  confidence  will  be  our  strength."  It  is  not 
by  our  subtle  reasoning  that  we  shall  conquer  our  doubts,  nor  by  our  doings  that  we 
shall  win,  salvation,  nor  by  our  efforts  of  speech  that  we  shall  save  souls ;  for  "  the 
weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty  through  God."  He  has  mercy 
upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  save  them  neither  by  bow,  nor  sword,  but  by  the 
Lord  their  God; 

IV.  That  its  highest  exemplification  is  seen  in  Christ's  eedemption  of  the 
WOBLD.  Had  he  come  in  manifested  glory,  the  sceptic  would  have  been  silenced  and 
the  wrong-doer  abashed ;  but  he  was  made  lower  than  the  angels,  that  he  might  suffer 
death  upon  the  cross.  Born  in  a  stable,  he  was  ntirsed  by  the  poor,  depended  on  the 
wages  of  a  carpenter  for  his  food,  and  played  with  the  common  children  in  Nazareth. 
Having  begun  his  ministry,  he  called  to  himself  none  of  the  leaders  in  the  ecclesiastical, 
or  Intellectual,  or  social  life  of  his  iige;  but  appointed  Galilean  fishermen  as  bis  repre- 
sentatives. Then  he  let  his  foes  do  their  worst.  No  angelic  forces  hurled  back  his 
assailants,  no  tnimpet-peal  startled  the  court  during  the  mockery  of  his  trial ;  but  he 
was  taken  "  by  wicked  hands,  crucified  and  slain."  And  when  he  had  passed  away 
from  earth,  his  disciples,  without  human  advantages,  won  the  world's  attention  and 
established  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord  amongst  all  peoples.  "  It  pleased  God  through 
the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  those  who  believed."  Consider :  1.  The  principle 
u  hich  underlies  our  text  lias  its  application  in  the  experience  of  every  Christian  life. 
We  are  justified,  not  by  the  works  of  the  Law,  but  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
We  conquer  our  easily  besetting  sins,  not  by  strenuous  resolve  or  Christian  association, 
but  by  him  who,  working  through  these,  says,  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  We 
are  saved  from  the  fret  of  care,  not  because  we  are  strong  and  brave  to  bear  it,  but 
because  we  have  learnt  to  cast  all  uur  care  upon  him.  We  obtain  rest  from  mental 
diflSculties,  not  by  reasonmg,  but  by  trusting,  and  leaving  much  contentedly  to  God's 
luture  revelation.  And  in  our  last  conflict  salvation  will  be  ours,  not  through  the 
memory  of  past  service,  nor  through  our  clear  perception  of  what  awaits  us  in  the  unseen 
world,  but  through  the  realized  presence  of  him  who  came  to  receive  us  to  himself  ami 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [tm.  1 1— It 

to  give  UB  the  TJctory.  2.  And  finally  let  us  apply  the  principle  to  the  accomplishment 
of  Christian  work.  The  foes  of  Christ  are  still  around  hia  Church,  and  they  will  be 
conquered,  not  by  the  bow  of  intellectual,  or  social,  or  civil  power,  but  by  the  Lord  our 
God.  You  will  never  conquer  scepticism  by  logical  demonstrations;  nur  cast  out 
heresy  by  persecution  or  the  thunders  of  excommunication;  nor  put  down  vices  by 
civil  law;  nor  compel  the  heailien  to  submit  at  the  |  oint  of  the  sword.  But  against 
these  eyils  they  will  prevail  who  trust,  not  in  men,  but  in  God;  who,  conscious  of 
human  helplessness,  look  beyond  all  that  is  seen  as  those  who  can  re-ccbo  the  jisalmist's 
words,  "  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the  hills,  from  whence  cometh  my  help."  For 
beyond  the  reach  of  mortal  weakness  and  transient  power  he  reigns  who  of  old  uttered 
this  promise,  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the 
Lord  their  God,  and  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses, 
nor  by  horsemen." — A.  B. 

Ver.  1. —  The  word  of  the  Lord.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  inspired  Hebrew  prophets 
that  they  sank  themselves,  their  own  individuality,  in  their  Divine  commission,  and  in 
the  authority  which  a<M!ompariied  it.  In  reading  their  prophecies  we  feel,  as  those  to 
whom  they  were  first  addrestied  must  have  felt,  that  there  was  no  desire  on  their  part 
to  speak  their  own  thoughts,  their  own  words. 

I.  From  wbou  the  word  came.  Their  formula  was  this :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 
Their  word  was  "  the  word  of  the  Lord."  This  is  witness :  1.  To  the  personality  and 
spiritual  nature  of  Ood.  Words  are  the  clothing  of  thought.  He  who  speaks  first 
thinks.  The  Divine  mind  is  presumed  in  the  Divine  utterance.  Language  like  that 
of  the  text  could  not  be  used  of  a  principle,  an  abstraction,  a  law,  an  unconscious  force, 
such  as  some  would  thoughtlessly  substitute  for  the  living  God.  2.  To  the  interest  of 
Ood  in  the  moral  state  and  welfare  of  men.  Why  should  the  Supreme  concern  himself 
to  address  the  members  of  our  race  ?  That  he  has  done  so  is  evidence  of  his  grace 
and  benevolence.  And  to  this  the  mission  of  the  prophets  bears  witness  only  less 
powerfully  than  the  advent  and  ministry  of  the  incarnate  Word. 

II.  By  whom  the  wokd  came.  1.  By  the  medium  of  human  spiriti.  There  might 
have  been  other  methods  of  communicating  with  mankind;  but  infinite  Wisdom  made 
choice  of  this.  Man  has  ever  been  the  minister  of  God  to  man.  2.  The  appeal  of 
Heaven  is  thus  seen  to  be  to  the  human  reason  and  conscience.  It  is  iilaiii  that  the 
Divine  intention  was  not  to  overwhelm  with  an  irresistible  impression,  but  to  convince 
and  to  persuade.  3.  The  Lord  made  choice  of  agtnts  morally  in  sym]  athy  with  his 
holy  character  and  aims.  The  prophets  uttered  the»word  of  God,  but  tliey  made  that 
word  their  own.  They  plainly  felt  indignation  with  rebellion  and  uniaiihfulness,  and 
commiseration  for  wretchedness,  and  joy  in  every  righteous  endeavour  and  aim.  In 
a  word,  they  were  what  their  designation  implies — inspired  utterers  of  the  Divine  mind, 
voices  to  all  who  would  bear. 

III.  To  WHOM  THE  WORD  CAUE.  1.  In  every  case  it  came  to  leings  naturally 
capable  of  understanding  it,  and  therefore  responsible  for  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
received.  2.  To  Israel  the  word  came  with  an  es[iecial  emphasis  and  adaptation;  for 
the  people  had  already  received  from  the  Lord  such  revelations  as  rendered  them 
peculiarly  qualified  now  to  hear  and  to  obey.  3.  The  especial  circumstances  of  the 
northern  tribes,  the  northern  kingdom,  were  such  as  to  maUe  it  peculiarly  appropriate 
that  Hosea  should  address  to  them  language,  first  of  severity,  and  then  of  oonsolation 
and  encouragement.  4.  The  fact  that  these  prophecies  form  a  part  of  the  canon  of  the 
Old  Testament  is  an  evidence  that  these  words  are  profitaljle  to  all ;  and  of  tbia  the 
experience  of  the  Church  is  a  sufiicient  confirmation. — r. 

Ver.  2. — Spiritual  infidelity.  The  figurative  language  in  which  Hosea  was  inspired 
to  expose  and  denounce  the  sinful  idolatry  and  apostasy  of  Israel  is  startling,  and  the 
symbolic  act  in  which  these  sins  were  set  forth  in  their  abomination  and  horror  is 
evidently  intended  to  shock  the  mind  of  every  reader. 

I.  God  is  the  Husband  of  his  people.  Human  relationships  are  pressed  into  the 
service  of  religion  ;  and  the  fact  that  God  created  man  in  his  own  imago  is  the  justifi- 
cation of  such  similitudes  as  that  of  the  text.  The  Creator  is  repii seated  as  the  Kino-, 
the  Father,  and  the  Husband  of  the  children  of  men.    Under  each  relationship  some 


OH.  L  1—11.]  THE   BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  29 


new  aspect  of  religious  life  and  duty  is  brought  into  prominence,  Jehovah  declares 
that  he  espoused  Israel  in  selecting  her  from  among  the  nations,  admitting  her  to 
special  intimacy,  and  conferring  upon  her  peculiar  dignity  and  favours. 

II.  God's  peoplk  abb  under  obligation  to  faithfulness  to  their  Lord.  The 
wife  who  has  accepted  a  man  as  her  husb.ind  binds  herself  to  "Iteep  to  him  only." 
Adultery  has  ever  been  regarded  as  a  shameful  vice  and  crime.  How  much  more  are 
those,  whom  the  eternal  Supreme  has  favoured  with  tlie  revelation  of  his  Law  and  his 
purposes,  bound  to  render  to  him  the  most  loyal  and  faithful  service !  He  alone  is  to  be 
worshipped,  adored,  obeyed,  and  survcd.  Israel  was  distinguislied  among  tlie  nations 
by  many  events  in  the  national  history  ;  and  "in  these  last  days  "  all  to  whom  the 
gospel  has  come  are  signally  honoured,  and  are  placed  under  a  sterner  responsibility. 

III.  Ikrbliqion  and  apostasy  are  nothing  less  than  flagrant  infidelity. 
When  Rosea  wrote,  the  northern  tribes,  constituting  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  were  again 
and  again  guilty  of  idolatry,  and  even  those  who  were  free  from  this  stain  in  many 
instances  fell  into  gross  ungodliness  and  disobedience.  Such  conduct  was  rejirosented 
as  equivalent  to  spiritual  adultery.  Israel  forsook  her  espoused  husband  and  went 
after  other  lovers,  and  attached  herself  guiltily  and  disgracefully  to  the  worthless 
rivals  who  wooed  her.  And  all  who  depart  from  God  are  guilty  of  infidelity  of  a 
flagrant  kind,  such  as  the  Lord  cannot  overlook  or  treat  with  indifference. 

IV.  The  unfaithful  are  summoned  to  repentance,  and  are  invited  to  restuen 
TO  the  Lord.  Conscience  wittiesses  to  the  justice  of  God's  claims  and  to  the  sinful- 
ness of  neglecting  and  outraging  them.  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  comes  to  the 
unfaithful  in  mercy  and  compassion.  For,  whilst  ho  might  righteously  cast,  off  his 
unfaithful  spouse,  he  graciously  opens  the  arms  of  his  love  and  welcomes  back  the 
penitent  and  the  contrite. — T. 

Ver.  6. — Mercy  dented.  The  iniquity  of  Israel  surpassed  that  of  the  sister  kingdom 
of  Judah.  Hence  the  awful  message  of  the  Lord  to  the  former,  contrasting  with  the 
declaration  of  favour  made  towards  the  latter.  There  is  perhaps  nothing  more  terrible 
in  the  whole  of  revelation  than  the  name  symbolically  given  to  the  daughter  of  Hosea, 
regarded  as  representing  the  idolatrous  and  rebolliuus  nation  of  Israel — the  Unpitied  ! 

I.  Herb  is  a  witness  to  the  enormity  op  human  sin.  Men  sometimes  imagine 
that  God  is  indifferent  to  the  conduct  of  man.  But  the  tiuth  is  that  while  he  is 
merciful,  while  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever,  he  is  not  on  this  account  an  unobservant 
Governor.  If  he  were  not  righteous,  his  mercy  would  be  unmeaning.  If  he  forgets  to 
be  gracious,  if  he  lays  aside  his  compassion,  that  which  provokes  him  to  such  action 
must  be  iniquity  of  the  deepest  dye. 

II.  'J'his  witness  is  all  the  more  striking  because  of  God's  merciful  nature 
AND  disposition.  That  some  kings  show  no  pity  to  their  enemies,  to  rebels  and 
traitors,  seems  only  natural ;  their  character  is  stern  and  unforgiving.  But  this  is  far 
from  being  the  case  with  Jehovah.  All  Scripture  concurs  in  exhibiting  him  as  rich  in 
mercy,  as  delighting  in  mercy,  as  unfailing  in  mercy.  If,  then,  he  in  any  case  refuses 
or  withholds  mercy,  his  most  glorious  attribute  seems  to  be  in  abeyance.  He  does  not 
refuse  mercy  for  his  own  pleasure,  but  only  when  its  exercise  would  lead  to  anarchy 
and  encourage  rebellion. 

III.  The  refusal  of  meecv  is  not  irrevocable.  It  is  not  for  us  to  question  the 
consistency  of  contiguous  representations  of  the  Divine  government  and  purposes.  We 
take  them  as  we  find  them.  And  we  observe  that  even  when  denunciations  so  terrible 
as  that  of  the  text  liave  been  uttered,  after  all  they  are  followed  by  promises  of 
deliverance  and  blessing. 

IV.  Accordingly  the  threats  of  God  should  not  lead  the  sinner  to  despair, 
but  bather  to  repentance.  To  some  temperaments  especially,  language  like  that  of 
the  text  is  productive  of  great  depression  as  well  as  of  serious  concern.  Let  it,  how- 
ever, be  remembered  that  to  dread  the  Divine  displeasure  is  one  step  towards  the 
Divine  favour.  It  is  the  insensible  and  impenitent  who  are  working  out  their  own 
destruction ;  whilst  the  man  who  trembles  at  God's  word  is  in  the  way  for  blessing. 
'I'hey  who  deserve  no  mercy  may  nevertheless  obtain  mercy;  but  only  by  sincere 
contrition,  unrestrained  confession,  deep  repentance,  and  a  eoniidence  in  the  Divine 
grace,  which  is  warranted  by  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. — ^T. 


30  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  1. 1— 11. 

Ver.  7. — Salvation,  not  of  man,  hit  of  Ood.  It  may  well  be  that  there  was  in  thia 
verse  a  prediction  of  one  certain  definite  iaterposition  of  the  Lord  on  behalf  of  Judah. 
Whilst  the  northern  kingdom  sliould  be  forsaken,  and  consequently  conquered  and 
desolated,  Judah,  it  was  foretold,  should  experience  a  very  signal  instance  of  Divine 
delivering  mercy.    The  destruction  of  the  host  of  Sennacherib,  when 

"  The  anp;el  of  death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast, 
And  breath'd  in  the  face  of  the  foe  as  he  pass'd," 

exactly  corresponds  with  the  language  of  this  verse.  Human  power  and  bravery  were 
not  the  means  of  the  deliverance  of  Jerusalem ;  this  was  due  to  the  ii/terveotion  of  a 
Divine  and  omnipotent  hand.  It  is  well  that  pious  minds  should  recognize  the  wisdom 
and  the  power  of  God  in  every  work  of  deliverance,  and  especially  in  the  unparalleled 
interposition  wrought  on  behalf  of  our  humanity  by  Jesus  Clirist  our  Saviour. 

I.  Man's  salvation  is  not  wrought  by  human  might.  1.  History  records  the 
insufficiency,  the  vanity,  of  all  human  endeavours  to  effect  the  deliverance  of  man 
from  sin.  KuUrs  by  legislation,  warriors  by  arms,  philosophers  by  systems  of  thought, 
poets  by  emotion  and  imagination,  have  all  essayed  the  reformation,  the  moral  eleva- 
tion, of  the  race;  and  aLi  who  have  tried  have  failed.  The  wisdom  of  the  world  has 
been  proved  folly,  and  its  strength  weakness.  2.  The  explanation  of  this  failure  is 
not  far  to  seek.  AH  human  means  are  powerless^  in  affecting  the  government  of  God ; 
whatever  is  to  affect  that  must  of  necessity  originate  with  the  Divine  Governor  him- 
self. And  all  human  means  fail  to  reach  the  root  of  the  mischief  in  man's  spiritual 
nature.  They  deal  with  the  surface,  but  do  not  penetrate  to  the  centre ;  they  do  not 
reach  the  heart  of  the  individual ;  they  do  not,  consequently,  prove  able  to  reconstitute 
society, 

II.  Saltation  is  from  the  Lord  our  God,  and  from  him  only.  1.  It  might  be 
presumed  that  such  is  the  case,  from  the  infinity  of  the  Divine  resources.  God  is  not 
liafiled  in  the  execution  of  his  purposes,  as  men  constantly  are,  by  insufficient  power. 
On  the  one  hand,  the  nature  of  his  creatures  is  accessible  to  him,  and  is  known  per- 
fectly by  him ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  means  of  affecting  that  nature  are  all  at  his 
disposal.  2.  We  observe  the  supreme  proof  of  this  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  (1) 
The  Saviour  himself  was  from  God.  (2)  The  Spirit,  who  effects  the  internal  change, 
is  the  Spirit  of  God.  (3)  The  gospel  itself  is  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God." 
Thus  it  is  apparent  that  the  whole  provision  for  man's  redemption  and  recovery  is 
nothing  less  than  Divine. 

Application.  This  declaration  is  especially  encouraging  to  those  who  feel  pro- 
foundly at  once  their  own  need  of  salvation  and  the  insufficiency  of  all  human  pro- 
vision ;  a  Divine  interposition  satisfies  all  the  conditions  and  necessities  of  the  sinner's 
case. — T. 

Vers.  9, 10. — Eejection  and  restoration.  Paradox  is  often  the  highest  truth.  Con- 
sistency is  the  idol  of  the  logician.  And  not  only  is  the  course  of  the  wise  and  good 
man  now  and  again  at  variance  with  itself;  God's  ways  sometimes  appear  to  us  as 
returning  upon  tbemselvea.  Yet  there  is  a  moral  unity  and  order  observable,  even 
when  the  "  dealings "  of  the  Divine  King  with  his  subjects  seem  inexplicable  and  at 
first  sight  irreconcilable. 

I.  The  utter  bbjeotion  of  Israel  foretold.  Stronger  language  of  repudiation 
could  not  be  used  than  that  which  is  used  here.  Isiael  is  completely  disowned.  "  Ye 
are  not  my  people,  and  I  will  not  be  your  God."  The  adulterous  spouse  is  divorced, 
cast  out,  and  forgotten.  The  idolatrous  nation  is  joined  unto  idols,  and  the  aggrieved 
Husband  of  the  adulteress  pronounces  the  sentence,  "  Let  her  alone."  In  all  this  we 
discern  the  degradation  into  which  sin  plunges  the  ungodly.  And  we  discern,  too,  the 
righteous  rule  of  the  Lord  of  all,  who  will  not  treat  evil  as  good,  and  who  will  vindi- 
cate bis  Law. 

n.  The  glorious  bbstoration  and  prosperity  of  Israel  assured.  In  startling 
contrast  to  the  denunciation  of  ver.  9,  is  the  gracious  and  generous  promise  of  ver.  10, 
1.  Increase  and  prosperity  are  denoted  by  the  common  expression,  "  as  the  sand  of  the 
sea."  2.  Favour  is  expressed  in  the  assurance  that  those  who  had  been  disowned  as 
the  subjects  of  God  shall  yet  be  regarded  as  his  sons.    Xha  very  spot  that  had  echoed 


CH.  L 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA,  81 

with  the  thunder  of  wrath  should  resound  with  the  language  of  fatherly  complacency 
and  affection. 

III.  The  beoonchliation  between  the  two  deolabatiohs.  In  several  places  in 
this  prophecy  similar  paradox  is  met  with ;  there  is  a  strange  and  sudden  reversal  of 
tone  and  language.  1.  The  change  is  not  in  the  principles  of  Q-od's  government,  but  in 
the  condition  and  character  of  God's  subjects.  Bepentance  and  renewal  are  undoubtedly 
presumed.  2.  The  two  sides  of  religion  are  thus  harmonized.  The  law  threatens,  the 
gospel  promises ;  but  both  alike  tend  to  the  moral  good  of  men  and  to  the  glory  of  God. 
3.  The  reconciliation  is  supremely  efTected  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ ;  by  him  came 
grace  and  truths  and  he  made  peace. — T. 

Ver.  10. — "  Sons  of  tht  living  Ood."  It  is  both  singular  and  instructive  to  observe 
that  this  expression,  which  is  one  of  the  richest  and  sweetest  in  revelation,  is  found  in 
closest  connection  with  language  of  severity,  rebuke,  and  threatening.  The  contrast 
enhances  the  preciousness  of  the  doctrine.  Children  of  wrath  become  members  of  the 
Divine  family,  rejoice  in  a  Father's  love,  and  inherit  a  Father's  home. 

L  The  light  here  oast  upon  the  nat0bb  and  ohabaoteb  of  the  Sopbbmb.  It 
is  a  gospel  needed  by  our  age  as  much  as  by  any  that  has  ever  existed — the  tidings 
that  the  living  God  is  the  Father  of  the  sons  of  men.  1.  He  is  the  living  Ood ;  neither 
an  abstraction  nor  a  law,  nor  a  Being  uninterested  in  his  works  or  indifferent  to  the  fate 
of  his  spiritual  creation.  2.  He  ig  the  Father ;  which  is  something  more,  for  it  denotes 
his  personal  regard,  his  affectionate  disposition,  his  benignant  and  bountiful  care.  To 
take  any  lower  view  than  this  of  the  Divine  Being  is  to  go  back  from  the  enlightened 
teaching  of  revelation  to  the  effete  and  degraded  paganism  of  the  past. 

II.  The  uoht  hebe  oabt  ufon  the  oallino  and  destiny  of  hah.  1.  Here  is 
witness  to  our  spiritual  nature.  This  language  could  not  be  applied  to  the  irrational 
and  .unmoral  brutes.  Only  man,  among  the  inhabitants  of  earth,  is  capable  of  the 
dignity  and  blessedness  involved  in  Divine  sonship.  2.  Here  is  witness  to  the  trans- 
forming power  of  religion.  The  context  shows  that  sinners  have  forfeited  all  claim  to 
a  hallowed  relationship  such  as  is  here  described,  with  its  privileges  and  immunities. 
The  grace  of  God,  especially  as  revealed  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  secures  adoption. 
Christians  are  "  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus ; "  they  have  "  received  the 
Spirit  of  adoption."  3.  Here  is  witness  to  the  duties  of  the  new  and  spiritual  life. 
What  dignity  clothes  the  sons  of  tha  living  God  I  What  relationships,  what  prospects, 
what  services,  are  theirs!  Surely  it  is  obvious  that  those  so  honoured  are  summoned, 
and  are  bound,  to  cherish  filial  sentiments,  to  render  filial  obedience,  to  offer  filial 
devotion.    A  holy  Father  looks  for  holy  sons. — T, 

Ver.  11. — Ojie  body  and  one  Head.  This  prediction  may  be  regarded  as  having  been 
literally  fulfilled,  wtjen,  after  the  Captivity,  all  distinctions  among  the  Hebrew  people 
came  to  an  end.  It  may  be  regarded  as  still  waiting  for  fulfilment  in  the  restoration 
of  Israel  to  the  Holy  Land.  But  it  seems  more  just  and  more  profitable  to  turn  atten- 
tion to  the  moral  lesson  of  this  text,  and  to  come  under  the  influence  of  this  inspiring 
representation  of  spiritual  felicity.  Elements  in  true  well-being  are  here  strikingly 
combined. 

I.  Unitt.  Judah  and  Israel  were  often  at  enmity,  and  always  envious  and  dis- 
cordant ;  their  reconciliation  was  represented  as  a  marvellous  work,  attesting  Divine 
power  and  grace.  The  work  of  Christ  was  one  of  reconciliation ;  he  harmonized  Jews 
and  Gentiles,  "  making  of  twain  one  new  man."  And  the  ultimate  realization  of  his  pur- 
poses of  mercy  shall  be  attained  when  there  shall  be  "one  flock  and  one  Shepherd." 

II.  Subjection  to  one  Head.  From  the  day  when  Behoboam  and  Jeroboam  became 
kings  of  the  two  sections  respectively  into  which  the  Hebrew  people  divided  themselves, 
onwards  for  many  generations  that  people  was  a  disunited  and  discordant  people.  In 
Christ  Jesus  a  disunion,  a  discordance,  far  more  widespread  and  far-reaching,  was 
abolished.  He  is  the  one  Head,  in  subjection  to  whom  the  several  and  separate  members 
realize  their  true  and  proper  unity.  History  shows  us  the  vanity  of  merely  human 
principles  and  powers  of  unity.  But  there  are  signs  that  a  Divine  headship  is  destined 
by  the  supreme  Ruler  to  be  the  means  of  reconciling  those  who  are  severed,  and  of 
preserving  the  usitj  of  thgse  who  are  at  one. 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [cii.  1. 1— 11. 


ni.  A  SPIRITUAL  BXODUs  LEADING  TO  ONE  SPiEiTnAL  HOME.  The  chroiiicles  of  Israei 
revealed  the  fact  that  It  was  the  Exodus  which  made  the  nation.  When  brought  out 
from  Egypt,  Israel  felt  the  pulses  of  national  life.  A  symbol  this  of  the  effects  of  a 
spiritual  deliverance ;  a  promise  this  of  a  spiritual  and  eternal  rest.  The  Church  is  led 
forth  by  her  Saviour,  by  him  is  guided  through  the  wilderness,  and  by  him  will  be 
gathered  into  the  unity  of  the  heavenly  Caaaan. — 1, 

Ver.  1. — Scripture,  kings,  and  truth.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  Hosea, 
the  son  of  Beeri,  in  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezeldah,  Kings  of  Judah, 
and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Juash,  King  of  Israel."  This  verse  leads  us  to 
consider  three  things. 

I.  The  essence  op  Sceiptube.  What  is  the  essence  of  the  Bible?  It  is  here  called 
"  The  word  of  the  Lord."  Analyze  the  expression :  1.  It  is  a  "  word."  A  word  fulfils 
two  functions ;  it  is  a  revelation  and  an  instrument.  A  true  word  reveals  the  mind  of 
the  speaker,  and  is  at  the  same  time  an  instrument  to  accomplish  his  purpose.  The 
Bible  is  the  manifestation  of  God ;  it  shows  his  intellect  and  heart ;  and  is  his  instrument 
as  well,  by  which  he  accomplishes  his  purpuse  on  the  human  mind.  By  it  he  is  said 
to  einliyhten,  quicken,  cleanse,  conquer,  etc.  2.  It  is  a  Divine  word.  "  The  word  of 
the  Lord."  Words  are  always  powerful  and  important  according  to  the  nature  and 
character  of  the  speaker.  The  words  of  some  men  are  unclean  and  weak,  the  words  of 
others  pure  and  mighty.  Because  the  Lord  is  all-mighty  and  holy,  his  word  is  all- 
powerful  and  pure.  3.  It  is  a  Divine  word  concerning  men.  The  prophecy  came  to 
Hosea  in  relation  to  Israel.  The  Lord  has  spoken  many  words,  words  to  other  intelli- 
gences unknown  to  us.  If  all  the  words  he  has  spoken  in  the  universe  were  written 
in  books,  what  globe  or  system  would  contain  them?  But  the  Bible  is  a  word 
to  man.  4.  It  is  a  Divine  word  concerning  man  comiiig  through  men.  The  Lord's 
word  came  now  through  Hosea  to  Israel.  In  the  Bible  God  speaks  to  man  through  man. 
This  gives  the  charm  of  an  imperishable  humanity  to  the  Bible. 

II.  The  mortality  of  kings.  Several  kings  are  here  mentioned  who  appeared  and 
passed  away  during  the  ministry  of  Hosea.  He  prophesied  "in  the  days  of  Uzziah, 
Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  Kings  of  Judah,  and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of 
Joash,  King  of  Israel."  Uzziah  was  the  eleventh  king  of  Judah.  His  example  was 
holy,  and  his  reign  peaceful  and  prosperous.  Ahaz  was  a  son  of  Jotham  ;  at  the  age 
of  twenty  he  succeeded  his  royal  sire.  He  gave  himself  up  to  idolatry,  and  sacrificed 
even  his  own  children  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  Hezekiah,  the  snn  and  successor  of 
Ahaz,  was  a  man  of  distinguished  virtue  and  religion,  animated  by  true  piety  and 
patriotism.  Jeroboam  was  the  son  of  Juash,  and  great-grandson  of  Jehu,  and  followed 
the  former  Jeroboam,  the  man  who  made  Israel  to  sin,  and,  like  him,  sank  into  the 
lowest  idolatry  and  corruption.  Some  of  these  kings  had  come  and  gune  during  the 
ministry  of  Hosea ; — Kings  die,  etc.  1.  This/act  is  a  hlessing.  Royalty  has  a  tendency 
so  to  feed  and  fatten  the  depravity  of  human  nature,  that,  were  not  death  to  interpose, 
the  lives  of  men  would  become  intolerable.  When  we  think  of  such  kings  as  those  of 
which  Ahaz  and  Jeroboam  were  types,  we  thank  God  for  death,  and  rejoice  in  the 
"  king  of  terrors,"  who  comes  to  strike  the  despots  down.  2.  This  fact  is  a  lesson. 
What  does  the  death  of  kings  teach  ?  (1)  The  rigorous  impartiality  of  death.  Death 
is  no  respecter  of  persons ;  it  treats  the  pauper  and  the  prince  alike. 

"  The  black  camel  death  kneeleth  once  at  each  door, 
And  mortal  must  mount  to  return  never  more." 

(2)  The  utter  powerlessness  of  wealth.  The  wealth  of  empires  cannot  bribe  death,  nor 
can  all  the  armies  of  war  ward  off  his  blow  or  keep  him  at  bay.-  (3)  The  sad  hollow- 
ness  of  worldly  glory.  Death  strips  sovereigns  of  all  their  pageantry  and  reduces  them 
to  common  dua'' 

"  It  is  a  monitory  truth,  I  ween, 

That,  turning  up  the  ashes  of  the  grave, 
One  can  discern  no  difference  between 
The  richest  sultan  and  the  poorest  slave." 

in.  The  perpetuity  op  truth.  Although  these  kings  successively  appeared  and 
passed  away,  the  ministry  of  Hosea  kept  on.    1.  The  "  Word  of  the  Lord  "  is  adapted 


OH.  1. 1— 11.]  THE  BOOK    OF  HOSBA,  33 

to  all  generations.  It  is  congruous  with  all  intellects,  it  chimes  in  with  all  hearts,  it 
provides  for  the  common  wants  of  all.  2.  The  "  Word  of  the  Lord  "  is  necessary  for  all 
generations.  All  men  in  all  ages  and  lands  want  it ;  it  is  as  indispensable  to  their 
happiness  as  air  is  to  their  life.  Generations  may  appear  in  the  distant  future  who 
may  not  require  our  forms  of  government,  our  social  institutions,  our  artistic  devices, 
our  mechanical  inventions,  and  who  may  despise  our  literary  productions;  but  no 
generation  will  ever  appear  who  will  not  require  the  "  Word  of  the  Lord." — D.  T. 

Ver,  5. — Betribution.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  at  that  day,  that  I  will  break  tl.e 
bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel."  The  word  "  Jezreel "  means  "  God's  seed,"  or 
"  sowing."  The  tract  of  land  called  by  this  name  was  an  extensive  plain,  computed 
by  modern  travellers  to  be  about  fifteen  miles  square,  stretching  south  and  south-west 
from  Mount  Tabor  and  Nazareth ;  the  hills  of  Nazareth  and  those  of  Samaria  on  the 
south,  those  of  Tabor  and  Hermon  on  the  west,  and  Garmol  to  the  south-«  est.  It  was 
called  by  the  Greeks,  Ksdraelon:  it  had  also  a  royal  city,  where  the  tidings  of  Saul's 
death  in  the  battle  of  Gilboa  was  first  announced.  In  this  Ahab  and  Joram  presided, 
and  here  Jehu  slew  both  Jezebel  and  Joram.  It  was  the  scene  of  many  battles  :  among 
them,  those  between  Deborah  and  Barak  and  Sisera  the  commander  of  the  Syrians ; 
one  between  Ahab  and  the  Syrians,  and  one  between  Saul  and  the  Philistines,  and 
another  between  Gideon  and  the  Midianites.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  have  been  a  chosen 
place  for  battles,  from  Barak  to  Bonaparte:  Jews,  Gentiles,  Egyptians,  Saracens, 
Christian  Crusaders,  and  anti-Christian  Frenchmen,  Persians,  Druses,  Turks,  and 
Arabs.  Warriors  out  of  every  nation  which  is  under  the  heaven  have  pitched  their 
tents  upon  the  plains  of  Bsdraelon,  and  have  beheld  the  various  banners  ol  their  nation 
wet  with  the  dews  of  Tabor  and  Hermon.  The  text  leads  us  to  make  a  few  remarks 
concerning  God's  retribution.  Here  the  Eternal  threatens  to  break  the  bow  of  Israel 
in  the  valley  of  Jezreel.     The  language  suggests  thafr^ 

I.  God's  kbtbibution  takes  away  the  poweb  of  its  victim.  The  bow  of  Israel  is 
to  be  broken.  'I'he  language  means  the  utter  destruction  of  all  their  military  power. 
Israel  fought  many  battles,  won  many  victories,  and  trusted  in  its  "  bow  " — military 
force — but  now  that  very  thing  in  which  it  trusted  is  to  be  destroyeii.  It  is  ever  thus, 
when  retributive  justice  comes  to  deal  out  suffering  to  the  sinner,  it  strips  him  entirely 
of  his  power ;  it  breaks  his  bow,  and  cuts  his  spear  asunder.  Thus  he  is  left  to  the 
mercy  of  his  enemies.  What  are  the  great  enemies  of  the  soul  ?  Carnality,  preju- 
dice, selfishness,  corrupt  impulses,  and  habits.  Betributive  justice  leaves  the  sinner 
at  the  mercy  of  these — breaks  his  bow,  so  that  hg  cannot  deliver  himself.  He  becomes 
their  utter  and  their  hopeless  victim,  and  their  "  bow  "  is  gone.  The  Word  of  truth, 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  all  the  ministers  of  religion  are  taken  from  him,  and  he  is  left 
morally  powerless.  What  "  bow  "  have  the  victims  of  retribution  in  eternity  by  which 
to  deliver  themselves  from  their  crushing  tyrants  ?  No  bow  at  all — all  redemptive 
instrumentaliiies  are  taken  from  them.  Thank  God,  we  have  a  bow  now  in  our  hands ; 
the  Bible,  the  Spirit,  the  min'stry,  are  all  with  us. 

II.  God's  betbibution  despises  the  pbestigb  of  its  victim.    The  bow  is  to  be 
■  broken  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel.     Perhaps  no  spot  on  earth  did  Israel  think  of  so  much 

as  Jezreel.  It  was  the  scene  of  their  grandest  military  exploits;  the  scene,  too,  where 
Jehu  their  king  had  slain  all  the  worshippers  of  Baal.  It  was  to  Israel  what  Marathon 
is  to  Greece,  what  Waterloo  is  to  England.  In  this  very  scene  the  punishment  shall 
come;  the  place  of  their  glory  shall  be  the  place  of  their  ruin  and  shame.  Thus  it  is 
ever;  v/Hen  retribution  comes,  it  seems  to  despise  the  very  things  in  which  its  victim 
glorieu.  A  noble  linea'je,  great  wealth,  patrimonial  possessions,  elevated  positions, 
brilliant  genius,  and  distinguished  abilities, — these  are  the  modern  Jezreels  of  sinner.s. 
In  these  they  boast.  But  what  are  these  ?  God,  when  he  comes  to  judgment,  will 
strike  them  in  those  very  places ;  he  will  break  their  bow  in  the  valley  of  JezreeL 

III.  God's  betbibution  defies  the  opposition  of  its  victims.  Jezreel  was  well 
fortified.  Israel  had  great  confidence  in  the  protection  which  it  had.  When  the 
prophets  foretold  the  ruin  of  their  kingdom  they  would  think  it  perhaps  impossible ; 
they  would  think  of  the  victories  won  in  Jezreel  and  the  protection  offered  there.  But 
retribution  will  take  the  sinner  in  his  strongest  place,  strike  him  down  on  the  s])ot 
where  he  feels  himself  most  fortified,    Notwithstandinjj  Jezreel,  the  kingdom  of  Israel 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  i.  1— 1L 

WM  broken  ;  the  ten  tribes  were  scattered  upon  the  hills  as  sheep  that  had  no  shepherd. 
What  defence  has  the  sinner?  "Though  hand  join  band,  iniquity  shall  not  go 
unpunished." 

GoKCLUSiON.  Retribution  must  always  follow  sin.  It  may  move  slowly  and  silently, 
but  its  pace  is  steady,  resolute,  and  iacreasing.  Swifter  and  swifter  it  moves  towards 
the  victim.  Sooner  or  later  it  will  reach  him,  break  his  "  bow,"  and  overwhelm  him 
in  shame  and  confusion.    "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." — D,  T. 

Vers.  6,  7. — OoiTs  merey,  "  For  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of 
Israel ;  but  I  will  utterly  take  them  away.  But  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of 
Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their  God,  and  will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor 
by  sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen."  This  passage  leads  us  to  con- 
template God's  mercy.  Mercy  is  a  modification  of  goodness.  God  is  good  to  all,  but 
is  only  merciful  to  the  suffering  sinner.  Mercy  not  only  implies  suffering,  but  suffering 
arising  from  tin.  If  suffering  were  a  necessity  springing  out  of  the  constitution  of 
things,  its  removal  or  mitigation  would  be  an  act  of  justice  rather  than  mercy.  Earth  is 
a  sphere  where  God  shows  his  mercy,  for  here  is  suffering  springing  from  sin.  Here  we 
have — 

I.  Mbbot  withheld  from  bomb.  "  For  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the  house  o! 
Israel ;  but  I  will  utterly  take  them  away."  "  There  are,"  says  Burroughs, "  three  estates 
of  the  people,  signified  by  the  three  children  of  Hosea :  First,  tlieir  scattered  estate,  and 
that  was  signified  by  Jezreel,  the  first  son,  and  the  story  of  that  you  have  in  2  Kings  xv. 
9 — 19,  where  you  may  read  their  woeful  seditions;  lor  Zaohariah  reigned  but  six 
months,  and  then  Shallum  slew  him,  and  reigned  in  his  stead ;  and  he  reigned  but  one 
month,  for  Menahem  came  and  smote  Shallum  and  slew  him,  and  reigned  in  his  stead  ; 
so  here  were  nothing  but  murders  and  seditions  amongst  them.  A  scattered  people. 
The  scattered  state  of  the  peojile  of  Israel  was  their  weak  condition  signified  by  the 
daughter ;  and  the  history  of  that  you  have  from  ver.  16  of  that  chai)ter  onwards, 
where,  when  Pul,  the  King  of  Assyria,  came  against  Israel,  Menahem  yielded  to  him 
his  demand,  gave  him  a  thousand  talents  of  silver  to  go  from  him,  and  laid  a  tax  upon 
the  people  for  it.  Here  they  were  brought  into  a  very  low  and  weak  condition.  And 
afterwards  this  King  of  Assyria  came  to  them  again,  and  carried  part  of  them  into 
captivity.  The  third  child  was  Lo-ammi,  and  the  history  of  the  state  of  the  people 
signified  by  what  you  have  in  2  Kings  xvii.  6,  where  they  were  fully  carried  away  and 
wholly  rejected  for  ever.  And  because  they  were  a  little  before  that  time  grown  up  to 
some  strength  more  than  formerly,  therefore  this^last  was  a  son."  God  now  threatened 
to  withhold  mercy  from  Israel,  and  we  know  that  when  he  did  so  the  consequence  was 
national  ruin.  Where  mercy  has  been  abused  the  time  comes  when  it  is  withheld,  and 
the  subjects  are  left  abandoned  of  God.  When  mercy  is  withheld  from  nations  they 
perish,  from  Churches  they  decay,  from  families  tliey  sink  to  corruption,  from 
individualg  they  are  lost.  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  men ; "  "  Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols:  let  him  alone." 

II.  Meeot  bestowed  upon  others.  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house  of  Judah." 
This  mercy  was  signally  shown  to  Judah.  "  When  the  Assyrian  armies  had  destroyed 
Samaria,  and  carried  the  ten  tribes  away  into  captivity,  they  proceeded  to  besiege 
Jerusalem ;  but  God  had  mercy  on  the  house  of  Judah,  and  saved  them  ;  they  were 
saved  by  the  Lord  their  Oud  immediately,  and  not  by  sword  or  '  bow.'  When  the  ten 
tribes  wore  carried  into  captivity,  and  their  land  was  possessed  by  others,  they  beinw 
utterly  taken  away,  God  had  mercy  on  the  house  of  Judah  and  saved  them,  and  after 
seventy  years  brought  them  back,  not  by  might  or  power,  but  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
of  hosts."  And  truly  most  signal  was  the  mercy  shown  to  Judah,  when  in  one  nighi 
Mie  hundred  and  eighty-five  thousand  of  the  Assyrian  warriors  were  slam. 

"The  angel  of  death  spread  his  wings  on  the  blast, 
And  breath'd  in  the  face  of  tlie  foe  as  he  paas'd  ; 
And  the  eyes  of  the  sleepers  wax'd  deadly  and  oliill, 
And  their  hearts  but  once  heav'd  and  for  ever  grew  still  1 

"And  there  lay  the  steed  with  bis  nostril  all  wide, 
Bat  thiongh  it  there  roU'd  not  the  breath  of  hia  pride^ 


OH.  1. 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  36 


And  the  foam  of  his  gasping  lay  white  on  the  tnrt, 
And  cold  as  the  spray  of  the  rook-beating  gnit 

"And  there  lay  the  rider  distorted  and  pale, 
With  the  dew  on  his  brow  and  the  rust  on  bis  mail ; 
And  the  tents  were  all  silent,  the  banners  alone, 
The  lances  unlifted,  the  trumpet  unblown." 

Looking  at  the  words  in  their  spiritual  application,  they  suggest  two  remarks  in 
relation  to  man's  deliverance.  1.  Itjs  of  mercy.  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon  the  house 
of  Judah,  and  will  save  them  by  the  Lord  their  Qod."  The  deliverance  of  man  from 
the  guilt,  the  power,  and  consequence  of  sin  is  entirely  of  God's  mercy — free,  sovereign, 
boundless  mercy.  2.  It  is  ly  moral  means.  "  Will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword, 
nor  by  battle,  by  horses,  nor  by  horsemen."  No  material  force  can  deliver  the  soul 
from  its  spiritual  difficulties  and  perils.  Moral  means  alone  can  effect  the  object. 
"  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord." 

CoKCLUsiON.  Use  mercy  rightly  while  you  have  it.  Its  grand  design  is  to  produce 
reformation  of  character  and  meetness  for  the  high  sei-yice  and  lofty  fellowship  with 
the  great  God,  here  and  yonder,  now  and  for  ever. — D.  T. 

Vers.  10, 11. — The  destiny  of  the  race.  "  Yet  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be  measured  nor  numbered ;  and  it  shall 
come  to  pass,  that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  not  my  people, 
there  it  shall  be  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God.  Then  shall  the 
children  of  Judah  and  the  children  of  Israel  be  gathered  together,  and  appoint  them- 
selves one  head,  and  they  shall  come  up  out  of  the  land :  for  great  shall  be  the  day  of 
Jezreel."  Biblical  critics  of  all  schools  use  the  natural  Israpl  as  the  emblem  of  the 
spiritual.  Paul  does  so,  and  therefore  it  is  just  and  right.  We  shall  take  Israel  for 
mmtkind,  and  use  the  text  to  illustrate  the  destiny  of  the  race. 

I.  The  race  is  destined  to  an  indefinite  increase  in  the  number  of  good  men, 
"  The  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  which  cannot  be 
numbered  or  measured."  The  good,  the  spiritual  Israel,  have  been  comparatively  few 
in  all  ages,  though  perhaps  there  is  a  larger  number  now  than  in  any  preceding  period. 
But  the  time  will  come  when  they  shall  be  innumerable.  What  mean  such  passages 
as  these  ? — "  He  shall  have  dominion  from  sea  to  sea,  from  the  river  to  the  end  of  the 
earth."  Again,  "  All  kings  shall  fall  down  before  him."  Again,  "  The  kingdoms  of 
this  world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ."  Numerous  as  the 
sand  on  the  sea-shore  I  A  Jewish  rabbi  regards  the  good  as  the  sand,  not  only  in 
relation  to  number,  but  to  usefulness.  As  the  sand  keeps  the  sea  from  breaking  in 
and  drowning  the  world,  so  the  saints  keep  the  world  from  being  drowned  by  the 
waves  of  eternal  retribution.  This  is  true.  Were  it  not  for  the  good  the  world  would 
not  stand  long.  But  it  is  to  represent  number,  not  protection,  that  the  figure  is 
employed.  Who  can  count  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  shore  ?  Do  you  say  that  to 
all  appearances  such  an  increase  is  impossible  ?  When  God  promised  to  Abraham  that 
his  seed  should  be  as  the  stars  of  heaven  and  the  sand  upon  the  shore,  what  could  seem 
more  improbable  than  the  fulfilment?  It  was  twenty  years  after  the  promise  that  he 
had  any  child,  and  that  only  child  he  was  commanded  to  destroy,  and  though  Isaae 
was  preserved,  he  had  no  offspring  until  twenty  years  after  his  marriage.  How 
improbable  the  fulfilment  of  such  a  promise ;  but  nevertheless  it  was  fulfilled.  How 
numerous  the  descendants  of  Abraham  became  I  Do  not  jud^e  from  appearance. 
Trust  God's  Word ;  it  will  come  to  pass.    There  is  a  glorious  future  for  the  world. 

II.  The  race  is  destined  to  a  tbanscbndbnt  pbivileok.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  thom.  Ye  are  not  my  people,  there  it  shall 
be  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living  God."  1.  "They  are  destined  to  a 
general  conversion  to  God.  Prom  not  being  his  people  they  are  to  become  his 
people.  The  places  ol  the  earth  now  populated  with  the  enemies  of  God  will  one  day 
be  crowded  with  his  friends;  places  where  idolatry,  superslilion,  worldliness,  and 
infidelity  prevail  shall  in  the  bright  future  be  consecrated  to  Heaven.  2,  They 
are  destined  to  a  general  adoption  into  the  family  of  Ood.  "  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the 
living  Qod.''    They  shall  be  endowed  and  animated  with  the  true  Spirit,  the  spirit 


36  THE  BOO]t  OP  HOSfiA.  [ch-  '•  1— H- 


of  reverence  and  adoring  love.  They  shall  "worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in 
truth."  "  The  living  God."  The  world  has  abounded  with  dead  gods ;  there  is  but 
one  living  God.  He  is  the  Living  One.  He  is  Iiife,  the  primal  Fount  of  all  existence. 
Ciirist  calls  him  the  living  Father.  "As  the  living  Father  sent  me  ...  I  live  in  the 
Father,  so  he  that  eatetli  with  me  shall  live  by  me." 

III.  The  race  is  destined  to  a  common  leadership.  "Then  shall  the  children  of 
Judah  and  the  children  of  Israel  be  "alhered  together,  and  appoint  themselves  one  head, 
and  they  shall  come  up  out  of  the  land :  for  great  shall  be  the  day  of  Jezreel."  1. 
This  leadership  shall  unite  the  most  hostile.  "Then  shall  the  children  of  Judah  and 
the  chililren  of  Urai  1  be  gathered  together."  Great  and  Icng-enduring  was  the  hostility 
exisling  between  these  people.  The  time  will  come  when  all  antipathies,  existing 
anuingxt  |ieoples  shall  be  destroyed.  "Epliraim  shall  not  envy  Judah  :  they  shall  be 
of  one  heart  and  one  mind."  2.  This  leadership  shall  be  by  common  appointment. 
They  shall  "  appnint  themselves  one  Head."  Their  Lea-ler  will  not  be  forced  upon  them 
contrary  to  their  consent,  nor  will  he  force  himself.  Who  is  the  Leader  ?  Christ.  He 
is  the  Leader  of  the  people.  He  is  the  Commander-in-chief,  he  is  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation.  All  shall  unite  in  him.  He  is  the  Head  of  the  Church.  3.  This  leadership 
will  be  glorious.  "  They  shall  come  up  out  of  the  land:  for  great  shall  be  the  day  of 
.Jezieel."  As  Moses  led  the  Jews  out  of  the  wildeiness,  as  Cyrus  delivered  them  from 
Babylon,  Christ  will  lead  them  out  of  Egyptian  darkness  and  Babjlonian  corruption. 
"Israel  is  here  called  Jezreel,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "the  seed  of  God.  This  seed  is 
now  sown  in  the  earth,  and  buried  in  the  clods,  but  great  shall  be  its  day  when  the 
harvest  comes." 

"  For  I  dipt  into  the  future,  far  as  human  eye  could  see, 
8aw  the  vision  Qf  the  world,  and  all  the  wonders  that  would  b«  | 

Saw  the  heavens  fill  with  commerce,  argosies  of  magic  sails, 
Pilots  of  the  purple  twilight,  drooping  down  with  costly  bales ; 

Heard  the  heavens  fill  with  shouting,  and  there  rained  a  ghastly  dew 
From  the  nations'  airy  navies  grappling  in  the  centre  blue ; 

Far  along  the  world-wiile  whisper  of  the  south  wind  rushing  warm, 
AVitli  the  standards  of  the  peoples  jilnnglng  thro'  the  thunderstorm  j 

Till  the  war-drum  throbb'd  no  longer,  and  the  battle-flags  were  fiu°I'd 
In  the  parliament  of  man,  the  federation  of  the  world. 

There  the  common  sense  of  most  shall  hold  a  fretful  realm  in  awe^ 
And  the  kindly  caith  shall  slumber,  lapt  in  universal  law." 

(Tennyson.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  1. — Superscription.    Consider  here — 

I.  The  prophet.  "  Hosea,  the  son  of  Beeri."  Hosea,  whose  name  (Hoshca,  "sal- 
vation") reminds  of  Jesus  (Matt.  i.  20),  was:  1.  A  native  of  Israel.  One,  therefore 
who  lived  in  the  midst  of  the  evils  which  he  describes,  and  felt  a  patriot's  love  for  his 
people.  2.  A  man  of  gentle,  pensive,  and  confiding  nature.  This  made  his  anguish 
at  the  thought  of  the  nation's  sins  and  impending  ruin  the  more  poi2,nant.  There  are 
striking  resemblances  between  this  prophet  and  Jeremiah,  who  sustained  a  relation  to 
Judah  similar  to  tliat  which  Hosea  sustained  to  Isiael.  3.  A  man  sorely  tried  hy 
domestic  sorrow.  Hosea  was  no  mere  spectator  of  the  evils  of  the  time.  The  iron 
had  entered  his  own  soul.  He  had  been  tried  in  the  sorest  way  a  iiian  can  be  tried  by 
the  unfaithfulness  of  his  wile.  It  was,  however,  in  connection  with  this  sorrow  that 
God's  word  came  to  him  (ler.  2).  It  was  his  own  experience  which  enabled  him  to 
enter  so  deeply  into  the  mystery  of  God's  love  to  Israel. 

II.  Ills  TiMKs.  "  In  the  days  of  Uzziah,  Jotham,"  etc.  He  dates  by  the  rei-'DB  of 
the  legiliinate  kings  of  the  house  of  David.  Israel,  after  the  fall  of  Jeroboam's  house 
was  governed  by  usurpers  (Menahem,  Pekah,  Hoshea,  etc.).  1.  The  chronology  of  tht 
times.  This  has  inijiortant  bearings  on  the  duration  of  the  prophet's  ndnistry,  and  on 
the  time  which  elapsed  before  the  downfall  of  the  kingdom.  We  cannot  here  howerer 
enter  at  length  into  the  tangled  questions  raised  by  the  apparent  conflict  of  Helrew 
and  Assyrian  dates  (cf.  Robertson  Smith,  '  Prophets  of  Israel,'  Lect.  iv.  and  notes) 


0&.L1— it]  Tflti  BOOK  OF  fiOSBA. 


It  seems  to  us  (1)  that  the  biblical  data  do  not  warrant  ns  in  assuming  the  identity  of 
the  Pul  of  2  Kings  xv.  19,  20,  to  whom  Menahem  paid  tribute,  with  Tiglath-pileser 
(cf.  1  Chron,  vi.  26) ;  and  that  insuperable  difBculties  attend  the  lowering  of  the  dates 
of  the  kings  to  the  degree  necessary  to  bring  them  into  entire  accord  with  the  dates 
in  the  Assyrian  canon.  We  believe  it  will  be  found  that  there  is  a  break  in  the  canon 
at  B.C.  745,  sufficient  for  the  insertion  of  the  reign  of  Pul,  and  that  the  Menahem  oi 
the  monuments,  who  paid  tribute  to  Tiglath-pileser  in  b.o.  738,  is  not  the  Menahem 
of  Scripture,  but  probably  a  second  Menahem,  a  rival  of  Pekah's,  whom  Tiglath-pileser, 
after  putting  down  the  revolts  of  b.o.  743 — 748,  attempted  to  set  on  the  throne  in  his 
own  interest.  We  have  a  Menahem  of  Samaria,  clearly  an  Assyrian  viceroy,  as  late  as 
B.a  702,  in  the  reign  of  Sennacherib  (Smith,  '  History  of  Assyria,'  p.  113).  (2)  On 
the  other  hand,  thure  are  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  interregna  commonly 
assumed  to  have  existed  between  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.  and  the  accession  of 
Zachariah  (eleven  years),  and  again,  between  the  murder  of  Pekah  and  the  accession 
of  Hoshea  (eight  or  nine  years),  must  be  abandoned  as  untenable.  Scripture  does  not 
recognize  them,  and,  as  shown  by  the  monuments,  Pekah  and  Rezin  of  Damascus  (2 
Kings  xvi.  6  ;  Isa.  vii.  1)  were  certainly  at  war  in  b.o.  734.  The  numbers  are  probably 
to  bo  harmonized  by  assuming  that  the  regnal  years  of  Uzziah  and  Jotham  include, 
the  former,  eleven  years  of  association  with  Amaziah,  and  the  latter,  eight  or  nine 
years  of  association  with  Uzziah  (of.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  21).  For  an  example  of  this  mode 
of  reckoning,  see  2  Chron.  xxL  5  compared  with  2  Kings  viii.  16.  This  lowers  the 
dates  by  nineteen  years,  and  assuming  a  break  of  twenty-eight  years  in  the  canon  at 
date  of  Pul  (Rawlinson, '  Ancient  History,'  allows  him  twenty-five  years),  we  bring 
the  two  chronologies  from  Ahab  downwards  into  harmony.  A  formidable  objection  to 
the  theory  of  a  break  in  the  canon  is  the  mention,  under  date  June,  763  b.o.,  of  an 
eclipse  of  the  sun,  known  to  astronomy  to  have  taken  place  at  that  date ;  hut  it  is 
noteworthy  that  a  similar  eclipse  took  place  June,  791  b.c.,  that  is,  twenty-eight  years 
earlier,  which  exactly  satisfies  the  conditions  of  our  hypothesis  (see  Pusey  on  Amos 
viii.  9).  The  seventeenth  of  Pekah,  given  in  1  Kings  xvi.  1  as  the  year  of  the 
accession  of  Ahaz,  must,  on  this  theory,  be  corrected  to  the  seventh,  and  this  is  the 
only  change  required  in  the  biblical  numbers.  Accepting  these  dates,  it  will  follow 
that  Jeroboam  II.  died  about  B.C.  762  or  763,  a  little  more  than  forty  years  before  the 
fall  of  Samaria  (B.C.  721).  If,  further,  we  assume  ch.  i. — iii.  of  this  book  to  be  based 
on  real  history,  and  to  have  been  composed  before  the  downfall  of  the  house  of  Jehu, 
we  must  suppose  the  prophet  to  have  commenced  his  ministry  about  the  middle  of 
Jeroboam's  reign,  and  to  have  laboured  for  nearly  sixty  years.  2.  The  character  of 
the  times.  They  were  evil  exceedingly.  The  state  was  tottering  to  its  downfall. 
Revolution  succeeded  revolution  (ch.  vii.  7).  The  land  was  filled  with  idolatry  and 
with  every  species  of  wickedness  fch.  iv.  1,  19).  Priests  and  prophets,  instead  of 
leproving  sin,  openly  encouraged  it  (ch.  iv.  5 — 9).  The  result  was  a  general  dissolution 
of  social  ties  (ch.  iv.  2).  To  internal  miseries  were  added  the  horrors  of  foreign  inva- 
sion (ch.  V.  8—11).  Yet  in  their  distress  the  people  sought  not  to  Grod,  but  turned 
instead  to  Assyria  and  Egypt  (ch.  v.  13 ;  vii.  11 ;  viii.  9 ;  x.  6  ;  xii.  1).  The  nation, 
in  short,  was  reeling  to  its  ruin,  and  remonstrance  and  warning  had  no  longer  any 
efiiect  upon  it.  The  blow  fell  in  the  capture  of  Samaria,  followed  by  the  captivity  of 
the  people  (ch.  xiii.  16). 

III.  His  mission.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  unto  Hosea.''  Hosea's  task  in 
Israel  was :  1.  To  testify  against  Israel  for  its  sins ;  to  hold  up  to  the  people  a  mirror 
which  should  show  them  to  themselves.  2.  To  show  them  the  root  of  their  trans- 
gressions in  apostasy  from  God.  3.  To  show  them  how  God  felt  to  them  in  their 
backslidings — how  strong,  pure,  consistent,  and  unchanging  was  his  affection  towards 
them.  4.  To  warn  them  of  the  inevitable  destruction  they  were  bringing  on  themselves 
by  sin.  5.  To  blend  promise  with  threatening,  and  declare  how  grace  would  triumph 
even  over  Israel's  unfaithfulness.  Though  sharing  in  many  of  the  calamities  of  the 
latter  days  of  the  nation,  Hosea  seems  to  have  been  removed  before  the  final  stroke 
fell.  This  was  God's  mercy  to  him ;  he  was  "  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come  " 
(Isa,  Ivii.  1). 

IV,  His  book.  Hosea's  prophecy  preserves  to  us  the  substance  of  his  public 
teaching.    The  materials  wrought  up  in  it  belong  to  different  periods  of  his  ministry. 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  l  1—11. 

Ch.  i. — iii.  belong  to  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  (oh.  i.  4).  They  show  no  traces  of  the 
anarchy  which  set  in  after  that  monarch's  death.  Ch.  iv. — vi.  belong  to  the  suc- 
ceeding period,  the  reign  of  Menahem,  and  earlier  years  of  Pekah.  Ch.  vii.  and  viii.  may 
be  a  little  later.  They  speak  of  a  time  of  busy  political  intrigue,  and  of  chastisement 
by  the  Assyrians.  We  are  disposed  to  refer  them  to  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Pekah, 
when  the  Assyrians  were  frequently  in  Palestine  (b.o.  743 — 738).  The  key-note  of  ch. 
ix.,  "  Eejoice  not,"  suggests  a  gleam  of  returning  prosperity.  This  answers  to  Pekah's 
later  days  when  at  war  with  Ahaz  (2  Chron.  xxviii.),  prior  to  the  crushing  of  his 
power  by  Tiglath-pileser  (1  Kings  xv.  29).  Ch.  x.  plainly  takes  us  unto  the  times  of 
Hoshca,  while  ch.  xi. — xiii.  refer  to  the  very  last  days  of  the  kingdom.  The  abrupt- 
ness, pathos,  and  quick  emotional  transitions  which  have  been  noted  as  characteristic 
of  the  prophet's  style  appear  in  these  chapters  in  an  exceptional  degree.  Ch.  xiv.  is 
the  fitting  conclusion  to  the  whole.  Calm  succeeds  to  storm.  The  language  is  soft, 
gliding,  peaceful,  and  laden  with  tenderness ;  the  imagery  is  idyllic ;  glorious  vistas 
open  themselves  into  the  future.  Keil's  division  of  the  second  part  of  the  book  into 
three  sections,  viz.  ch.  iv. — ^vi.  3;  ch.  vi.  4 — xi.  11;  ch.xii. — ^xiT.,each  section  rounded 
off  by  promise,  is  as  good  as  any. — J.  0. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  "wife  of  whoreiloms."  We  cannot  doubt  but  that  real  inci- 
dents in  the  prophet's  history  underlie  the  representations  of  this  chapter.  Hosea, 
in  obedience  to  what  he  recognized  to  be  a  word  of  God,  took  to  wife  Gomer,  the 
daughter  of  Diblaim.  The  names  (Gomer,  "  completion ; "  Diblaim,  "  fig-cakes  ")  may 
possibly  be  symbolical,  the  real  name  of  the  prophet's  wife  being  concealed  (cf.  ch.  iii.  1, 
"  The  children  of  Israel,  who  look  to  other  gods,  and  love  grape-cakes  ").  We  need  not 
suppose  Gomer  to  have  been  unchaste  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  tho'igh  she  soon 
afterwards  fell  into  light  ways.  Ver.  2  is  not  to  be  pressed  too  literally.  The  prophet, 
in  the  light  of  his  later  knowledge,  reads  back  into  the  beginning  of  his  relations  with 
Gomer  a  meaning  which  could  hardly  have  been  obvious  to  him  at  the  time.  Children 
were  born  of  the  marriage,  to  whom,  by  Divine  command,  the  character  of  the  mother 
having  by  this  time  revealed  itself,  Hosea  gave  prophetic  names.  These,  as  they 
grew  up,  appear  to  have  followed  only  too  faithfully  in  their  mother's  footsteps. 
"  Wife  of  whoredoms,"  "  children  of  whoredoms."  Hosea  did  all  he  could  to  reclaim 
his  wife  from  her  sinful  ways,  but  without  success.  The  sequel  of  the  story  is  given 
in  ch.  iii.     The  present  section  yields  the  following  lessons : — 

I.  A  DiVnTB  LEADING  IS  TO  BE  BBCOONIZED  IN  THE  EVENTS  OF  LIFE.      In  what  befell 

Hosea  there  was,  as  the  prophet  came  afterwards  to  see,  a  clear  Divine  purpose.  He 
was  bidden  take  Gomer,  for  "the  land  hath  committed  grievous  whoredom,  departing 
from  the  Lord."  The  object  of  the  union  was  to  afford  a  symbol  of  the  unhappy 
relations  subsisting  between  Jehovah  and  his  people.  The  prophet,  further,  was  to  be 
trained  through  his  own  great  personal  sorrow  to  sympathy  with  God  in  his.  The 
human  heart  was  to  be  made  an  interpreter  of  the  Divine.  Life  is  shaped  for  us  by  a 
power  higher  than  our  own.  Its  events  embody  words  of  God.  The  meaning  hidden 
in  them  is  often  not  manifest  till  afterwards.  They  are  shaped  for  our  instruction. 
They  are  parables  to  us  and  to  others  of  Divine  things.  The  teaching  of  the  Spirit 
should  be  sought  to  aid  us  in  understanding  them. 

II.  There  is  a  natural  analogy  between  eabthlt  uabbiaoe  and  the  affiance 
OF  THE  SOUL  WITH  GoD.  It  is  this  analogy  which  underlies  the  representation  of 
Israel's  apostasy  from  God  as  whoredom.  "The  whole  Jewish  Scriptures,"  says  R.  II. 
Hutton,  "  insist  with  a  strange  and  almost  mystical  monotony  on  the  close  connection 
between  the  constancy  required  in  marriage  and  the  constancy  which  God  demands  in 
the  spiritual  relation  of  worship  to  himself.  Sometimes  there  appears  to  be  almost  a 
confusion  between  sins  against  the  one  kind  of  fidelity  and  sins  against  the  other,  as 
if  it  were  implied  that  ho  who  is  incapable  of  appreciating  duly  the  sacredness  of  the 
human  tie,  will  necessarily  be  incapable  of  appreciating  the  sacredness  of  that  which 
is  at  once  more  awful  and  more  intimate.  It  is  clear  that  the  Jewish  prophets  regarded 
constancy  in  the  most  intimate  of  human  relations,  as  a  sort  of  initiation  into  the 
infinite  constancy  of  God."  God  claims  our  heart-whole  love.  The  least  wandering 
of  desire  from  him  is  sin.  Paul  warns  against  the  slightest  deviation  from  perfect 
simplicity  of  affection  towards  Christ  as  a  ipecies  of  unchastity  (2  Oor.  3U.  1). 


an.  1. 1-11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  39 

III.  The  BEST-aUABBED  HOMES  ABE  KOT  SAFE  FBOU  THE  INFECTION  OF  SUBBO^NBINa 

iTiii.  Ko  home  would  be  more  jealously  guarded  than  Hosea's.  Yet  the  infection 
entered  it.  In  a  dissolute  state  of  society  it  is  almost  impossible  to  exclude  the  pes- 
tiferous germs  with  which  the  moral  atmosphere  is  loaded.  They  find  insidious  lodg- 
ment in  places  and  hearts  where  we  would  least  suspect  their  presence.  Our  safety 
lies  in  vigilance,  and  in  doing  our  utmost  to  resist  the  e^read  of  moral  corruption. 

IV.  CmLDBBN  TEND  TO  FOLLOW  IN  THK  FOOTSTEPS  OF  THE  PABENT8.      Especially  ol 

the  mother.  A  mother's  influence  is  greater  than  a  father's,  A  pious  mother  is  the 
best  of  blessings,  as  a  wicked  mother  is  the  worst  of  curses. — J.  0. 

Vers.  3 — 9.—"  Children  of  whoredoms."  Hosea's  children,  like  Isaiah's,  were  to  be 
"  for  signs  and  wonders"  in  Israel  (Isa.  viii.  18).  Their  names — Jezreel,  Lo-ruhamah, 
Lo-ammi — were  sisniflcant.    A  prophetic  word  was  attached  to  each. 

I.  Jezbeel.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  This  first  name — "God  will  scatter" — foretells  Israel's 
scattering.  Through"  it  judgment  is  denounced  (1)  upon  the  house  of  the  king — "Yet 
a  little  while,  and  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of  Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  Jehu; "  and  (2) 
upon  the  kingdom — "  I  will  cause  to  cease  the  kingdom  of  the  house  of  Israel."  The 
lessons  taugiit  are :  1.  Z%e  character  of  an  action  is  determined  hy  its  motive.  By  the 
"  blood  of  Jezreel"  is  meant  the  slaughter  of  the  seed  of  Ahab  (2  Kings  x.).  God  had 
commanded  the  extermination  of  Ahab's  house  (2  Kings  ix.  7).  Jehu  was  his  chosen 
instrument  in  executing  the  judgment.  Yet  God  says,  "  I  will  avenge  the  blood  of 
Jezreel  upon  the  house  of  Jehu."  The  apparent  contradiction  is  solved,  by  remembering 
the  unsanctified  spirit  in  which  Jehu  went  about  his  work  of  bloodshed.  He  did  what 
God  commanded,  but  there  was  no  purity  of  motive  in  what  he  did.  His  "  zeal  for  the 
Lord  "  was  mere  pretence,  covering  the  seeds  of  personal  ambitio'n.  He  served  God 
only  so  far  as  he  could  thereby  serve  himself.  The  massacre  of  Ahab's  seed  opened  his 
own  way  to  the  throne.  When,  therefore,  having  extirpated  Ahab's  house,  Jehu  and 
his  successors  showed  themselves  heirs  to  Ahab's  sins,  the  bloodshed  of  Jezreel  was 
justly  imputed  to  them  as  guilt.  Actions  formally  right  may  yet  become  sin  to  us 
through  the  motives  which  prompt  them.  2.  Partners  in  guilt  will  he  made  partners 
also  in  punishment.  The  kingdom  had  followed  in  the  steps  of  its  guilty  rulers.  The 
doom  of  excision,  therefore,  which  is  denounced  against  them — the  same  doom  as  had 
been  denounced  formerly  against  the  house  of  Ahab — will  fall  on  it  also.  Judgment  is 
impartial.  3.  There  is  a  law  of  symmetry  in  the  Divine  visitations.  It  was  the  "  blood 
of  Naboth,"  shed  in  Jezreel,  which  brought  down  on  Ahab's  house  the  sentence  of 
extermination  (1  Kings  xxi.  17 — 25).  It  was  in  Jezreel  that  the  doom  was  inflicted  on 
Ahab(l  Kings  xxi.  19 ;  xxii.  34 — 38),  on  Jezebel  (2  Kings  ix.  30 — 37),  and  on  Ahab's 
sens  (2  Kings  x.  11).  Jezreel  was  the  head-quai;ters  of  the  wickedness  for  which  the 
whole  nation  was  now  to  be  punished.  And  now  Jezreel  is  again  chosen  as  the  place 
of  vengeance.  ,"  I  will  break  the  bow  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of  Jezreel."  A  similar 
correspondence  of  sin  and  punishment  may  be  traced  in  very  many  of  God's  dispen- 
sations. God  would  "  break  the  bow."  When  he  smites,  weapons  of  defence  afiford  but 
small  protection. 

II.  Lo-EUHAMAH.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  The  first  name  spoke  of  external  judgment.  The 
second,  "  Unpitied,"  lays  bare  the  ground  of  the  judgment  in  the  withdrawal  of  the 
Divine  pity.  It  tells  that  Israel  has  nothing  to  hope  tor  from  God's  mercy  in  the  dire 
hour  that  was  so  rapidly  approaching.  "  For  I  will  no  more  have  mercy  upon  the 
house  of  Israel,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  The  fact  that  mercy  was  no  longer  to  be  shown  to  Israel 
implied :  1.  That  mercy  had  been  shown  to  Israel  hitherto.  This  was  the  case.  No 
attribute  had  been  more  conspicuously  displayed  in  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with 
the  nation.  Mercy  was  to  be  shown  to  Judah  still  (ver.  7).  God's  end  was  mercifiil, 
even  in  the  threatened  rejection.  2.  That  there  are  limits  to  the  Divine  mrrcy.  Not, 
indeed,  to  the  mercy  itself,  but  to  the  exercise  or  manifestation  of  it,  Eighteousness 
sets  limits  to  mercy.  There  comes  a  time  when,  consistently  with  righteousness,  punish- 
ment can  no  longer  be  postponed.  Even  love  sets  limits  to  mercy.  Paradoxical  as  it 
may  seem,  there  are  times  when  the  only  mercy  God  can  show  us  is  to  show  no  mercy. 
It  is  no  kindness  to  the  incorrigible  transgressor  to  continue  sheltering  him  from  the 
results  of  his  transgression.  God's  very"  love  for  Israel  compelled  him  to  exchange 
kindness  for  a  holy  severity  which  would  not  spare.     This  was  needful,  as  ch.  iL 


*d  THE  BOOR  Of  I10S£A.  [en.  1. 1— H. 

sliows,  for  Israel's  salvation.  The  experience  of  the  bitter  fruits  of  sin  may  be  the  only 
thing  which  will  bring  the  wayward  one  to  repentance  (of.  Luke  xv.  11 — 32),  3.  Ood 
would  pity  Judah  while  rejecting  Iirad.  (Ver.  7.)  The  distinction  made  was  not 
arbitrary.  Judah,  too,  had  deeply  sinned,  but  she  had  not  yet  filled  up  the  cup  of 
her  iniquity.  Mercy,  therefore,  was  still  to  be  extended  to  her.  The  ground  of  this 
mercy,  however,  was  to  be  sought,  not  in  Judah,  but  only  in  God.  "  I  will  save  them 
by  the  Lord  their  God."  There  is  indicated  here  (1)  the  long-sufferingness  of  the 
Divine  mercy ;  (2)  the  sovereignty  of  the  Divine  mercy  ;  (3)  the  omnipotence  of  the 
Divine  mercy.  "  Will  not  save  them  by  bow,  nor  by  sword,  nor  by  battle,  by  horses, 
ror  by  horsemen."  We  read  of  many  such  signal  deliverances  granted  to  Judah 
(Isa.  vii.  7,  8  ;  xxxvii.  6). 

III.  Lo-AMMi.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The  third  name,  "  Not  my  people,"  is  most  signifi- 
cant of  all.  It  bespeaks  a  present,  though,  as  the  sequel  shows,  only  temporary, 
dissolution  of  the  covenant  bond  subsisting  between  the  people  and  Jehovah.  Throu.;h 
this  rejection  Israel  would  cease  to  bo  God's  prople — would  sink  to  the  level  of  the 
Gentiles.  1.  In  declaring  Israel  to  le  not  his  people,  Qod  hut  ratified  the  choice  of  the 
people  themselves.  They  had  refused  to  be  Gid's  people.  They  liaii  resisted  all  attempts 
to  bring  them  back  to  their  allegiance.  God  at  length  ratifies  their  choice.  It  is  the 
same  with  every  sinner.  He  chooses  his  own  position.  He  makes  his  choice,  and  God 
confirms  it.  2.  In  declaring  himself  to  he  not  their  Ood,  Ood  tank  up  the  only  attitude 
now  possible  to  him.  Many  would  gladly  have  God  as  their  God,  i.e.  would  retain  the 
benefits  of  his  favour,  friendship,  and  protection,  while  refusing  the  counter-obligation 
of  living  as  his  people.  This  cannot  be.  If  we  refuse  to  be  God's  people,  he  has  no 
alternative  but  to  refuse  to  be  our  God. — J.  0. 

Ver.  10 — ch.  ii.  1. — Mercy  triumphant  over  judgment.  This  which  has  been  described 
would  fall  (and  did  fall)  on  Israel.  Yet  would  not  God's  purpose  in  the  calling  of  the 
nation  thereby  be  defeated.  Woeful  as  was  the  apostasy,  it  did  not  take  God  by  sur- 
prise. It  had  been  foretold  (Deut.  iv.  25 — 28 ;  xxxi.  16^19).  Bat  the  same  word 
which  had  predicted  the  rejection,  predicted  also  the  recovery  (Deut.  xxx.  1 — 10). 
Hosea,  in  this  new  word  from  God,  repeats  and  confirms  the  promise.  The  blessings 
predicted  are — 

I.  Numerical  ikceease.  "  Yet  the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  be  as  tho 
sand  of  the  sea,"  etc.  This  was  the  original  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  5).  Israel's 
unfaithfulness  could  not  make  it  void  (Horn.  iii.  3).  Neither  did  it.  1.  God  has  made 
up  for  the  rejection  of  Israel  hy  giving  Abraham-  a  spiritual  seed  vastly  outstripping  in 
numbers  the  natural  seed.  The  spiritual  seed  was  included  in  the  promise :  "  And  'u 
thee  shall  all  families  of  the  eartli  be^  blessed  "  (Gen.  xii.  3).  God  has  given  Abraham 
this  seed.  Even  now,  while  Israel's  rejuotion  ksis,  a  vast  seed  has  been  raised  from  the 
Gentiles,  "  which  in  time  past  were  not  a  people"  (1  Pet.  ii.  10).  God  has,  as  it  were, 
from  the  stones  raised  up  children  to  Abraham  (Matt.  iii.  9).  This  seed  will  go  on 
increasing  till  it  embraces  all  peoples  of  the  eartli.  2.  Mercy  waits  even  for  the  natural 
Israel,  who  will  yet,  in  great  numbers,  enter  the  kingdom  of  God  (Rom.  xi.). 

II.  Kestoration  to  spiritual  honour.  "  In  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them. 
Ye  are  not  my  people,  there  it  shall  bo  said  unto  them.  Ye  are  the  sons  of  the  living 
God."  1.  The  privilege.  "  Sons  of  the  living  God."  Formerly  they  were  called  God's 
"  people  ;  "  now  they  are  called  his  "  sons."  The  last  honour  is  greater  than  the 
first.  Sonship,  which  formerly  was  predicated  of  the  nation,  is  now  predicated  of  the 
individuals  composing  it'.  2.  The  heirs  of  the  privilege.  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews 
(Rom.  ix.  26;  1  Pet.  ii.  10).  For  Gentiles  are  now  admitted  to  Israel's  privileges. 
They  are  part  of  the  spiritual  seed.  Israel,  in  its  state  of  rejection,  stands  towards 
God  on  no  higher  a  footing  than  the  Gentiles.  "  Not  my  people."  Conversely,  the 
scheme  of  grace  through  which  it  is  recovered  has  a  range  wider  than  the  natural 
Israel ;  it  applies  to  the  whole  class  of "  Not-my-people,"  and  includes  Gentiles  as  well 
as  Jews.  The  middle  wall  of  partition  is  broken  down  (Eph.  ii.  14)  ;  there  is  no  more 
any  difference  (Rom.  iii.  22,  29).  3.  Greatness  of  the  privilege.  (1)  Great,  in  contrast 
with  former  condition.  "  Once,"  not  the  people  of  God ;  "  now,"  not  bis  people  only, 
but  his  sons.  (2)  Great  in  its  own  nature.  "  Sons  of  the  living  God."  What  honour, 
what  dignity,  what  favour,  is  implied  in  this  I    We  have  this  sonship  in  Ohriit,  the 


cfi.  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OS*  BOSEA. 


41 


beloved  Son.  Angels  do  not  possess  this  honour.  It  is  reserved  for  sinful  but  redeemed 
man.    "  Behold,  what  manner  of  love,"  etc.  (1  John  iii.  1). 

III.  Removai,  of  disunion.  "  Then  shall  the  children  of  Israel  and  the  children  of 
Judah  be  gathered  together,"  etc.  The  words  imply :  1.  That  Judah,  like  Israel,  would 
be  found  at  length  inexiie.  2.  That  mercy  was  in  reserve  for  both.  3.  That  a  new 
Head — a  King — would  be  given,  under  whom  both  would  return  from  captivity.  The 
return  will  certainly  take  place,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  in  Israel's  conversion ;  whether 
also  in  a  literal  sense  remains  to  be  seen.  4.  That  the  leadership  of  the  new  King 
would  be  voluntarily  accepted — "appoint  themselves  one  Head"  (of.  Ps.  ex.  2)i  5. 
That  in  the  restored  kingdom  of  God  no  place  woiild  be  found  for  existing  divisions. 
The  old  enmities  would  disappear.  Enmity  has  already  disappeared  between  Judah 
and  Israel.  The  present  Jews  have  in  them  the  blood  of  all  the  twelve  tribes.  We  may 
learn  (1)  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Gud  there  onght  to  he  no  disunion ;  (2)  that  in  the 
perfected  kingdom  of  God  there  vfill  he  no  disunion  ;  (3)  that  in  the  kingdom  of  God 
the  Centre  of  unity  is  CAriat — "  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism  "  (Eph.  iv.  5). 

IV.  Gladness  and  bejoicino.  "Say  ye  unto  your  brethren,  Ammi;  and  to  your 
sisters,  Ruhamah  "  (ch.  ii.  1).  1.  Because  of  God's  great  goodness  in  the  extension  of 
his  Church.  "  Great  shall  be  the  day  of  Jezreel,"  this  time  in  the  sense,  "  God  will 
sow."  2.  Because  of  reversal  of  forjner  rejection.  No  longer  Lo-arnmi,  but  Ammi — 
"  my  people ; "  no  longer  Lo-ruhamah,  but  Ruhamah — "  pitied."  This  joy  will  be 
universal.  Will  fill  all  hearts,  will  occupy  all  lipi.  Each  will  greet,  rejoice  with,  and 
congratulate  the  other. — J.  (X 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  It 


Vor.  1.— {See  p.  9.) 

Vor.  2. — Plead  with  your  mother, plead:  for 
she  is  not  my  wife,  neither  am  I  her  husband. 
In  this  second  chapter  the  same  cycle  of 
events  recurs  as  in  the  first,  with  this  diifer- 
enoe,  that  what  is  expressed  by  symbol  in 
the  one  is  simply  narrated  in  the  other. 
The  cycle  is  the  common  one  of  sin :  its 
usual  consequences  of  suffering  and  sorrow; 
then  succour  and  sympathy  in  case  of  re- 
pentance. The  persons  addressed  in  the 
verse  before  us  are  those  individuals  in 
Israel  who  had  still  retained  their  integrity, 
and  who,  notwithstanding  surrounding  de- 
fection and  abounding  ungodliness,  had 
continued  steadfast  in  their  loyalty  and  love 
to  the  Lord.  They  might  be  few  in  number, 
widely  scattered,  perhaps  unknown  to  each 
other,  and  of  comparatively  little  note;  yet 
they  are  here  called  on  to  raise  their  voice 
in  solemn  warning  and  earnest  protest 
against  the  national  defection  and  wicked- 
ness. "  The  congregation  in  its  totality, 
or  whole  people  taken  c6njointly,  is  com- 
pared to  the  mother,  but  individual  mem- 
bers to  the  children,  and  the  sense  is  that 
they  are  to  plead  with  each  other  to  bring 
them  back  to  the  way  of  goodness  "  (Kim- 
chi).  Tlie  nation  as  such,  and  in  its  im- 
piety, is  the  mother  ;  the  pious  persons  still 
found  in  it  are  here  required  to  testify 
for  God  both  by  exhortation  and  example. 
"  The  congregation  of  Israel  is  compared  to 
•n  aduIteKH,  and  the  ohildien  of  the  dilfei- 


ent  generations  to  the  children  of  whoredoms. 
Before  them  the  prophet  Siiys, '  Plead  with 
your  mother'"  (Kimchi).  Adultery  per  se 
is  a  virtual  dissolution  of  the  marriage-tie ; 
idolatry  is  spiritual  adultery ;  the  close  and 
tender  relationship  into  which  God  has 
graciously  condescended  to  tsike  Israel  is 
rendered  null  and  void,  and  that  through 
Israel's  own  fault,  God  threatens  the  re- 
nunciation of  it,  unless  perchance  the  plead- 
ing of  the  stUI  faithful  children  might  recall 
the  erring  mother  to  penitence  and  purity. 
A  case  the  converse  of  this  is  that  presented 
in  Isa.  1.  1,  where  the  mother's  divorce  is 
attributed  to  the  unfaithfulness  of  the 
children.  "  Where,"  asks  the  Lord  in  that 
passage,  "is  the  bill  of  yrnir  mother's  di- 
vorcement, whom  I  have  put  away  ?  ...  for 
your  transgressions  is  your  mother  put 
away."  Ki  before  the  second  clause  is 
either  recitative,  introducing  the  words  of 
pleading,  or  assigns  a  reason ;  the  latter 
seems  preferable.  Let  her  therefore  put 
away  her  whoredoms  out  of  her  sight,  and 
her  adulteries  from  between  her  breasts. 
The  word  mippaneyha  is  rather  to  be  ren- 
dered "from  her  face"  tlian  "out  of  her 
sight."  The  expression  is  to  be  taken 
1  i  terally,  as  the  word  "  breasts  "  in  the  parallel 
clause  proves.  Thus  Kimchi  rightly  ex- 
plains it,  saying,  "  Since  he  compares  her 
to  a  harlot,  he  attributes  to  her  the  ways  of 
harlots  :  for  the  harlot's  way  is  to  adorn  her 
fuce  with  various  kinds  of  colours,  that  she 
may  appear  fair  in  the  eyes  of  her  par- 
amours,"   But  in  addition  to  oinamenfai  such 


42 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  n.  1—23. 


ai  ear-rings  or  nose-rings,  and  oHier  ways  of 
decking  herself,  as  by  painting,  the  expres- 
sion may  imply  lasoivions  looks  and  wanton 
expressions  of  countenance ;  while  the  men- 
tion of  breasts  may  indicate  the  making  of 
them  bare  for  the  purpose  of  meretriciouB 
blandishments,  or  as  indicating  the  place  of 
the  adulterer  (comp.  Ezek.  zxiii.  3  and 
Cant.  i.  13).  The  Jewish  commentators 
adopt  the  latter  sense.  Aben  Ezra  oommen  ts 
on  the  grammatical  form  of  the  words 
t'nuneha  and  naaphupheha  (the  former  by 
duplication  of  the  second  radical,  and  the 
latter  by  that  of  the  third)  as  intensive; 
while  Baehi  and  Kimchi  refer  to  the 
pressure  of  the  breasts.  But  others  under- 
stand them  figuratively,  the  countenance 
indicating  boldness,  and  the  breasts  shame- 
lessness.  Thus  Horace  speaks  of  the 
brilliant  beauty  (nixor)  and  coquettishnesB 
(prolervitas)  of  Glycera. 
-  Ver.  3. — Lest  I  strip  her  naked,  and  set 
her  as  in  the  day  that  she  was  bom.  The 
Lord,  by  Ills  servant  the  prophet,  enforces  the 
preceding  exhortation  by  a  stem  denuncia- 
tion, and  the  threat  of  further  severities 
unless  averted  by  repentance  ;  as  an  in- 
jured husband  withdraws  from  a  faithless 
wife  all  the  gifts  and  presents  lie  had  made 
for  her  adornment,  leaving  her  poor  and 
bare.  Not  only  the  removal  of  her  garments 
by  way  of  degradation  and  disgrace,  but 
exposure  in  that  position  to  insult  and 
Ignominy  would  ensue.  In  other  words,  the 
nation  is  threatened  with  deprivation  of 
all  the  blessings  prevloubly  lavished  upon 
them — property,  prosperity,  population,  and 
privileges ;  while  dishonour  of  the  deepest 
dye  would  aggravate  the  misery.  The  day 
of  the  nation's  birth  denotes  the  weakness 
and  wretchedness  of  their  infant  state.  To 
this  corresponded  their  servile,  suffering 
condition  during  their  bondage  and  oppres- 
sion in  Egypt.  Basi  li  thus  explains  it ; 
Kimchi  says,  "  The  figure  of  birth  is  the 
time  they  are  slaves  in  Egypt;"  so  also 
Theodoret, — the  latter  calls  the  day  of  her 
birtli  the  sojourn  in  Egypt.  The  Prophet 
Ezekiel  (xvi.  4)  expands  the  idea,  occasion- 
ally employing,  as  Eosenmiiller  remarks, 
the  very  words  of  Hosea.  And  make  her  aa 
a  wilderness,  and  set  her  like  a  diy  land,  and 
slay  her  with  thirst.  This  part  of  the  verse 
is  susceptible  of  two  explanations.  The 
faithless  female,  under  which  character  the 
northern  kingdom  is  personified,  may  be 
compared  to  a  wilderness,  that  is,  according 
to  Cyril,  fruitless,  parched,  and  productive 
only  of  thorns,  thirsty  and  waterless.  This 
comparison  of  a  woman  to  a  desert  is  want- 
ing in  suitability,  and  seems  in  some  degree 
awkward  in  itself,  beside  being  out  of  har- 
mony with  the  closing  clause ;  for  to  "  slay 
with  thirst,"  however  applicable  to  a  person, 


cannot  with  any  propriety  be  said  of  a  place, 
whether  desert  or  otherwise.  No  doubt  the 
wilderness  may  stand  for  those  dwelling  in 
it.  We  prefer,  therefore,  the  altemative 
rendering,  "make  her  as  tn  a  wildemess, 
and  set  her  as  in  a  dry  land."  Bashi  aptly 
explains  the  threat  to  mean,  "  Lest  I  pro- 
nounce against  them  such  a  sentence  as  of 
old  in  this  desert  (Numb.  xiv.  35),  '  In  this 
wildemess  they  shall  be  consumed,  and 
there  they  shall  die.' "  There  is,  moreover, 
a  natural  connection  of  ideas  between  a 
wildemess,  a  dry  land,  and  thirst.  The 
nation's  birth,  represented  by  or  compared  to 
their  sojourn  in  Egypt,  naturally  suggests 
the  idea  of  their  wandering  in  the  wilder- 
ness after  tbeir  exodus  from  that  country ;  a 
wildemess,  again,  suggests  what  is  an  ordi- 
nary feature  of  such  a  district,  namely,  » 
dry  land ;  while  a  region  thus  without  water 
is  suggestive  as  well  as  provocative  of  thirst. 
The  former  explanation,  however,  is  given 
by  Kimchi:  "I  will  make  thee  like  the 
wilderness  which  is  open  to  every  one,  and 
in  which,  moreover,  one  finds  no  means  of 
Subsistence,  nor  anything  that  man  needs ;  so 
I'll  withdraw  my  goodness  from  them,  and  they 
shall  be  surrendered  as  a  prey  to  every  one." 

Ver.  4. — ^And  I  will  not  have  mercy  upon 
her  children;  for  they  be. the  children  of 
whoredoms.  The  connection  of  this  verse 
is  carried  on  from  the  preceding,  viz.  and 
leet  I  will  not  have  mercy  upon  her  children. 
An  exceedingly  apt  illustration  of  this 
verse  is  given  by  Jerome.  It  is  to  this 
effect:  When  the  children  of  Israel  were 
brought  out  of  Egypt,  the  parents  perished 
in  the  wildemess ;  but  the  children  of  those 
who  had  thus  perished,  and  whose  carcases 
had  thus  fallen  in  the  wildemess,  were 
spared  and  permitted  to  enter  the  land  of 
promise.  Now,  however,  the  case  is  different, 
and  the  pnnishment  aggravated.  The  adul- 
terous parent  perishes,  and  the  children  of 
that  parent  perish  also.  Further,  the  reason 
is  assigned  in  the  concluding  clause.  The 
children  proved  themselves  no  better  ihan 
the  mother  that  bor  them;  they  were  the 
worthless  progeny  of  a  wortliless  parent. 

Ver.  5. — For  their  mother  hath  played  the 
harlot :  she  that  conceived  them  hath  done 
shamefolly :  for  she  said.  I  will  go  after  my 
lovers.  The  oliarge  of  idolatry  under  the 
figure  of  harlotry,  spiritual  harlotry,  is 
reiterated.  "Mother'  is  repeated  in  and 
emphasized  by  the  parallel  words, '  she  that 
conceived  them."  A  somewhat  similar  form 
of  expression  is  that  in  Ps.  Iviii.  3,  "The 
wicked  are  estranged  from  the  womb :  they 
go  astray  as  soon  as  they  be  bom,  speaking 
lies."  To  both,  to  be  ashamed,  belong  the 
Hiphil  forms,  hebhish  and  hobhiah  (the  latter 
formed  from  labhith),  properly  "to  put  to 
tbame,"  but  also  "  to  practise  shame  or  d« 


OH.  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA. 


48 


Bhamefnl  things."  The  nature  of  her  ghame- 
ful  conduct  is  more  definitely  and  distinctly 
expressed  in  the  clauses  which  follow ;  and 
consisted  of  several  particulars.  There  is 
the  persistent  pursuit  of  her  lovers ;  then 
the  unblushing  boldness  with  which  she 
avows  her  determination  to  continue  that 
course ;  and  next  come  her  expectations  from 
them.  That  give  me  my  bread  and  my  water, 
my  wool  and  my  flax,  mine  oil  and  my  drink 
(margin,  drinks).  The  original  word  here 
rendered  "lovers"  is  the  Piel  participle, 
which  may  have  either  its  usual  intensive 
sense  or  its  occasional  causative  sense  in 
which  it  is  tatenbyRosenmiiller,  whohas  "a- 
mare  me  facientes,"  equivalent  to  "  wooers." 
It  matters  little  which  way  we  understand 
it.  The  more  important  point  is  to  determine 
who  or  what  are  here  meant  by  lovers.  Most 
commentators  understand  them  to  be  those 
nations  whose  friendship  Israel  set  such 
store  by — ^the  Assyrians  and  the  Egyptians. 
Thus  Grotius  and  Jerome, — the  latter  ex- 
plains them  of  the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians 
and  other  nations,  with  whose  idols  Israel 
committed  fornication,  and  &om  which  in 
distress  they  vainly  hoped  for  help ;  so  also 
Kimchi,  in  the  following  comment:  "By 
'  friends '  he  implies  the  Assyrians  and  Egyp- 
tians joined  in  alliance  to  the  Israelites, 
who  delivered  them  from  their  enemies,  so 
that  they  lived  safely,  in  return  for  the 
gifts  (tribute)  which  they  (the  Israelites) 
were  in  the  habit  of  giving  them.  And  as 
they  lived  in  tranquillity  in  virtue  of  the 
compact  entered  into  with  them,  the  prophet 
represents  it  as  if  they  supplied  them  with 
all  the  necessaries  of  life.  For  with  their 
help  they  tilled  their  land  without  fear  and 
in  safety  traded  from  country  to  country." 
Kimchi  quotes  at  the  same  time  his  father's 
(Joseph  Kimchi)  interpretation;  "But  my 
lord  my  father  of  blessed  memory  explained 
'  after  her  lovers '  of  the  sun  and  moon  and 
stars,  which  they  worshipped;  while  their 
intention  was  that  they  gave  them  their  food 
and  their  sufficiency,  as  they  said, '  But  since 
we  left  off  to  bum  incense  to  the  queen  of 
heaven,  and  to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto 
her,  we  have  wanted  all  things,  and  have 
been  consumed  by  the  sword  and  by  the 
famine.* "  This  exposition  of  Joseph  Kuu- 
chi  is  much  nearer  the  truth  than  that  of 
his  son  David ;  it  is,  however,  too  restricted. 
The  "  lovers "  were  the  idols  on  which  the 
people  of  the  northern  kingdom  so  doated, 
and  on  which  they  placed  so  much  depen- 
dence. The  blessings  which  they  vainly 
expected  from  these  idols  are  enumerated : 
they  were — ^food  and  raiment  and  luxuries ; 
the  bread  and  water  were  the  articles  of 
food,  as  it  is  written  elsewhere,  "  Bread  shall 
be  given  him ;  his  waters  shall  be  sure ; " 
the  wool  and  flax  were  the  materials  for 


clothing ;  while  the  oil  and  drinks  were,  the 
former  for  ornament,  the  latter  for  refiresh- 
ment,  and  so  included  all  luxuries ;  thus  in 
Ps.  xxiii.  5,  "  Thou  anointest  my  head  with 
oil ; "  and  in  Ps.  cii.  9,  "  And  mingled  my 
drink  [literally,  'drinks,'  the  same  word, 
ihigguyar]  with  weeping;"  also  in  Ps.  civ. 
15  we  read  of  "  wine  that  maketh  glad  the 
heart  of  man,  and  oil  to  make  his  face  to 
shine,  and  bread  which  strengthened  man's 
heart." 

Ver.  6. — Therefore,  behold,  I  will  hedge  up 
thy  way  with  thorns,  and  make  a  wall,  that 
she  shall  not  find  her  paths.  The  sudden 
change  of  person  from  the  third  to  the 
second  is  very  observable.  This  directness 
of  address  is,  in  this  instance,  expressive  of 
deep  indignation.  She  had  avowed  her 
determination  to  pursue  her  evil  courses 
shamefully  and  sinfully,  as  if  in  despite  and 
defiance  of  the  Almighty.  In  deep  and 
undisguised  displeasure,  and  with  a  sudden- 
ness springing  &om  indignation,  he  affirms 
his  determination  to  thwart  Jier  course  of 
sin  and  shame;  as  though  addressing  her 
personally  and  promptly,  he  said,  "Then 
thou  shalt  not  be  able  to  carry  out  thy 
plan  or  accomplish  thy  purpose ;  I  will  see 
to  that."  The  hedge  and  wall  are  elsewhere, 
as  in  Job  L  10  and  Isa.  v.  5,  uied  for  pro- 
tection and  defence,  here  for  prevention  and 
obstruction,  and  similarly  in  Job  xix.  8, 
"  He  hath  fenced  up  my  way  that  I  cannot 
pass,  and  he  hath  set  darkness  in  my  paths ; " 
and  in  Lam.  iii.  7,  "He  hath  hedged  me 
about,  that  I  cannot  get  out,"  and  ver.  9, 
"He  hath  enoloseil  my  ways  with  hewn 
stone,  he  liath  made  my  paths  crooked." 
Thus  Kimchi :  "  I  will  hedge  thy  way  with 
thorns,  so  that  they  cannot  go  out  of  the 
city  because  of  the  devastation ;  and  her 
lovers  shall  not  be  able  to  help  her,  and 
they  are  Assyria  and  Egypt."  After  quoting 
his  father's  explanation  of  lovers,  he  pro- 
ceeds :  "  So  their  way  is  as  if  there  were  in 
it  a  thorn  hedge,  and  thorns  that  she  could 
not  pass  through  it,  and  coidd  not  find  her 
patlis  in  which  she  walked."  The  fence 
here  is  double — one  a  hedge  of  thorns,  sharp, 
prickly,  and  piercing,  such  as  forbid  her 
forcing  a  way  through ;  the  other  a  wall  of 
stone  that  cannot  be  climbed,  or  leaped,  or 
otherwise  got  over.  We  need  not  try  to 
specify  the  particular  circumstances  that 
thus  hedged  in  and  walled  about  the  adul- 
teress— whether  fightings  within  or  foes 
beleaguering  without,  whether  straitened 
means  or  stre.ss  of  circumstances  raising  an 
impassable  barrier  against  the  practice  of 
idolatry,  or  an  enforced  conviction  of  its 
futility.  "If,"  says  Kimchi,  "she  leek  to 
Assyria  and  Egypt,  they  will  not  give  her 
their  friendship  and  their  help." 
Vet.  7.— And  .she  shall  follow  after  her 


44 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[CH.  II.  1—23, 


loven,  Tint  she  shall  not  overtake  them ;  and 
she  shall  seek  them,  bnt  shall  not  find  them. 
This  portion  of  the  verse  expresses  the 
consequence  of  the  preceding.  However 
eagerly  she  follows  after  them— and  the  form 
of  the  verb  (Piel  conjugation)  expresses  that 
eagerness — she  shall  only  experience  the 
ineffectual  nature  of  her  efforts,  and  feel 
the  impossibility  of  overtaking  the  darling 
objects  of  her  pursuit.  However  earnestly 
she  seeks  them  (here  the  Fiel  is  used  again), 
she  shall  find  every  passage  barred  and 
every  outlet  obstructed,  so  that,  unable  to 
find  them,  she  shall  be  forced  to  abandon  her 
search  as  utterly  vain  and  impossible.  Then 
shall  she  say,  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first 
husband ;  for  then  was  it  better  with  me  than 
now.  The  difficulties  of  her  position,  the 
distress  in  which  she  found  herself,  stimu- 
lated her  to  increased  eagerness  in  pursuit 
of  her  lovers ;  but  it  was  only  for  a  brief 
space,  and  the  efforts  were  unsuccessful ; 
the  means  as  well  as  opportunity  for  the 
sacrifices  and  services  of  idol- worship  failed, 
the  obstacles  placed  in  her  way  were  insur- 
mountable. Or,  rather,  the  disappointment 
was  BO  great  and  grievous,  when  all  the 
fondly  cherished  hopes  of  help,  or  succour, 
or  support  from  those  idols  were  frustrated 
and  found  entirely  vain,  that,  heart-sick  and 
chagrined  by  unsuccess,  she  resolves  on  a 
change  of  course.  With  mingled  feelings 
of  remorse  and  penitence  she  makes  up  her 
mind  to  retrace  her  steps.  She  recalls  the 
better  days,  the  happier  time,  the  more 
prosperous  circumstances,  of  fidelity  to  her 
first  and  rightful  husband  and  head :  and 
now  she  is  just  ready  to  return  to  him.  She 
is  just  now  at  that  stage  at  which  the 
prodigal  in  the  parable  had  arrived  "when 
lie  came  to  himself,"  and  when  he  said, 
"How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's 
have  bread  enough  and  to  spare,  and  I  perish 
with  hunger  I  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my 
father."  Kimchi  remarks, "  She  will  not  say 
tliis  until  she  has  borne  the  captivity  a  con- 
siderable time." 

Ver.  8. — For  she  did  not  know  that  I  gave 
her  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  multiplied 
her  silver  and  gold,  which  they  prepared  for 
Baal.  From  vers.  6  to  13  inclusive,  the 
suffering  and  sorrow  consequent  on,  and 
occasioned  by,  her  sins  are  enumerated ;  yet 
now  and  again  certain  aggravations  of  her 
guilt  crop  up.  Here  we  have  an  account 
of  her  ignorance  of,  and  ingratitude  to,  the 
trae  Author  of  her  mercies,  together  with 
her  sinful  misuse  and  ead  abuse  of  those 
mercies.  The  products  of  the  earth  which 
God  bestowed  on  her  were  com  and  wine 
and  oil — all  that  was  needed  for  food,  re- 
freshment, and  even  luxury ;  the  prosperity 
in  trude  or  commerce  with  which  he  favoured 
her  resulted  in  the  multiplied  incfease  of 


Bilver  and  gold.  The  perversion  of  these 
blessings  consisted  in  her  employment  of 
them  in  the  service  of  Baal  or  of  idolatry  in 
general.  The  sin  of  refusing  to  acknowledge 
the  Author  of  such  manifold  mercies  was 
grievously  augmented  by  this  gross  abuse 
of  them.  The  last  clause  is  a  relative  one, 
asher,  as  frequently  being  understood ;  while 
the  words  asu  lahbaal  do  not  signify  that 
they  made  those  metals  into  images  of  Baal, 
as  implied  in  the  Authorized  Version ;  nor 
yet  that  they  offered  them  to  Baal,  according 
to  Gesenius ;  but  that  they  prepared  or 
employed  them  in  the  worship  of  that  idol 
and  the  service  of  idolatry  in  general. 
pi,  rad.  rat,  to  cover,  multiply,  I'.e.  multi- 
tude and  plenty  covering  over  everything; 
comp.  tego,  ty'iTn,  rad.  t^T,  take  possession  of 
the  brain  in  intoxicating:  inx',  rad.  ins, 
to  shine.  Kimchi  remarks  as  follows :  "All 
the  goodness  in  the  possession  of  which  she 
was,  she  bad  not  except  from  me ;  because  1 
sent  my  blessing  on  tlie  corn  and  wine  and 
OH,  and  sent  my  blessing  upon  the  work  of 
their  hands,  so  that  they  had  abundance  of 
silver  and  gold ;  but  Jeshurun  waxed  fat 
and  kicked," 

Ver,  9, — Therefore  will  I  return,  and  take 
away  my  com  in  the  time  thereof,  and  my 
wine  in  the  season  thereof,  and  will  recover 
my  ,wool  and  my  flax  given  to  cover  her 
nakedness.  The  abuse  of  the  Divinebountics 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse  fully  justi- 
fies the  series  of  punishments  that  follow. 
God  thus  vindicates  those  penal  inflictions. 
Accordingly  he  threatens  them  in  this  ninth 
verse  with  the  deprivation  of  the  bounties 
which  they  had  misused  as  the  means  of 
idolatry  and  sin ;  in  ver.  10  with  disgrace ; 
in  ver.  11  with  the  departure  of  all  her 
merry-makings ;  in  ver.  12  with  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  sources  whence  the  means  of 
idolatrous  worship  were  supplied;  and  in 
ver.  13  with  days  of  visitation  proportion- 
ate to  the  time  of  declension  and  apostasy. 
The  first  clause  of  the  verse  under  considera- 
tion is  better  rendered  (1)  according  to  tho 
common  Hebrew  idiom,  which  employs  two 
verbs  to  express  one  idea  in  a  modified  sense, 
the  first  denoting  the  manner,  and  so  equiva- 
lent to  an  adverb  with  us,  and  the  second 
signifying  the  matter ;  and  it  is  thus  trans- 
lated by  Keil :  "  Therefore  will  I  take  back 
my  corn."  (2)  We  admit  the  vav  consecu- 
tive is  opposed  to  this;  and  tho  LXX.  has 
iviffTpeifia  Kal  Koiuoupuu  i  and  Jerome,  "  re- 
verter et  sumam."  The  manner  of  the  dis- 
possession intensifies  the  punishment,  just 
as  their  abuse  of  those  possessions  had 
augmented  their  guilt.  The  food,  refresh- 
ment, and  raiment  are  to  be  taken  away ; 
this  certainly  would  be  bad  enough  by  itselfj 
but  tho  suddenness  of  the  stroke  adds 
poignancy  to  the  infliction.    The  prosjiec* 


OH.  B.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ROSEA, 


45 


of  an  indifferent  harvest    and  of  a  bad 

vintage  for  weeks  previously   might  have 

prepared  them  in  some  sort  for  the  disaster. 

But  when  the  time  of  harvest  has  already 

come  and  the  season  of  vintage  just  arrived, 

by   some     sudden,    unexpected    calamity, 

whether  tempest  or  hostile  invasion,  the 

bread-corn    perishes  and   the  wine-grapes 

are  destroyed.    The  food  is  thus  snatched, 

as  it  were,  from  their  mouth,  and  the  cup 

dashed  from  their  lips;  the  sadness  of  tbe 

catastrophe  is  immensely  increased  by  the 

sudden  rudeness  of  the  stroke  by  which  it 

comes.    Nor  is  this  all.    In  the  case  of  the 

raiment,  or  rather  the  material,  the  wool 

and  the  flax  out  of  which  it  is  formed,  its 

removal   reduces   the  intended  wearer   to 

perfect  nudity,  or,  if  we  understand  it  as 

figure,  to  abject  poverty  and  absolute  penury. 

Aben  Ezra  attributes  this  disaster  (ver.  9) 

to  hostile  invasion :  "  At  its  season  when  I 

■hall  bring  the  enemies,  to  take  away  the 

com  and  tlie  wine ; "  Kimehi,  on  the  other 

hand,  sees   in  it  a   misgrowth:  "I  will 

return  and  take  away  my  corn  in  its  season, 

and  my  wine  in  its  appointed  time,  because 

I  will  send  a  curse  upon  them  in  the  time 

of  harvest  and   at  tlie  season  of  vintage, 

instead  of  the  bli  ssing  I  used  to  send  upon 

them.     And  so  on  all  the  work  of  their 

hands  I  shall  send  a  curse,  and  all  their 

gain  shall  be  put  into  a  bag  with  holes ;  and 

they  shall  not  have  bread  to  eat  nor  raiment 

to  wear." 

Ver.  10. — And  now  vnO.  I  discover  her 
lewdness  in  the  sight  of  her  lovers,  and  none 
shall  deliver  her  out  of  mine  hand.  Depri- 
vation is  followed  by  disgrace,  dispossession 
by  dishonour.  The  figure  of  a  faithless 
female  being  continued,  the  calamities  of 
Israel  are  pictured  in  the  extreme  deplor- 
obleness  of  her  condition.  The  word  navluth 
does  not  elsewhere  occur,  but  its  meaning  is 
not  difiScult  to  ascertain.  It  denotes  lite- 
rally, "  Blackness,"  "  laxness,"  or  a  withered 
state,  from  navel,  to  be  withered,  and  may 
be  translated  either  "her  shame"  or  "her 
turpitude."  The  LXX.  has  dKadapalav, 
while  Jerome  renders  it  stuUitiam.  Thus 
she  is  exposed  to  the  derision  and  disgust 
of  her  former  admirers  and  paramours; 
while  deliverance  is  out  of  the  question. 
Her  lovers  are  the  idols,  or,  according  to 
Kimehi, "  Egypt  and  Assyria,  which  cannot 
deliver  her."  She  who  once  was  the  object 
of  delight  is  become  the  object  of  disdain 
and  contempt;  nor  is  there  any  of  her 
quondam  lovers  desirous  of  or  able  to  de- 
liver her  out;  of  the  hand  of  him  who  admi- 
nisters the  justly  deserved  punishment. 

Ver.  11.— I  will  also  cause  all  her  mirth 
to  oease,  her  feast  days,  her  new  moons,  and 
her  sabbaths,  and  all  her  solemn  feasts.  The 
enumoration  is  completo.    "  Her  feast  days  " 


were  the  three  annual  festivals  of  Passover, 
Pentecost,  and  Tabernacles.  "  Her  new 
moons  "  were  the  monthly  celebrations  at  the 
commencement  of  each  month.  "  Her  sab- 
baths" were  the  weekly  solemnities  of  oneday 
in  seven,  dedicated  to  the  Lord.  Then  there 
is  a  general  summing  up  of  the  whole  by  the 
addition  of  "all  her  solemn  feasts," — all  her 
festal  days  and  seasons,  including,  besides 
those  named,  tlie  beginning  of  the  years, 
the  solemn  assembly  or  holy  convocation  on 
the  seventli  day  of  the  Passover  and  on  the 
eighth  day  of  Tabernacles.  Preceding  the 
enumeration  is  the  general  ckdracteristic  of 
all  Israel's  festivities.  They  were  times  of 
joy,  as  we  read  in  Numb.  x.  10, "  In  the  day 
of  your  gladness,  and  in  your  solemn  days, 
and  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months,  ye 
shall  blow  with  the  trumpets ; "  and  in 
Dent.  xii.  12  it  is  expressly  declared,  "  Ye 
shall  rejoice  before  the  Lord  ...  ye,  and  your 
sons,  and  your  daughters,  and  your  meneer- 
vants,  and  your  maidservants,  and  the  Le- 
vite  that  is  within  your  gates."  All  this 
was  to  cease;  the  coming  captivity  would 
render  all  suoli  celebrations  impossible. 
Kimehi  remarks  on  this  (ver.  11):  "For  in 
the  distress  there  is  no  new  moon  and  no 
sabbath ;  and  the  beginnings  of  months  and 
sabbaths  on  which  offerings  were  presented 
were  days  of  joy.  And  so  with  respect  to 
the  feast  days  and  solemn  assemblies,  which 
were  days  of  rest  and  quiet  joy,  they  shall 
not  have  in  them  any  joy  in  consequence  of 
the  greatness  of  their  distresses."  He  sub- 
sequently adds,  "  There  is  a  chag  which  is 
not  a  moed,  but  joy  wherewith  men  rejoice 
and  eat  and  drink;  and  it  is  called  chag," 
referring  to  Solomon's  feast  of  dedication ; 
"  and  there  is  also  a  moed  which  is  not  a 
chag,  as  for  signs  and  for  seasons  (moedim), 
and  at  the  appointed  time  I  will  return 
uuto  thee  "  (moed,  from  ip',  to  appoint  as 
time  and  place). 

Ver.  12. — And  I  will  destroy  (make  deso- 
late) her  vines  and  her  fig  trees,  whereof 
she  said.  These  are  my  rewards  that  my  lovers 
have  given  me.  God  had  alrendy  threatened 
to  deprive  Israel  of  the  means  of  support — 
the  corn,  wine,  wool,  and  flax ;  he  now 
threatens  the  removal  of  the  very  sources 
whence  that  support  was  derived.  The  vine 
and  fig  tree  are  usually  conjoined,  and  by  a 
common  synecdoche  convey  the  idea  of  all 
those  sources  that  combine  to  support  life 
and  supply  its  luxuries.  When  the  united 
kingdom  of  Judah  and  Israel,  before  the 
disruption,  had  obtained  the  zenith  of  pros- 
perity in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  it  is  thus 
expressed :  "  Judah  and  Israel  dwelt  safely, 
every  man  under  his  vine  and  under  his 
fig  tree,  from  Dan  even  to  Bcersheba,  all 
the  days  of  Solomon."  Yet  Israel  knew  not 
the  time  of  her  merciful  visitation,  and  not 


M 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  n.  1—23. 


only  turned  aside  to  idols,  but  most  stupidly 
and  most  inexcusably  attributed  the  many 
mercies  she  enjoyed  to  the  idols  which  she 
worshipped.  Like  a  foul  adulteress  despis- 
ing the  tokens  of  her  husband's  affection 
and  delighting  in  the  rewards  of  lewdness 
receired  from  licentious  paramours,  Israel 
forfeited  all  her  privileges,  and  forced  the 
Lord  to  withdraw  his  bounties  and  destroy 
their  very  source.  )|J,  rad.  jsa,  equivalent 
to  p],  to  be  bent,  from  the  arch  made  by  its 
drooping  boughs.  n:m,  rad.  ]Nn,  equiva- 
lent to  pn,  to  extend  from°  its  length. 
And  I  Moll  make  them  a  forest,  and  the 
beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  them.  The 
places  where  fig  trees  flourished  and  vines 
abounded  shall  be  stripped  of  those  trees, 
with  their  pleasant  fruits — shall  become  a 
forest.  The  vineyards  being  no  longer 
hedged  or  fenced,  no  longer  cultivated  or 
cared  for,  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall,  in 
consequence,  find  free  ingress  and  roam 
there  at  large,  devouring  and  devastating 
at  pleasure.  The  Scptuagint  translates  the 
first  part  of  the  above  sentence  by /cai  Biiaoinat 
auTB  eis  iiapripiov,  "  and  I  will  make  thein 
a  testimony,''  thus  reading,  according  to 
Jerome,  Ty,  instead  of  iv;  while  Cyril 
comments  on  the  words  so  read  aa  follows : 
"  For  these  things  being  taken  away  shall 
testify  as  it  were  against  Israel's  depravity, 
and  render  their  punishment  more  signal, 
and  make  the  wrath  conspicuous."  The 
context,  however,  militates  against  the  read- 
ing in  question,  for  in  time  of  war  or  general 
devastation  places,  through  neglect,  grow 
trees  and  brushwood,  where  wild  beasts  lair 
and  lay  waste.  Tlie  explanation  of  the  verse 
is  well  given  by  Kimchi  in  his  comiuentary : 
"  Because  she  said, '  These  are  the  hire  of  my 
harlotry;'  beuauoe  slie  said  that  from  the 
hand  of  her  lovers  came  the  corn  and  must 
and  oil  and  all  good  things ; — I  will  make 
them  a  desolation,  that  she  may  know 
whether  she  had  those  good  things  from  me 
or  from  them.  mriK,  because  he  has  com- 
pared her  to  a  harlot,  he  calls  those  good 
things  mriN,  equivalent  to  m'l  )3ns ;  while 
their  signification  is  identical  with  'Kin,  and 
their  root,  n:n  [extend,  reach,  give],  the 
aleph  being  pjosthetio.  But  Jonathan  ren- 
ders rant*  by  ip\,preoionji  things.  And  he 
mentions  tlie  vine  and  the  fig  tree  because 
grapes  and  figs  are  the  best  part  of  the  food 
of  man  after  the  produce  of  the  earth  (i.e. 
Corn) ;  and  already  he  had  said, '  I  will  also 
take  away  my  com  in  its  season.' " 

Yer.  13. — And  I  will  visit  upon  her  the 
days  of  Baalim,  wherein  she  burned  incense 
to  them,  and  she  decked  herself  with  her 
ear-rings  and  her  jevrels,  and  she  went  after 
her  lovers,  and  forgat  me,  saith  the  Lord. 
The  name  of  Saalim,  that  is,  Baals  iu  tha 


plural,  has  respeet  to  tha  varioH  formi  of 
the  Baal-idolatry,  or  modification  of  the  Baal- 
worship;  for  example,  Baal-peor,  Baal-be- 
rith,  Baal-zebub,  Baal-perazim,  Baal-zephon, 
Baal-zamar,  Baal-shalishu.  The  name  of  Baal 
came  to  be  used  generally  as  the  designation 
of  any  idol  or  false  god.  The  days  of  the 
Baals  were  the  days  consecrated  to  Baal, 
and  on  which  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
was  transferred  to  that  idol.  It  matters 
little  whether  we  render  "  wherein"  or  "  to 
whom,"  referring  to  <D<,  in  which  case,  how- 
ever, we  should  expect  D3,  though  the  latter 
answers  better  to  the  meaning  of  the  prepo- 
sition I'  in  Dph.  After  mentioning  the  object 
of  their  idolatrous  worship,  he  specifies  the 
manner  of  it,  which  was  the  burning  of 
incense,  the  part  of  the  process  beins;  em- 
ployed by  synecdoche  for  the  whole.  Every 
mincha,ox  meat  offering,  which  was  presented 
by  itself  as  a  free-will  oflering  was  accom- 
panied with  frankincense;  every  day, morn- 
ing and  evening,  incense  was  burnt  in  the 
holy  place ;  while  on  the  great  Day  of  Atone- 
ment the  high  priest  carried  a  censer  of 
coals  from  the  golden  altar  into  the  holiest 
of  all  and  there  burnt  incense  before  the 
mercy-seat.  But  the  word  has  often  a  wider 
sense  tlian  that  of  burning  incense,  and  is 
applied  to  the  offering  of  any  sacrifice  what- 
ever. Just  as  the  festivals  of  Jehovah  were 
transferred  to  Baal,  so  his  service  was  turned 
into  that  of  Baal.  TIjus  Israel  prostituted 
herself  and  acted  the  part  of  a  spiritual 
adulteress  by  her  worship  of  idols.  The 
same  unsavoury  figure  is-resumed;  and  her 
assiduous  efforts  to  worship  the  idol  accept- 
ably and  propitiate  his  favour  is  presented 
under  the  figure  of  a  whorish  woman  deck- 
ing herself  with  meretricious  ornaments — 
nose-rings  and  jewels,  thus  making  up  by 
artificial  means  for  the  lack  of  natural  beauty 
— to  attract  the  attention  and  gain  the 
admiration  of  her  lovers.  Thus  Aben  Ezra : 
"  The  meaning  of  nyni  is  metaphorical  in 
allusion  to  a  whorish  woman  who  puts  a 
nose-ring  in  her  nose  and  a  necklace  on  her 
neck  to  make  herself  beautiful,  in  order  to 
find  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  adulterer." 
The  word  Tj)  has  for  its  verbal  root  my,  to 
overstep  the  boundary,  transgress,  plunder, 
draw  to  one's  self,  put  on ;  while  n>^n  (mas- 
culine \hn)  ia  from  n'^n,  to  rub,  polish,  be 
smooth.  But  when  all  fails  to  draw  lovers 
unto  her,  she  casts  aside  the  last  remaining 
fragment  of  female  delicacy,  and  goes  iu 
pursuit  of  lovers.  Thus  did  Israel.  She 
put  Baal  or  other  idols  in  place  of  Jehovah ; 
she  made  a  transfer  of  Jehovah's  festivals  to 
Baal ;  she  burnt  incense  or  offered  sacrifice 
to  her  idol  instead  of  tlie  true  God ;  she 
went  to  great  pains  to  secure  the  acreptance 
of  her  false  deities}  *'  and  me,"  says  Jehovah 


OH.  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


47 


Tery  emphatically, "  sheforgat; "  that  is,  me 
the  true  God,  her  bountiful  Benefactor,  her 
gracious  Lord,  and  loving  Husband,  she  for- 
gat.  The  visitation  expressed  by  nps  with 
accusative  of  the  thing,  and  hy  before  the 
person,  is  commented  by  Kimchi  as  follows : 
"For  the  transgressions  of  her  (Israel's) 
iniquity  in  tlie  exile  I  will  visit  upon  her 
the  time  that  she  served  Baalim ;  and  I  will 
let  them  remain  long  in  exile  for  punishment, 
because  they  have  left  my  service  and  served 
other  gods.  And  even  upon  children's 
children  shall  come  this  punishment,  al- 
though they  do  not  serve  strange  gods  in 
exile ;  thus  is  the  sentence  [literally,  'judg- 
ment ']  of  their  punishment,  because  their 
children's  children  shall  not  be  perfect  in 
the  service  of  God  and  in  his  commandments 
in  exile,  therefore  thus  shall  the  iniquity  of 
their  fathers  who  served  strange  gods  unite 
with  their  own  punishment." 

Ver.  14. — ^Therefore,  behold,  I  will  allure 
her,  and  bring  her  into  the  wilderness,  and 
speak  comfortahly  unto  her.  As  in  vers. 
2 — 5  we  have  an  exposure  of  Israel's  sin, 
and  in  vers.  6 — 13  an  enumeration  of  her 
sufferings  by  penal  inflictions ;  so  vers.  14 
— 2.3  contain  a  touching  exhibition  of 
Divine  succour  and  support.  The  transi- 
tion is  abrupt.  Vers.  14—17  exhibit  the 
gradual  change  wrought  in  Israel  through  the 
progressive  means  of  improvement  employed 
by  Jehovah.  Israel's  future  is  here  reflected 
in  the  mirror  of  her  past  history.  The  events 
of  that  history  are  elegantly  employed  to  re- 
present as  by  type  or  symbol  the  mercies  in 
store  for  Israel,  wayward  and  rebellious 
though  she  had  proved  herself  to  be.  Lahen 
(from  I'  causal,  and  ken,  so,  equivalent  to 
"  because  it  is  so")  at  the  begiouingof  this 
verse  (14)  is  rendered  by  some,  (1)  "  but "  or 
"  yet ; "  but  its  natural  signification  is  (2) 
"  therefore."  It  is  like  the  Greek  oSi/  (from 
Siv,  Ionic  ?a»',  neuter  i6i>,  contracted  oSy);  it 
being  so,  therefore,  and  similar  to  the  Latin 
phrase,  quas  cum  ita  lint, "  therefore  "  implies 
because  Israel  •can  only  be  turned  from  her 
foolish  idolatry  by  the  penal  measures 
named.  Aben  Kzra  also  understands  it  here, 
as  elsewhere,  in  its  literal  sense;  thus: 
"  After  she  [the  unchaste  wife  representative 
of  Israel]  shall  know  that  all  this  evil  has 
come  upon  her  because  that  she  had  forgot- 
ten me,  and  had  not  known  at  the  beginning 
that  I  dealt  kindly  with  her;  and  when  she 
will  say, '  Yet  will  I  go  and  return  to  my 
former  husband ; '  then  will  I  allure  her  with 
words."  nn£3  is  from  the  root  ns,  cognate 
with  the  Arabic  in  the  sense  of  "  dividing," 
"  being  open,"  "  standing  open ; "  thence  it 
signifies  "  to  be  susceptible  of  out  waid  impres- 
sions," "  allow  access  and  entrance ; "  in  Piel, 
"  to  make  one  open,"  "  be  susceptible  or  in- 
clined," "  induce  by  words."  The  word  lalcen. 


"  therefore,"  has  somewhat  puzzled  commen- 
tators, because  the  connection  between  the 
judgments  threatened  in  the  preoedingverses 
and  the  mercies  proffered  in  what  follows  is 
not  to  a  superficial  view  at  once  apparent. 
Yet  it  is  mercy  and  truth  meeting  together, 
righteousness  and  peace  kissing  each  other. 
It  is  (3)  the  connecting  link  between  the 
enormity  of  our  sins  and  the  greatness  of  the 
Divine  mercy ;  between  the  vileness  of  our 
iniquities  and  the  riches  of  Divine  grace. 
In  like  manner  the  psalmist  prays,  "Par- 
don mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great ; "  and  God 
promises  by  the  prophet,  "  For  the  iniquity 
of  his  covetousness  was  I  wroth,  and  smote 
him :  I  hid  me,  and  was  wroth,  and  he  went 
on  frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  heart.  I 
have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him ;  I  will 
lead  him  alto,  and  restore  comforts  unto  him 
and  to  his  mourners."  Long  previously  God 
had  said,  "  I  will  not  again  curse  the  ground 
any  more  for  man's  sate ;  fur  the  imagina- 
tion of  man's  heart  is  evil  from  his  youth." 
The  secret  of  such  striking  contrasts  is 
that  where  sin  abounded  grace  did  much 
more  abound.  Egypt  having  been  to  Israel 
the  house  of  bondage,  the  exodus  from  that 
land  represents  deliverance  out  of  a  servile. 
Buffering  condition.  (I)  The  wilderness  or 
Arabian  desert  into  which  they  were  brought 
on  leaving  that  country  was  a  place  of 
freedom.  They  were  emancipated,  and 
breathed  the  free  air  of  the  wilderness; 
they  were  exercised  with  salutary  discipline 
after  their  emancipation;  as  they  traversed 
the  wilderness  they  were  trained  and  tiled. 
The  allurement  which  prefaces  their  deli- 
verance refers  to  the  persuasion  of  Moses 
and  Aaron,  who  found  it  necessary  tu  per- 
suade and  even  coax  their  countiymen  to 
turn  their  back  on  their  bondage  and  follow 
the  leaders  whom  God  had  sent  them.  The 
"  comfortable  words"  mentioned  in  the  close 
of  the  verse  were  addressed  to  them  at  a 
subsequent  period,  when,  allured  out  of  the 
strange  land  where  they  had  sojourned  so 
long,  they  were  led  forth  into  the  wilderness. 
The  "comfortable  words"  comprehended 
both  temporal  and  spiritual  mercies — relief 
in  every  time  of  emergency,  deliverance  in 
danger  and  distress,  a  plentiful  supply  of 
their  necessities,  with  pardon  of  their  sins, 
assurances  of  grace,  and  renewed  tokens  of 
God's  favour  on  repentance.  A  difficulty 
has  been  found  in  the  words,  "  and  bring 
her  into  the  wilderness,"  being  interposed, 
between  the  alluring  and  the  speaking 
comfortably.  The  difficulty  is  removed 
(2)  by  translating  vav,  not  by  "and,"  but 
by  "  after,"  as  if  equivalent  to  acher ;  thus : 
"After  I  shall  have  brought  her  into  the 
wilderness  I  will  allure  and  comfort  her." 
Then  the  meaning  would  be,  "  After  I  have 
humbled  them  thoroughly  at  I  did  their 


48 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  n.  1— 2a 


forefathers  in  the  wilderness,  then  will  I 
speak  comfortably  unto  them."  God  humbled 
their  forefathers  in  Egypt,  yet  that  did  not 
suffice ;  he  humbled  them  afterwards  in  the 
wilderness,  and  then  brought  them  into 
Canaan.  Many  times  God  sends  successive 
afflictions  upon  his  own  people,  to  break 
their  hearts,  to  humble  them  thoroughly, 
and  at  last  "  he  speaks  comfortably  unto 
them."  But  (3)  the  wilderness  may  be 
▼iewed  in  iinother  light.  Besides  the  dis- 
tri  sses  experienced  in  the  wilderne.-s,  there 
were  deliverancet  enjoyed.  The  reference 
here  may  be  to  the  latter,  and  all  the  more 
as  this  part  of  the  chapter  deals  with  merci- 
ful providences.  The  particle  vav  and  other 
words  of  the  verse  then  retain  their  natural 
sense;  and,  instead  of  a  denunciation  of 
further  afflictions,  God  declares  to  Israel 
that  he  will  perform  on  their  behalf  such 
works  of  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  at 
once  great  and  glorious,  merciful  and  won- 
derful, as  he  had  wrought  for  their  fore- 
fathers in  the  wilderness  after  their  deliver- 
ance from  Egypt.  Thus  the  Ohtildee :  "  I 
will  work  miracles  and  great  works  of  wonder 
for  them,  such  as  I  wrought  in  the  desert;  " 
as  though  he  said,  "  Whatever  the  condi- 
tion may  be  into  which  you  shall  be  brought, 
yet  you  shall  have  me  working  in  as  glo- 
rious a  way  for  your  good  and  comfort  as 
ever  I  did  for  your  forefathers  when  they 
were  in  the  wilderness."  The  explanation  of 
"  wilderness"  ul»der  number  (1) above, com- 
bining, as  it  does,  deliverance  yet  discipline, 
care  yet  chastisement,  deserves  the  prefer- 
ence ;  it  is  neither  to  be  explained  with  Keil 
exclusively  in  the  sense  of  promise,  nor,  on 
the  other  hand,  exclusively  in  the  sense  of 
punishment  with  Bashi,  who  comments  as 
follows :  "  I  will  lead  her  into  the  wilder- 
ness, which  for  her  is  like  a  wilderness  and 
a  dry  parched  land ;  and  there  she  shall  lay 
it  to  heart  that  it  was  better  with  her  when 
she  did  my  will  than  when  she  rebelled 
against  me." 

Ver.  15. — And  I  will  give  her  her  vine- 
yards from  thence,  and  the  valley  of  Achor 
for  a  door  of  hope :  and  she  shall  sing  there, 
as  in  the  days  of  her  youth,  and  as  in  the 
day  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  laud  of 
SgTPt'  Tlie  consolations  of  God  are  not 
confined  to  words ;  they  comprise  works  as 
well  as  words.  Friendly  doings  as  well  as 
sayings  are  embraced  in  the  Divine  good- 
ness, and  manifest  the  Divine  mercy.  On 
emerging  from  the  wilderness,  fruitful  vine- 
yards, such  as  Bibmah,  Heshbon,  and  Elea- 
leh,  east  of  Jordan,  and  fertile  valleys,  like 
that  of  Achor  near  Jericho,  to  the  west  of 
Jordan,  as  soon  as  they  have  crossed  the 
river,  shall  be  given  them.  These  vine- 
yards and  valleys  would  thus  be  the  first 
iustalmenta  of  God's  promise,  and  a  prelude 


to  the  possession  of  the  whole,  so  that  the 
door  of  hopeful  expectation  and  of  joyful 
anticipation  would  be  thrown  wide  open  to 
them.  The' verb  nip  has  three  meanings — 
"humble  one's  self,"  "answer,"  "sing." 
Hence  the  LXX.  and  older  interpreters 
adopt  TawfivuSiia-eTat :  Calvin,  "  responde- 
bit;"  and  Aben  Ezra  and  Kiinchi,  "she 
shall  sing  and  play."  The  last  deserves 
the  preference.  No  wonder  if,  under  such 
circumstances,  Israel  responded  with  songs 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  as  in  that  early 
day  of  the  nation's  youth,  when,  coming  up 
out  of  Egypt,  they  sang  the  song  of  Moses 
by  the  Bed  Sea's  margin,  while  Miriam 
and  the  maiilens  of  Israel  in  full  chorus 
completed  the  harmony.  Now,  all  these 
experiences  of  the  past  were  to  repeat  them- 
selves in  the  future  history  of  Israel.  Their 
past  captivity  or  dispersion  was  obviously 
implied  in  this  promised  deliverance  and 
God's  gracious  dealings  with  them  in  the 
future.  There  is  a  different  explanation 
of  one  expression  in  this  verse,  which  de- 
serves careful  consideration — an  explanation 
which  turns  on  what  once  transpired  in 
that  valley,  and  the  meaning  of  the  name  of 
it,  troubling,  derived  from  that  transaction ; 
we  refer,  of  course,  to  the  affair  of  Achan. 
The  punishment  of  the  transgressor  in  that 
case,  and  the  putting  away  of  sin  in  con- 
nection with  penitence  and  prayer,  reopened, 
after  defeat,  the  door  of  hope,  and  restored 
the  enjoyment  of  Divine  help.  The  dis- 
comfiture tliat  so  troubled  the  host  of  Israel 
was  immediately  followed  by  the  victory  at 
Ai,  which  inspired  them  with  the  hope  of 
soon  possessing  the  whole  land.  So  with 
Israel  after  the  captivity — a  dreary  niyht 
of  weeping  was  followed  by  a  bright  and 
blessed  morning.  So,  too,  in  time  to  come, 
when,  after  a  long  and  sorrowful  expecta- 
tion, Israel  shall  return  from  the  lands  of 
their  exile  to  their  fatherland,  or  by  faith 
and  repentance  to  the  paternal  God,  the 
light  of  better  and  more  hopeful  days  shall 
dawn  upon  them.  To  the  ilea  of  troubling 
Kimchi  attaches  the  notion  of  purification, 
quoting  with  approval  Eashi  and  Aben  Ezra 
to  the  same  purpose.  His  comment  is: 
"Because  at  the  beginning,  when  they 
went  Into  the  land  in  the  days  of  Joshua, 
this  misadventure  befell  them,  namely,  the 
matter  of  Achan,  he  gave  them  cojifidence 
that  they  should  not  fear  when  they  as- 
sembled in  the  land,  and  that  no  misadven- 
ture would  occur  to  them,  as  they  would 
all  be  refined  and  purified  because,  in  the 
wilderness  of  the  peoples,  they  would  be 
purified.  And  that  valley  of  Achor  shall 
no  more  be  called  so,  for  its  name  is  for 
depreciation;  but  a  name  of  honour  shall 
be  given  to  it,  and  it  is  a  door  of  hope. 
And  inasmuch  as  be  says  'door,'  and  not 


CH.  n.  1—23.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


a 


'  valley,'  as  it  should  be,  H  \b  because  it  shall 
be  to  them  as  a  door,  since  from  there  they 
shall  enter  into  the  land  as  they  did  at  the 
first,  and  it  shall  be  to  them  hope  and  the 
aim  of  what  is  good ;  consequently  they  call 
it  the  door  of  hope.  And  the  sage  Kabbi 
Abraham  explains  the  valley  of  Achor  to  be 
the  valley  of  Jezreel,  viz.  '  because  I  [Jeho- 
vah] troubled  her  there,  it  will  turn  to  a  door 
of  hope.'  And  R.  S.  I.  (Eaahi)  of  blessed 
memory  explains  it  as  the  depth  of  the 
exile,  where  they  were  troubled ;  so  '  I  will 
give  her  a  door  of  hope,  the  beginning  of 
hope,  that  out  of  the  midst  of  those  troubles 
I  will  give  her  a  heart  to  return  to  me.' " 
To  the  same  purpose  he  quotes  a  brief  com- 
ment of  Saadiii  Gaon,  ais,  cognate  with 
Arabic  karma,  to .  be  noble,  equivalent  to 
"  the  more  fruitful  and  productive."  The 
word  mishsham  is,  according  to  some,  (1)  an 
expression  of  time,  equivalent  to  "  from  the 
time  of  their  departure  from  the  desert," — 
so  Keil ;  others  explain  it  as  (2)  "  thereout," 
t.e.  "  I  will  make  their  vineyards  out  of  it," 
— 80  Simson  ;  and  others,  again,  explain  it 
"  from  there  or  thence."  It  is  taken  in  the 
last-mentioned  sense  by  Kimohi,  as  follows : 
"  From  the  wilderness  I  will  give  the  whole 
land,  which  she  formerly  possLSsed,  as  if  he 
said,  '  I  will  constitute  her  there  in  the 
wilderness  to  do  good  to  her  in  her  land,' 
because  that  in  the  wilderness  of  the  peoples 
he  will  purify  them  and  consume  the  re- 
bellious and  the  transgressors,  so  that  the 
remainder  shall  fear  (or  flock  reverently  to 
him).  Consequently  they  shall  need  con- 
solations, and  he  shall  speak  to  their  heart. 
Because  God — blessed  be  he  I — shall  give 
them  their  land  as  at  the  first;  therefore 
he  says,  '  And  I  will  speak  to  their  heart.' 
And  although  we  have  explained  that  the 
consolations  shall  spring  out  of  the  distress 
which  they  endured  in  exile,  yet  will  the 
whole  be  as  well  for  tlie  one  (viz.  the  con- 
solation) as  for  the  other  (the  trouble)."  It 
is  aptly  remarked  by  Abun  Ezra,  in  relation 
to  the  vineyards,  that  "  the  words  form  a 
contrast  to  the  dtiier  words  of  the  prophet, 
'  And  I  will  destroy  their  vine ; '  "  likewise 
Kirachi  asking,  "  And  why  has  the  prophet 
only  mentioned  their  vineyards  (i.e.  when 
purposing  to  give  tliem  the  whole  land)? 
iiecause  he  had  mentioned  in  their  punish- 
ment, '  I  wiil  destroy  her  vines,'  he  mentions 
in  the  promifod  consolation  her  vineyards." 
Vers.  16, 17. — In  these  verses  a  renewal  of 
God's  covenant  with  Israel,  under  the  figure 
of  a  marriage  contract,  is  predicted.  The 
name  by  which  Israel  shall  address  her 
beloved  shall  be  henceforth  IsM,  not  Baali ; 
that  is,  a  term  of  tender  affection,  not  of  stern 
authority.  (1)  The  title  of  "  My  Husband  " 
will  take  the  place  of  "  My  Lord."  Some 
suppose  that  the  latter  title  was  the  idol's 

HOSEA. 


name,  which,  in  the  lips  of  Israel,  had  super- 
seded that  of  the  true  God, the  meaning  being 
(2)  "Thou  wilt  no  more  call  to  me.  My  Baal." 
Nay,  the  names  of  Baals  shall  become  so 
abhorrent  to  their  better  feelings,  as  well  aa 
hateful  to  Jehovah,  that  they  shall  pass  away 
at  once  from  their  mouth  and  from  their 
memory,  never  more  to  be  mentioned  and 
never  more  to  be  remembered.  Eashi's  cx)m- 
ment  favours  (1);  thus:  "  Ye  shall  serve  me 
out  of  love,  and  not  out  of  fear ;  ishi  denoting 
marriage  and  youthful  love ;  haali,  lordship 
and  fear." 

Ver.  18. — A  state  of  tranquillity  was  to 
follow,  a  sort  of  golden  age  was  to  ensue. 
With  both  the  rational  and  irrational  crea- 
tion they  would  be  at  peace,  enjoying  security 
from  the  one  and  safety  from  the  other. 
Peace  would  be  established  with  the  hostile 
forces  of  the  outer  world,  and  peace  at  the 
same  time  national  and  political.  With  the 
beasts  of  the  field — viz.  the  wild  beasts,  as 
contrasted  with  h'hemdh,  tame  animals — and 
with  the  fowls  of  heaven — i.e.  birds  of  prey, 
destructive  of  the  fruits  of  the  field  — 
and  with  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground, 
detrimental  to  the  products  of  the  earth, 
they  would  be  in  league ;  while  weapons  of 
war  would  be  devoted  to  destruction,  the 
bow  and  the  sword  and  the  battle  being 
broken,  and  not  only  so,  but  banished  out  of 
the  earth,  so  that  Israel,  free  from  the  alarm 
of  a  night  attack,  and  protected  by  night  as 
well  as  by  day,  would  be  made  to  lie  down 
safely.  MUchamah  is  constructed  with  eshbor 
by  zeugma ;  or  it  includes,  as  Kimchi  ex- 
plains it,  "  all  the  implements  of  war  except 
the  bow  and  sword,  which  he  has  already 
mentioned." 

Vers.  19,  20. — Much  as  was  included  in 
these  promises,  more  and  better  was  to  follow. 
The  divorced  wife  was  to  be  tal^en  back; 
the  marriage  contract,  which  her  shameful 
adultery  had  vitiated,  was  to  be  renewed, 
and  past  offences  condoned.  This  certainly 
eviilenced  extraordinary  forbearance  and 
affei'.tion.  But  it  was  not  all.  A  new  and 
higher  relationship  was  tc  be  entered  on ; 
so  entirely  bad  Grod  fcigiven  and  forgotten, 
if  we  may  so  say,  all  the  multiplied  and 
aggravated  transgressions  of  Israel  against 
him,  that  that  people  is  not  to  be  received 
back  as  a  repudiated  wife,  but  to  be  hence- 
forth regarded  and  treated  as  a  chaste  virgin, 
and  in  that  capacity  betrothed  unto  the  Lord. 
And  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  is  tlie  gra- 
cious promise  thrice  repeated,  and  OEich  time 
with  an  additional  element  of  mercy  ;  nor  is 
this  betrothal  of  a  temporary  character  and 
of  sliort  continuance,  like  the  previous  mar- 
riage compact  which  the  wife's  guilt  a  short 
time  had  rendered  null  and  void.  It  is  a 
durable  betrothal,  lasting  for  ever.  Next  to 
the  time  during  which  this  betrothal  shall 


50 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  n.  1—23. 


continue  is  tlie  manner  in  which  it  is  efiected, 
or  rather,  the  basis  on  which  it  is  estab- 
lished. Justice  and  judgment  present 
righteousness  under  two  aspects — subjective 
and  objective.  Tsedeq,  equivalent  to  tt'da- 
qdh,  being  right,  is  subjective  righteous- 
ness and  an  attribute  of  God.  Mishpat, 
equivalent  to  objective  right,  either  as  exe- 
cuting judgment  or  as  existing  in  fact 
Some  attribute  these  characteristics  to  God 
and  some  to  Israel,  while  others  to  both. 
Bashi  and  Kimchi  understand  both  words 
tsedeq  and  mishpat,  subjectively  and  in  re- 
lation to  the  Israelites.  The  former :  "  In 
righteousness  and  judgment  wherein  ye  shall 
walk ; "  the  latter :  "  In  righteousness  which 
the  Israelites  shall  practise."  WUnsehe  and 
Hengstenberg  undejstand  the  righteousness 
and  judgment  of  God's  doing  justice  and 
faithfully  fulfilling  his  covenant  obligations 
to  Israel,  The  latter  has  well  remarked  in 
relation  to  mishpat  when  distinguishing  it 
from  tiedeq,  that  a  man  may  render  what  is 
right  to  persons  and  yet  not  be  righteous ; 
that  is,  there  may  be  objective  apart  from 
subjective  righteousness.  Keil  attributes 
the  attributes  in  question,  not  only  to  God 
fulfilling  his  covenant  engagements  to  his 
people,  but  purifying  them  through  just 
judgment,  and  thus  providing  for  their 
righteousness.  That  God  possesses  these  is 
undeniable,  but  it  is  equally  obvious  that  he 
bestows  righteousness  on  his  people  both  by 
imputation  and  impartation;  he  also  executes 
righteousness  in  their  case,  purifying  them 
by  salutary  chastisement,  his  object  being, 
not  only  to  cleanse,  but  to  keep  clean.  And 
yet  such  is  the  frailty  of  man's  fallen  nature, 
and  so  many  are  the  faults  and  the  failings 
to  which  he  is  liable,  that  loving-kindness 
(God's  condescending  love,che$ed,  equivalent 
to  iydvii)  and  mercies  (inmost  compassion 
on  man's  weakness,  racliamim,  trwhixyya)  on 
God's  part  must  be  added  to  righteousness 
and  judgment  in  order  to  secure  the  stability 
of  those  whom  he  takes  into  covenant,  and 
the  continuance  of  the  contract  Nay;  for 
the  attainment  of  the  desired  end  still  more 
is  re(juisite,  for,  after  all  his  bestowments  and 
all  his  disci[iline,  and  in  addition  to  all  his 
favour  and  forbearance,  his  faithfulness  (un- 
wavering steadfastness,  entunoA,  correspond- 
ing as  the  reverse  side  to  and  securing  the 
I'olam)  is  indispensable  to  Israel's  persever- 
ance; and  thus,  notwithstanding  Israel's 
failures,  Jehovah's  faithfulness  guarantees 
ultimate  and  lasting  success.  The  special 
quality  on  Israel's  side  is  true  knowledge  of 
CJod. 
-Yen.  21—23. — The  eighteenth  verse  pic- 


tures a  scene  of  peace  for  Israel's  fntnre;  the 
verses  following  warrant  the  expectation  of 
its  perpetuity ,  owi  n  g  to  the  higher  and  holier 
relationship ;  the  verses  before  us  are  a  vivid 
description  of  unlimited  prosperity.  The 
corn  and  wine  and  oil  appeal,  by  a  graiihio 
personification,  to  mother  earth ;  earth  ap- 
peals to  the  over-canopying  heavens;  and 
the  heavens  appeal  to  him  whose  throne  is 
in  the  heavens,  but  whom  the  heavens  and 
heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain.  S<jon  the 
floating  cloud  is  seen  and  the  falling  rain  is 
heard ;  tlie  parched  earth  drinks  in  the  mois- 
ture ;  and  its  products,  being  nourished  and 
refreshed,  supply  to  the  utmost  the  wants 
and  wishes  of  Jezreel.  Kimchi  comments 
on  this  picture  as  follows :  "  He  says  that 
then,  in  the  season  of  sal  vation,  the  heavens 
shall  give  their  dew,  and  the  earth  shall  give 
her  increase.  And  he  says, '  I  will  hear  the 
heavens  which  were  shut  up  when  they  were 
in  the  land,  as  in  the  days  of  Ahab ;  on  their 
return  to  the  land  at  the  time  of  salvation 
they  shall  no  more  bo  shut.'  And  he  says, 
'  I  will  answer,'  as  if  the  heavens  asked  that 
they  might  give  rain  according  to  their 
manner,  and  I  will  answer ;  [as  if]  their  earth 
[asked]  that  they  [the  heavens]  might  give  rain 
after  their  manner,  even  showers  of  blessing. 
And  this  '  I  will  answer '  denotes  that  my 
favour  shall  be  on  them  [the  heavens].  '  And 
they  shall  answer  the  earth,'  as  if  the  earth 
asked  rain  and  longed  for  it.  '  And  the  earth 
shall  hear '  when  it  shall  give  its  increase, 
and  the  tree  of  the  field  shall  give  its  fruit. 
'  And  they  shall  hear  Jezreul,'  for  in  the  mul- 
tiplying of  good  things  the  eaters  thereof 
multiply,  for  the  steppes  shall  be  full  of  the 
sheep  of  Israel.  In  the  punishments  he 
called  the  name  of  Israel  Jezreel,  because 
they  were  scattered  among  the  nations.  In 
the  time  of  salvation  he  likewise  calls  them 
Jezreel,  because  they  were  sown  in  their 
land ;  accordingly,  he  says  afterwards, '  I  will 
sow  them  to  me  in  the  land.' "  Such  is  the 
prophet's  pictorial  representation  of  a  pros- 
perity including  food  in  abundance,  refresh- 
ment limited  by  moderation,  and  evenluxuries 
without  stint.  Old  things  are  passed  away ; 
sinful  things  have  ceased ;  there  is  a  com- 
plete reversal  of  the  sorrowful  circumstances 
into  which  sin  had  plunged  Israel.  God's 
scattering  has  now  become  God's  sowing. 
"  I  sow  her  "  is  the  remark  of  Aben  Ezra, 
"  that  they  may  multiply  and  be  fiuitful  as 
the  seed  of  the  earth."  The  unpitied  one 
has  found  mercy ;  the  rejected  one  is  received 
with  rejoicing.  I  will  say  to  them  which 
were  not  my  people,  Thou  art  my  peopl»; 
and  they  shall  say,  Thou  art  my  God." 


OH.  u.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  51 


HOMILETI08. 

Ven.  2 — 5. — The  prophet  exhibiit  the  c/ross  sin  of  idolatry.  The  prophet  in  this 
Bectiou  exposes  the  shame  as  well  as  sin  of  idolatry.  It  is  a  mistaken  notion  to 
suppose,  with  some,  that  the  tribe  of  Judah  is  here  urged  to  plead  with  the  tribes  of 
Israel ;  for  Israel  cannot,  with  any  propriety  of  speech  or  figure,  be  8])oken  of  as  the 
mother  in  this  case,  however  possibly  they  may  be  addressed  as  brethren  and  sisters. 
The  Church  or  nation  is  the  mother,  and  the  individual  members,  as  nursed  and  brought 
up  by  her,  are  the  children.  The  doctrines  symbolized  in  the  preceding  chapter  are 
here  more  fully  developed  and  plainly  set  forth. 

L  Pleadino  commanded.  The  explanation  which  Calvin  gives  of  the  first  clause 
of  this  second  verse  is  ingenious,  yet  we  must  regard  it  as  rather  specious  than  sound. 
Instead  of  "  plead,"  he  employs  the  word  "  contend ; "  and  interprets  the  contention  to 
imply  that  Israel,  instead  of  censuring  the  seeming  severity  of  God's  dealings  with 
them,  should  rather  condemn  their  mother's  sin  as  the  guilty  cause  of  that  severity, 
and  thus  cast  the  blame  of  their  sufferings,  not  on  God,  as  though  he  had  falsified  his 
covenant,  but  upon  their  mother,  the  Israelitish  Church  or  kingdom,  that  had  fallen 
away  and  fallen  far  from  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  the  covenant.  After  referring  to 
the  mark  of  disgrace  fixed  on  the  children  born  by  a  marrifige  with  a  wife  who  has 
been  repudiated  by  her  husband,  he  says,  "  When  a  husband  repudiates  his  wife 
through  waywardness,  the  children  justly  regard  him  with  hatred.  Why  ?  'Bi  cause 
he  loved  not  our  mother  as  he  ought  to  have  done;  he  lias  not  honoured  the  bond  of 
marriage.'  It  is,  therefore,  usually  the  case  that  the  children's  affections  are  alienated 
from  their  father,  when  he  treats  their  mother  with  too  little  humanity  or  entire  con- 
tempt. So  the  Israelites,  when  they  saw  themselves  rejected,  wished  to  throw  the 
blame  on  God.  For  by  the  name  mother  are  the  people  here  called ;  it  is  transferred 
to  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  or  the  race  of  Abraham.  God  had  espoused  that 
people  to  himself,  and  wished  them  to  be  like  a  wife  to  him.  Since,  then,  God  was  a 
Husband  to  the  people,  the  Israelites  were  as  sons  born  by  that  marriage.  But  when 
they  were  repudiated,  the  Israelites  said  that  God  dealt  cruelly  with  them,  for  he  had 
cast  them  away  for  no  fault.  The  prophet  now  undertakes  the  defence  of  God's  cause, 
and  speaks  also  in  his  person.  '  Contend,  contend'  he  says, ' with  your  mother  [your 
dispute  is  not  with  me].'  .  .  .  He  brings  this  charge  against  the  Israelites,  that  they 
had  been  repudiated  for  the  flagitious  conduct  of  their  mother,  and  had  ceased  to  be 
counted  the  children  of  God  .  .  .  the  blame  of  their  rejection  belonged  to  the  whole 
race  of  Abraham  (t.e.  the  mother);  but  no  blame  could  be  imputed  to  God."  We 
rather  understand  the  pleading  mentioned  as  that  which  the  pious  remnant  of  the 
nation,  who  had  still  kept  themselves  separate  from  idolatry  and  the  general  degeneracy, 
are  exhorted  to  address  to  their  mother,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  bulk  of  the  people  with 
the  heads  of  the  congregation  and  rulers  of  the  nation.  It  is  the  duty  of  believers  to 
plead  for  God  and  his  truth,  eveu  though  the  great  body  of  Church  or  nation  shonld  be 
opposed  to  them.  This  is  specially  the  case  in  times  of  spiritual  leanness,  and  in 
days  of  deep  declension  or  entire  apostasy.  Thus  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  pled  with 
the  people  of  the  Jews  in  their  days,  charging  their  rulers,  the  chief  priests  and  scribes 
and  Pharisees,  with  the  gravest  dereliction  of  duty.  Yet  there  must  be  tenderness  in 
this  pleading.  It  is  remarkable  that,  as  Jerome  remarks,  he  commands  "  the  sons 
.(children)  to  speak  not  at  all  to  the  wife  of  their  father  whom  she  forsook,  but  to  their 
mother  who  bare  them."  Neither  is  there,  on  the  other  hand,  any  impropriety  in  thns 
pleading  with  an  erring  parent,  for  wo  find  that  Jonathan  thus  pleaded  with  his  father, 
Saul,  on  behalf  of  David.  Humble  and  modest,  yet  firm  and  faithful  pleading,  is  not 
only  lawful,  but  dutiful  even  on  the  part  of  private  persons  against  national  corruptions 
or  public  profanations,  as  of  God's  Name,  or  Word,  or  day,  or  worship. 

11.  Penitence  enjoined.  Though  Israel  had  forfeited  her  right  to  the  name  or 
privilege  of  wife  since  she  had  so  grievously  fallen  away  from  faithfulness  and  affec- 
tion, and  though  God  disowned  the  relationship  as  she  had  virtually  dissolved  her 
marriage  union  by  her  unfaithfulness,  yet  she  had  not  actually  and  formally  received 
the  bill  of  divorce  putting  her  away ;  in  other  words,  her  outward  and  public  rejection. 
There  was  thus  still  left  space  for  repentance,  and  room  for  hope  in  case  of  repentance. 


53  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  u.  1—23. 

So  great  is  the  mercy  of  God,  that  if  she  lent  an  ear  to  tlie  pleadings  of  her  children 
orphaned  through  her  misconduct,  and  put  away  her  whoredoms  or  defilements  with 
many  lovers,  and  her  adulteries  or  departures  from  her  rightful  Husband  and  Lord,  she 
might  hope  for  restoration.  Thus  God  deals  with  sinners  in  general,  if  they  will  only 
hearken  to  the  aiimonitions  and  invitations  of  his  Word,  and  put  away  from  them  the 
objects,  one  or  many,  of  their  sinful  attachment,  which  withdraw  their  affection  from  him 
who  is  their  true  and  proper  Object.  There  is  a  practical  comment  by  Matthew  Henry 
on  the  close  of  this  verse  which  appears  to  us  well  worth  quoting.  He  says, "  Every 
sinful  course  persisted  in  is  an  adulterous  departure  from  God ;  and  here  we  may  see 
what  it  is  truly  to  repent  of  it  and  turn  from  it.  (1)  True  penitents  will  forsake 
both  open  sins  and  secret  sins ;  will  put  away,  not  only  the  whoredoms  that  lie  m 
sight,  but  those  that  lie  in  secret  between  their  breasts — the  sin  that  is  rolled  under 
the  tongue  as  a  sweet  morsel.  (2)  They  will  both  avoid  the  outward  occasions  of  sin 
and  mortify  the  inward  disposition  to  it." 

III.  Pdnishmbnt  threatened.  The  punishment  threatened  in  case  of  impenitence 
consists  of  several  particulars.  1.  There  is  destitution  of  the  extremest  kind.  Israel 
.would  be  stripped  of  all  the  favours,  temporal  and  spiritual,  which  God  had  bestowed, 

and  be  so  situated  that  she  could  not  help  herself.  The  idea  is  more  fully  developed  by 
Ezekiel,  who  in  ch.  xvi.  presents  us  with  a  most  piliable  picture — that  of  an  infant 
exposed,  neglected,  nude,  and  helpless :  "  As  for  thy  nativity,  in  the  day  thou  wast 
born  thy  navel  was  not  cut,  neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water  to  supple  thee ;  thou 
was  not  salted  at  all,  nor  swaddled  at  all.  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to  do  any  of  these 
unto  thee ;  but  thou  wast  cast  out  in  the  open  Hold,  to  the  loathing  of  thy  person,  in 
the  day  that  thou  wast  born."  2.  Next  to  destitution  ii  desolation.  In  this  particular 
the  representation  is  that  of  a  wilderness  and  a  dry  land,  or  rather  of  a  traveller  in 
such  a  district.  The  nature  of  the  wilderness  or  of  the  way  through  it  is  easily 
inferred  from  other  Scriptures ;  thus  we  read  of  Israel's  departure  from  Horeb :  "  We 
went  throu;^h  all  that  great  and  terrible  wiliieruess ;  "  again  it  is  written,  "  He  found 
him  in  a  desert  land,  and  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness."  A  traveller,  in  journeying 
through  that  waste  and  howling  and  terrible  wilderness,  would  meet  with  many  a 
rough  road,  many  a  ruga;ed  way,  many  a  rocky  ascent,  many  an  uncultivated  waste, 
many  a  harsh  sound,  many  a  scaresome  sight,  many  a  tangled  spot,  many  a  thorny 
place,  many  a  toil,  and  many  a  trial.  Travellers  passing  through  such  a  scene  of 
desolation  are  said  to  wander  "  in  the  wilderness  in  a  solitary  way."  3.  The  dangers 
of  the  wilderness  are  manifold.  There  is  the  place  of  lions'  dens,  and  of  the  mountains 
of  the  leojards.  There,  too,  the  Israelites  of  old  encountered  the  fiery  serpents  that 
infested  it.  For  a  time  they  had  been  restrained,  but  afterwards  they  were  uncon- 
trolled, and  even  commissioned  to  chastise  the  erring  Israelites.  4.  Death  itself  is 
included  in  the  threatened  punishment :  "  And  slay  her  witti  thirst."  There  is  no 
water  to  cleanse,  no  thirst-satisfying  fountain,  no  life-giving  spring.  Of  waylarers  in 
such  a  region  it  is  written, "  They  were  hurjgry  and  thirsty ;  their  soul  fainted  in  them." 

IV.  POSTERII'T  INVOLVED  IN  THE  THKEATBNED  PUNISHMENT.    The  n petition  of  "  lest " 

at  the  beginning  of  ver.  4  is  needed  to  make  the  meaning  plain  and  carry  on  the  con- 
nection. Particular  members  of  a  Church  or  nation  too  oiten  share  the  sins  of  the 
general  body  or  rulers  of  the  people;  so  too  children,  frequently  following  in  the  foot- 
steps of  godless  jiarents,  suffer  by  the  sad  heritage  of  those  parents'  guilt ;  for  God 
"visits  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of 
them  that  hate  him."  It  has  been  well  said  that  "  God  visits  the  sins  of  the  parents 
upon  the  children  until  the  entailed  curse  be  cut  off  by  repentance." 

V.  Persistence  in  bin.  The  harlotry  and  shameful  conduct  of  the  libidinous 
woman,  who  represents  Israel  in  this  passa:^e,  evidence  the  greatest  perversity.  In 
spite  of  warnings  and  threatenings,  in  spite  of  entreaties  and  exhortations,  and  in  spite 
of  inducenients  and  invitations,  Israel  persists  in  her  iniquitous  idolatry  and  perseveres 
in  her  shameless  conduct.  Like  an  abandoned  woman,  who  has  renounced  all  the 
instinctive  modesty  of  womanhood,  and  who,  instead  of  waiting  for  the  addresses  of 
paramours,  actually  takes  the  initiative,  and  pursues  them  with  her  unwomanly  appeals 
Israel  goes  after  her  lovers,  that  is,  her  idols,  or,  as  some  think,  her  idolatrous  allies! 
We  may  not,  however,  overlook  the  fact  that,  besides  the  gross  idolatry  of  Israel,  there  is 
a  spiritual  idolatry,  to  which  all  are  exposed,  and  to  which  many  are  addicted.    Any- 


OH.  iL  1—23.]  THE  BOOK   OF  HOSEA.. 


thing  tliat  draws  away  our  thoughts  and  affections  from  God,  or  that  occnpiis  that 
place  in  our  heart  that  belongs  to  him,  is  an  idol — not  so  rude  as  the  image  of  wood,  or 
stone,  or  metal,  but  not  less  perilous,  not  less  pernicious,  not  less  insidious.  Let  ua 
beware  of  following  such  lovers ;  let  us  beware  of  spiritual  harlotry,  and  of  shamefully 
pursuing  wealth,  or  lame,  or  power,  or  pleasure,  and  of  turning  aside  from  God  I 

VI.  PfiosPERiTY  REGARDED  AS  THE  BE8T0WMBNT  OF  IDOLS.  Israel  in  time  of  plenty 
forgot  the  important  lesson  that  her  prosperity  came  from  God.  Her  sottish  stupidity 
was  only  equalled  by  her  ingratitude,  when  she  attributed  all  she  had  to  those  miser- 
able idols  on  which  her  heart  wtis  fixed,  and  of  which  she  showed  herself  so  dotingly 
fond.  Put  by  Jehovah  into  the  possession  of  such  a  lifesome  land,  of  fuod  in  abun- 
dance, of  raiment — garments  inner  and  outer — and  of  the  luxuries  as  well  as  the 
comforts  of  life,  she  forgot — basely  forgot — that  she  continued  a  pensioner  on  his 
providence  and  lilessed  by  his  bounties.  Bad  enough  and  base  enough  as  such  ingra- 
titude was,  it  was  still  worse  to  transfer  her  love  and  her  gratitude  to  idols  dumb  such 
as  blinded  nations  fear.  How  unspeakably  mean  it  was  for  Israel  to  form  such  a  low 
estimate  of  religion  as  to  value  it  according  to  the  worldly  advantages  to  be  derived 
from  it,  or  in  proportion  to  the  selfish  interests  served  by  it !  How  much  worse  still 
to  depend  on  idols  fur  such  advantages,  and  in  hope  of  furthering  those  interests  I 

Vers.  6 — 13. — The  pains  and  penalties  that  are  attached  to  sin.  In  the  Book  of  Judges 
it  is  stated  once  and  a.;ain  that,  when  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  he  delivered  them  into  the  liand  of  their  enemies.  "  They  forsook  the  Lord,  and 
served  Baal  and  Ashtaroth.  And  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  hot  against  Israel,  and  he 
delivered  them  into  the  hands  of  the  spoilers  that  spoiled  them ; "  "  The  children  of 
Israel  again  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  ,  .  .  And  the  Lord  sold  them  into  the 
hand  of  Jabin  King  of  Canaan ; "  "  And  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord  :  and  the  Lord  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of  Midian." 

I.  Tub  difficulties  placed  in  their  way.  First  there  is  a  hedge,  which  no  one 
can  crush  through  without  risk  of  painful  lacerations.  God  frequently  draws  round 
sinful  pleasures,  as  a  fence,  severe  sufferings  to  warn  men  against  their  indulgence. 
But  when  all  restraints  are  cast  aside,  and  men  will  force  their  way  through  all  such 
fences,  there  is  another  mode  of  Divine  operation  which  opposes  an  insurmountable 
barrier  to  men's  lusts.  If  a  hedge  may  be  broken  through,  a  wall  cannot ;  if  a  hedge 
fail  to  check  men  in  their  onward  career  of  sin,  a  wall  will  effect  the  purpose.  11 
thorns  in  the  flesh  do  not  deter  men  from  sinful  gratifications,  a  wall  is  raised  up  that 
cannot  be  passed  over,  when,  through  failure  of  bodily  strength,  the  crippling  o( 
worldly  resources,  the  removal  of  opportunity  or  occasion,  or  otherwise,  those  gratifi- 
cations become  impossible.  The  sorrows  which  Israel  suffered  by  their  iilols  and 
idolatrous  alliances  were  only  the  hedge,  and  served  merely  for  a  partial  and  passable 
fence  ;  the  wall  was  a  complete  separation  between  them  and  their  sins. 

II.  The  defeat  of  her  designs.  The  most  vigorous  pursuit  fails,  the  most  minute 
search  is  frustrated.  For  years  and  centuries  the  Hebrew  race  has  had  their  eyes 
directed  to  a  temporal  Messiah,  who  would  lead  the  armies  of  his  people,  fi;;ht  theii 
battles,  triumph  over  all  enemies,  and  raise  them  to  the  highest  pinnacle  of  human 
greatness,  and  their  nation  to  a  proud  pre-eminence  amung  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
We  kniiw  the  result.  God  has  hedged  up  their  way  and  walled  up  their  path.  So, 
too,  with  sinners  in  general.  God  often  seeks  by  cross  providences  to  withdraw  man 
from  his  purpose.  He  places  thorns  and  snares  in  the  way  of  the  froward,  making  the 
way  of  sin  diflicult,  sometimes  impossible,  so  that  they  follow  after  their  beloved  lusts 
but  do  not  overtake  them,  and  seek  them  but  cannot  find  them.  How  different  with 
the  search  after  gospel  grace  1  It  is  "ask,  and  ye  shall  receive;  seek,  and  ye  shall 
find." 

III.  The  determination  at  length  arrived  at.  The  disappointments  which 
Israel  meets  with  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  sin  and  its  sorrows.  Having  long  and 
eagerly  sought  satisfaction  in  the  pursuits  of  the  wojld  and  in  the  pleasures  of  sense, 
they  are  forced  at  last  to  acknowledge  their  mistake.  Such  things  do  not  and  cannol 
satisfy ;  they  are  husks  that  starve  but  do  not  support  a  hun^jry  soul ;  their  idols 
cannot  succour  them  in  the  time  of  need.  They  recall  the  early  history  of  their 
nation,  and,  contrasting  the  past  with  the  present,  are  convinced  of  the  better  days  that 


64  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  n.  1—23. 


had  long  gone  by.  They  thought  of  the  time  when  Jehovah  was  the  God  of  Israel, 
sitting  between  the  cherubim,  and  when  the  prosperity  of  the  people  had  kept  pace 
with  their  piety.  How  different  now!  How  different  ever  after  Jeroboam  seduced 
them  to  the  idolatry  of  the  calves,  or  Ahab  indoctrinated  them  in  the  heathenish  rites 
of  the  dual  deities  of  Phctnicia!  The  retrospect  persuaded  them  of  their  sad  mistake 
in  departing  from  their  true  Husband  and  Head.  Finding  themselves  hardly  bestead, 
their  condition  desperate,  and  their  hopes  blighted,  they  determine  to  retrace  their 
steps,  and  with  sentiments  and  language  closely  akin  to  the  prodigal  in  our  Lord's 
parable,  they  set  about  the  accomplishment  of  their  purpose. 

IV.  The  sad  mistake  of  Israel.  In  the  time  of  their  plenty  and  prosperity  they 
mistook  tlie  source  of  their  blessings,  as  also  the  right  use  of  them.  They  attributed 
them  to  their  idols,  and  abused  them  in  their  service.  Worldly  prosperity  was  what 
Israel,  in  the  period  of  degeneracy,  most  cared  for.  What  contributed  to  bodily  grati- 
fication, luxurious  living,  and  worldly  wealth,  was  most  esteemed  by  them.  These 
they  counted  blessings,  and  regarded  as  the  bestowments  of  their  idols.  Just  as  in 
Jeremiah's  time  their  brethren,  or  rather  sisters,  of  Judah  clung  obstinately  and 
stupidly  to  the  evil  and  error  of  their  ways,  saying,  "  We  will  certainly  do  whatsoever 
thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our  own  mouth,  to  burn  incense  unto  the  queen  of  heaven,  and 
to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her,  as  we  have  done,  we,  and  our  fathers,  our  kings,  and 
our  princes,  in  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  :  for  then  had  we 
plenty  of  victuals,  and  were  well,  and  saw  no  evil.  But  since  we  left  off  to  burn 
incense  to  the  queen  of  heaven,  and  to  pour  out  drink  offerings  unto  her,  we  have 
wanted  all  things,  and  have  been  consumed  by  the  sword  and  by  the  famine."  What- 
ever excuse  the  heathen  may  have  had  when  they  spoke  of  their  corn  as  coming  from 
Ceres,  and  their  wine  as  the  gift  of  Bacchus,  and  their  wealth  as  bestowed  by  Plutus, 
Israel  had  none ;  for  they  had  early  been  instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  the  one  living 
and  true  God,  and  early  as  well  as  impressively  reminded  that  the  good  land,  which 
yielded  the  corn  and  on  which  the  vine  and  olive  grew,  was  God's  gift ;  and  that  it 
was  God,  moreover,  who  gave  them  power  to  get  wealth,  so  that  however  plentiful  the 
silver  and  abundant  the  gold,  they  owed  all  to  him.  Worst  ot  all,'  they  not  only 
mistook  the  Author  of  these  mercies,  but  perverted  them  to  the  service  of  a  rival  deity, 
thus  provoking  Jehovah  to  jealousy  with  that  which  was  not  God,  but  the  miserable 
idol  of  Sidon,  Tyre,  and  Phoenice. 

V.  Sevbek  ohastisbmbnt  was  the  consequence.  This  was  to  be  expected. 
Created  things  are  given  to  man  for  his  service,  and  man  himself  was  created  for  God's 
service ;  but  when  man  perverts  the  creatures  which  God  has  given  him,  and,  instead 
of  serving  and  glorifying  God  by  means  of  them,  actually  employs  them  in  ways  and 
for  purposes  derogatory  to  the  Divine  glory,  no  wonder  the  Almighty,  in  just  indignation, 
should  snatch  them  from  him  who  so  misuses  and  abuses  them.  As  in  ver.  8  the 
addition  of  the  personal  pronoun  to  the  verb  gives  emphasis,  so  in  ver.  9  the  repetition 
of  the  possessive  pronoun  with  the  nouns  serves  the  same  end.  "  She  did  not  know, 
not  she,  that  I  even  I  it  was  that  gave  her  com  and  wine  and  oil,  .  .  .  therefore  I  will 
take  away  my  corn,  my  wine,  my  wool,  and  my  flax."  God  requires  two  things  at 
least  in  return  for  his  mercies :  (1)  that  we  gratefully  acknowledge  the  Giver  in  the 
gifts;  and  (2)  that  we  employ  them  in  his  service  or  to  his  glory.  Men  praise  the 
fruitful  earth,  but  it  is  God  that  makes  the  earth  firuitful ;  men  talk  learnedly  of  the 
laws  of  nature,  but  it  is  God  that  invests  nature  with  those  functions,  or  arranges 
those  natural  sequences  called  laws ;  men  boast  of  good  fortune,  but  such  fortune  is 
only  the  bounteous  providence  of  God.  Whether,  then,  it  is  articles  of  food,  or 
materials  of  raiment,  or  the  precious  metals  which  represent  wealth  that  men  possess, 
it  is  God  that  either  gives  or  withholds  at  pleasure.  How  beautifully  this  lesson  is 
inculcated  in  that  precious  chapter,  the  eighth  of  Deuteronomy  1  "  When  thou  hast 
eaten  and  art  full,  then  thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  God  for  the  good  land  which  he 
hath  given  thee ; "  and  again,  beware  that  "  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  My  power  and  the 
might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth.  But  thou  shalt  remember  the  Lord 
thy  God:  for  it  is  he  that  giveth  thee  power  to  get  wealth."  Further,  the  question 
with  Israel,  as  with  the  heathen  both  then  and  now,  is,  "  What  shall  we  eat,  and 
what  shall  we  drink,  and  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed?"  whereas  the  question 
should  be,  "  How  shall  we  use  God's  gifts  to  God's  glory ;  so  that  whether  we  eat  or 


cH.n,l— 23.J  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  65 


drink,  or  whatorer  we  do,  we  may  glorify  God  ?  "  The  abuse  of  God's  mercies  abridges 
the  time  of  their  enjoyment ;  when  we  misuse  or  mismanage  our  stewardship,  he  turns 
us  out  of  ofiBce,  and  tells  us  we  may  be  no  longer  stewards ;  when  we  forget  the  Giver 
and  forsake  his  service,  we  forfeit  our  interest  in  his  gifts.  The  manner,  too,  of  their 
removal  adds  justly  merited  severity  to  the  stroke.  Just  as  the  time  of  reaping  arrives, 
the  harvest  becomes  a  heap ;  just  as  the  ship  reaches  the  port,  it  becomes  a  wreck  ; 
just  at  the  season  when  all  seems  sure  and  hopes  are  highest,  the  blight  descend*  and 
expectation  ends  in  bitterest  disappointment. 

VI.  Shame  agghavatbs  the  ohabtisbment.  A  sense  of  shame  is  sometimes  the 
most  painful  punishment ;  men  of  greatest  physical  courage  have  often  been  found 
devoid  of  sufficient  moral  courage  to  bear  up  agaiust  a  laugh  or  resist  a  sneer.  Besides, 
when  insult  is  added  to  injury,  the  indignity  is  complete.    When  Israel  prospered,  her 

'  folly  was  covered  and  her  sin  cloaked  ;  her  lewdness  was  long  concealed,  being  unseen, 
or  overlooked,  or  thouglit  lightly  of.  But  when  the  prosperity  is  withdrawn,  the 
covering  is  cast  aside  and  the  cloak  turn  off.  Outward  prosperity,  while  it  lasts,  is 
like  gilding  over  many  a  lewd  life,  or  like  veneering  over  a  loose  character.  But  when, 
in  the  providence  of  God,  the  day  of  adversity  comes,  the  inward  vileness  becomes 
transparent;  when  Israel  fell  from  her  prosperous  state,  her  corruption  was  made 
manifest,  even  in  the  sight  of  the  idols  she  loved,  and  whose  love-tokens  she  fancied 
herself  to  have  enjoyed,  or  of  the  idolatrous  nations  whose  alliance  she  courted,  or  of 
the  sun  and  moon  which  as  deities  she  worshipped ;  she  is  stripped  naked,  and  exposed 
to  shame,  contempt,  and  insult.  Nor  is  there  any  hope  of  remedy  or  prospect  of 
recovery.  It  has  been  well  remarked  that  "  those  who  will  not  deliver  themselves  into 
the  hand  of  God's  mercy,  cannot  be  delivered  out  of  the  hand  of  his  justice." 

VII.  Sorrow  follows  shame  in  the  dat  of  Israel's  distress.  Israel  continued 
to  keep  up  the  outward  ordinances  of  religion,  but  the  inward  essence  had  long 
departed;  there  was  the  semblance  of  worship,  but  the  reality  was  altogether  absent; 
there  was  a  form  of  godliness,  but  it  was  destitute  of  the  living  power.  Jeroboam  had 
made  the  worship  of  Jehovah  a  state  religion.  The  changes  he  introduced  were  with 
the  view  of  furthering  his  political  interests.  The  worship  he  established  was  a  sort  of 
rival  worship,  so  that  the  breach  between  the  ten  tribes  and  the  two  might  become 
wider  and  still  widening.  He  changed  the  manner  of  worship  by  the  introduction  of 
images  or  symbols,  so  that  Jehovah  was  worship^jed  under  the  form  of  a  calf,  as  though 
in  allusion  to  the  cherubim  over  the  mercy-seat ;  he  changed  the  place  of  worship  from 
its  central  seat  at  Jerusalem  to  Dan  in  the  north  and  Bethel  in  the  south ;  he  changed 
the  time  of  worship,  at  least  in  the  case  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  from  the  seventh 
month  to  the  eighth,  as  though  the  harvest  was  later  in  the  north  than  in  the  south ; 
he  changed  the  ministers  of  worship,  taking  the  priests  out  of  all  the  tribes  without 
distinction,  and  not  from  that  of  Levi,  which  had  resisted  his  innovations  and  refused 
to  sanction  his  godless  novelties.  But  notwithstanding  these  changes — and  important 
changes  they  were — he  retained  so  much  of  the  national  worship  as  suited  his  purpose, 
and  did  not  clash  with  his'  usurpation  or  tend  to  weaken  his  authority.  Israel  still 
had  the  weekly  sabbath,  memorial  of  creation  work  completed ;  and  the  month-sabbath, 
a  monthly  dedication  to  God.  They  had  the  three  yearly  festivals — the  pesocA,  with  the 
c?iag  ha-matzoth,  to  commemorate  the  deliverance  from  Egypt ;  the  chag  ha-sh'bi^oth, 
or  feast  of  weeks,  called  also  chag  ha-gatzir,  the  feast  of  harvest,  and  yom  ha-iiccurim, 
day  of  firstfruits ;  and  the  chag  ha-asiph,  the  feast  of  ingathering,  or  chag  ha-succoih, 
feast  of  tabernacles,  or  simply  chag,  the  feast  by  way  of  eminence,  the  completion  of 
the  ingathering  of  fruits  and  vintage,  and  commemoration  of  Israel  dwelling  in  tents 
in  the  wilderness;  they  had  all  the  other  solemn  feasts  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for 
special  proviilences  or  particular  blessings.  With  all  these  feasts  were  associated 
merry-makings,  especially  with  that  of  tabernacles  ;  but  now  God  takes  all  these  away. 
The  outward  joy  had  for  long  been  severed  from  that  inward  spiritual  joy  of  true 
religion ;  only  the  semblance  remained,  for  the  substance  was  gone.  And  now  shadow 
as  well  as  substance  is  to  pass  away.  God  in  judgment  turns  their  joy  Into  sorrow, 
their  mirth  into  melancholy.  "  Sin  and  mirth,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  can  never  hold 
long  together;  but  if  men  will  not  take  away  sin  from  their  mirth,  God  will  take 
away  mirth  from  their  sin." 

VIII.  KuiN  OF  THEIR  PROSPECTS  AS  WELL  AS  OF  THEIB  POSSESSIONS.    The  threatened 


M  TUE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [ch.  il  1—23. 

destruction  of  their  vines  and  fig  trees  affected,  not  only  their  present  and  actual  pos- 
sessions, but  also  their  future'  and  possible  prospects.  The  fruits  of  one  year,  or  even 
of  several,  might  fail ;  but  other  years  of  better  harvests  and  other  seasons  of  greater 
fruitfulness  might  repair  in  some  measure  the  loss.  The  destruction  here  threatened, 
however,  is  not  only  that  of  one  year's  fruits  or  of  one  season's  produce,  but  the  cutting 
off  of  all  future  hope.  It  is  not  only  the  destruction  of  the  fiuUs,  but  of  the  treet, 
and  BO  a  ruin  without  remedy.  Neither  is  it  a  partial  destruction — some  of  those  fruit- 
bearing  trees  being  still  spared — but  total ;  the  country  would  be  laid  waste,  the  fences 
would  be  broken  down,  the  enclosures  taken  away,  and  the  vineyards  left  as  a  common ; 
the  fig  trees  would  give  place  to  forest  trees,  and  wild  beasis  devour  and  dwell  amid  the 
ruins.  Yet  Israel  could  not  say  that  this  ruin  was  unmerited,  for  the  prophet  is  careful 
to  remind  them  how  foully  they  had  abused  thij  favours  of  God's  providence,  and 
scandalously  regarded  them  as  the  fruits  of  their  idolatry,  the  gifts  of  their  idols,  or 
the  hire  of  their  spiritual  adultery. 

IX.  KBTKimjTioN  coMMKNStJBATB  WITH  THEIR  WEONO-DOINO.  God's  chastisementB  in 
this,  as  often  in  other  cases,  bear  an  obvious  proportion  to  the  lieinousness  of  men's  sin  and 
the  time  of  its  continuance.  Like  wicked  men  and  seducers  in  general,  idolaters  wax 
worse  and  worse.  From  the  wrong  way  of  worshipping  God  under  the  images  of  the  calves 
according  to  their  own  devices,  they  had  proceeded  to  the  grosser  sin  of  setting  up  an  idol 
in  his  place.  This  idolatry  had  long  continued,  and  that  continuance  made  an  era  in 
iheir  history  here  named  tlie  days  of  Baalim.  1.  The  variety  of  this  iilolatry  is  specified. 
They  worshipped  Baal  under  divers  forms,  for  divers  purposes,  and  in  divers  places ; 
and  hence  the  plural,  Baalim.  2.  We  may  notice  the  devoutness  of  their  idolatry. 
The  burning  of  incense  prtceded  the  nioining  and  succeedfd  the  evening  sacrifice  of  a 
lamb  in  the  temple.  It  was  symb'ihcal  of  prayer  and  thanksgiving;  it  was,  in  fact, 
the  highest  and  holiest  ol  the  priest's  functions,  as  we  may  inter  from  Luke  i.  9.  3. 
Further,  the  preparation  and  pomp  of  this  service  to  which  Israel  prostituted  the 
wealth  she  possessed,  decking  herself,  adulteress-like,  with  her  ear-rings  and  her  jewels, 
and  lavishing  the  good  gifts  of  God's  providence  on  contemptible  and  filthy  idols.  4. 
Her  eagerness  for  idol-worship  is  as  noticeable  as  it  is  lamentable.  Unsought,  unsoli- 
cited, without  inducement  or  allurement,  she  takes  the  initiative,  and  with  unblushing 
importuniiy  makes  advances  to  her  lovers.  5.  The  blackest  sin  of  all,  and  in  some 
sort  the  source  of  all,  was  her  forget  fulness  of  God.  Alas  I  how  often  do  men  and 
women  abuse  the  best  gilts  of  God,  and  pervert  them  to  the  vilest  purposes  I  How 
often  are  they  far  more  zealous  in  a  wrong  course  than  in  the  right  1  How  often  do 
sinful  pursuits  engross  their  noblest  powers !  How  often  does  the  storm  of  evil  passion 
sweep  away  all  thoughts  of  God  out  of  their  mind  I  How  often,  amid  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  the  pride  of  life,  grovelling  avarice,  soaring  ambition,  and 
schemes  of  world liness,  do  men  forget  God  altogether;  or  at  least  how  often  do  they 
consecrate  to  self,  or  sensuality,  or  sin  in  some  of  its  countless  forms,  the  thoughts, 
aSeotions,  and  love  which  God  claims  as  jusily  his  duel  How  often,  too,  does  God 
visit  with  terrible  retribution  the  sins  of  such  I 

Vers.  14 — 23. — Sympathy  with  Israel  in  spite  of  their  sina.  The  lahen  which 
introduces  ver.  14  is  rendered  by  some  "  notwithstanding,"  and  this  is  what  we  might 
expect ;  but  it  is  opposed  by  linguistic  usage;.  We  must  adhere  to  the  ordinary  trans- 
lation, which  is  "  therefore."  'I'lie  word  thus  translated  tends  to  exalt  our  idea  of 
God's  goodness.  Israel  had  sinned  and  forgotten  God;  the  "therefore"  we  would 
expect,  and  the  inference  we  would  draw  is  God's  final  and  for-ever  abandonment  ol 
such  a  sinful,  God-forgetting  people.  Not  so,  however.  Israel  had  sinned  by  idolatry, 
and  sunk  into  a  depth  of  misery  from  which  they  were  utterly  unable  to  extricate 
themselves.  But  their  extrBaiity  is  God's  opportunity ;  their  misery  appeals  to  God's 
mercy;  and  what  man  could  not  do,  and  man  would  not  do  if  he  could,  God  does, 
lifting  Israel  up  out  of  the  pit  of  misery  into  which,  through  sin  and  forgetfulness  of 
God,  they  had  plunged.  Not  their  desert,  but  their  distress,  turned  the  eye  of  Divine 
compassion  upon  them.  "  His  ways  aie  not  as  our  ways,  neither  are  his  thoughts  as 
our  thoughts."  "  He  hath  not  dealt  with  us,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  after  our  sins ;  nor 
rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquities."  He  had  indeed  dealt  with  Israel  in  wrath, 
and  prepared  the  people  to  put  away  their  idols,  and  now,  to  prevent  them  giving  way 


cfi,n.l— 23.]  I'HE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  67 


to  despair,  he  deals  with  them  in  mercy.  1.  "  This  '  therefore '  has  a  strange  and 
wonderful '  wherefore '  if  we  dwell  on  what  precedes :  '  She  went  after  her  lovers,  and 
forgat  me,  saith  the  Lord.  Therefore,  heboid,  I  will  allure  her  : '  there  needs,  indeed,  a 
'  behold '  to  be  put  to  this  'therefore.' . . .  The  right  knowledge  of  the  fulness  and  riches 
of  the  grace  of  the  covenant  will  help  us  out  of  this  difficulty,  and  tell  us  how  these 
two,  the  greatness  of  man's  sin  and  the  riches  of  God's  grace,  may  have  a  connection 
one  with  another,  and  that  by  an  illative  'therefore.'"  2.  The  allurements  of  God 
are  (1)  those  manifestations  which  he  makes  of  himself  to  his  people,  when  he  displays 
to  them  the  beauty  of  his  holiness,  the  goodness  of  his  grace,  the  greatness  of  his 
mercy,  and  the  glory  of  his  power.  Again,  (2)  he  allures  men  when  he  draws  them  away 
from  the  specious  blandishments  and  subtle  snares  of  sin  and  Satan,  the  world,  and  the 
flesh.  He  counteracts  the  enticements  of  things  temporal,  and  turns  the  affections  to 
things  spiritual  and  eternal.  From  earthly  gain  he  allures  them  to  godliness,  which, 
with  contentment,  is  great  gain ;  from  the  pleasures  of  the  world  he  allures  them  to 
delight  themselves  in  God  and  in  the  things  of  God ;  from  all  sinful  pursuits  and 
from  all  unworthy  ambitions  he  allures  us  to  seek  our  satisfaction  in  himself,  and  to 
set  our  affections  on  things  above,  where  Jesus  sits  at  God's  right  hand.  3.  He  speaks 
comfortably  to  his  people,  literally,  to  their  heart.  Man  can  only  speak  to  the  ear, 
God  speaks  to  the  heart ;  yet  God's  words  in  man's  mouth  are  brought  home  by  the 
Holy  Spiiit  to  the  affections,  and  so  to  the  comfort  of  man's  heart.  4.  Whether,  then, 
the  wilderness  state  be  one  of  afflictive  dispensations  or  of  merciful  deliverances,  the 
power  of  Divine  attraction  is  experienced  and  Divine  consolations  are  enjoyed.  (1) 
Days  of  even  painfully  afflictive  dispensMions  are  often  days  of  spiritual  consolations ; 
whereas  in  days  of  outward  prosperity  there  are  many  obstructions  barring  the  way 
to  man's  heart  and  preventing  the  entrance  of  Ijeavenly  comfort.  (2)  Again,  what 
comfort  we  derive  from  the  record  of  God's  merciful  manifestations  to  his  people  in  the 
past  I  "  We  may  read  the  stories  of  God's  wonderful  power  displayed  in  delivering  his 
people  out  of  their  straits  in  the  wilderness,  and  make  them  our  own  ;  and  plead  with 
God  that  he  would  show  forth  that  old,  that  ancient  power  and  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  his,  as  he  did  unto  his  people  formerly."  Hence  the  prophet  prays  and  teaches  us 
to  pray,  "  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord,  awake  as  in  the  ancient 
days,  in  the  generations  of  old." 

L  Rblibf  is  the  first  manifestation  of  this  meeot.  That  relief  is  described  in 
terms  calculated  to  remind  them  of  God's  gracious  dealings  with  their  forefathers,  and 
to  recall  his  merciful  deliverance  of  them  out  of  Egypt.  1.  Several  incidents  connected 
with  their  redemption  out  of  the  laud  of  bondage  are  laid  hold  of  by  the  prophet  and 
impressed  into  his  prediction,  which  is  thus  rendered  beautifully  vivid  and  picturesque, 
of  future  deliverance.  Among  these  incidents,  which  give  such  a  life-like  colouring  to 
the  prophecy,  are  God's  persuasion  of  Israel  through  his  servants,  Moses  and  Aaron ; 
their  exit  from  Egypt,  and  entrance  into  the  wilderness  on  the  way  to  Canaan ;  his 
cordial  and  comforting  dealings  with  them  in  the  wilderness,  when  he  gave  them  that 
fiery,  yet  just  and  good  and  holy  Law,  instructed  them  in  the  ways  and  means  whereby 
they  might  worship  him  acceptably,  and  took  them  into  covenant  with  himself  2. 
The  Prophet  Isaiah  speaks  of  the  wilderness  becoming  a  fruitful  field,  and  again  of  the 
wilderness  and  solitary  place  being  gladdened,  and  of  the  desert  rejoicing  and  blos- 
soming as  the  rose.  Whether,  then,  the  wilderness  itself  shall  bloom  with  vineyards  for 
Israel,  or  whether,  on  emerging  from  the  wdderness,  they  were  to  be  put  in  possession  of 
vineyards  in  the  promised  land,  the  promised  blessing  of  restoration  remains  the  same ; 
while  the  responsive  song  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  such  as  M(jses  and  the  men  ol 
Israel  sang  for  the  glorious  triumph  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  in  which  Miriam  and  the  Women 
of  Israel  responded,  shall  be  repeated  on  the  occasion  of  Israel's  rehabilitation  in  theii 
former  inheritance.  3.  A  remembrancer  of  a  practical  kind  is  interjected,  if  we  are  to 
understand  Achor  rather  appellatively  than  locally.  That  remembrancer  of  Achan's  sin, 
and  Israel's  suffering  in  consequence,  teaches  the  lesson  sometimes  difficult  to  realize, 
that  the  bitterest  sorrow  becomes  the  source  of  sweetest  comfort  to  penitent  souls. 
God  subjects  his  people  to  humbling  providences  in  order  to  make  them  contrite ;  he 
awakens  within  them  painful  convictions,  to  prepare  them  for  heavenly  consolations ; 
he  tries  them  by  distressing  circumstances,  but  it  is  by  way  of  wholesome  discipline  ; 
by   all   their  wanderings  in  the  wilderness  he  humbles  and  proves   them  in   order 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  if3a.u.l—2S. 

to  do  them  good  at  the  latter  end.  If,  too,  like  Israel,  we  put  away  sin,  the  accnrsed 
thing  within  us,  we  may  confidently  hope  for  God's  presence  with  us,  and  power  to 
prevail  over  all  enemies  around  us.  Mortifying  sin  expels  the  troubles  from  the  camp; 
"  trouble  for  sin,  if  it  be  sincere,  opens  a  door  of  hope,  for  that  sin  that  truly  troubles 
us  shall  not  ruin  us." 

II.  Ebview  op  God's  dbalinos  with  Isbakl.  In  the  strong  language  of  prophecy, 
Israel  had  been  married  to  God,  but  had  proved  unfaithful ;  going  after  otlier  lovers,  and 
thus  committing  spiritual  adultery,  which  is  idolatry.  Her  unfaithfulness  had  exposed 
her  to  the  just  judgments  of  God,  issuing  in  her  captivity.  1.  From  the  fourteenth 
verse  to  the  close  of  the  present  chapter,  however,  promises  of  mercy  take  the  place  of 
denunciation  and  reproof.  Because  of  Israel's  adultery  God  had  threatened  her  with 
a  bill  of  divorce ;  but  now  he  allures  her,  that  is,  woos  her  again,  as  a  young  man  & 
maiden  whom  he  means  to  make  his  wife,  and  in  the  sequel  actually  renews  that 
relationship,  as  we  learn  from  the  words,  "  At  that  day  thou  shalt  call  me  Ishi " — "  my 
Husband."  He  here  dwells  with  complacency  on  his  manner  of  dealing  with  her  wlien 
alluring  or  wooing  her  in  order  to  make  her  his  wife.  Having  brought  her  into  the 
wilderness,  or  a  state  of  trouble  and  distress,  and  thereby  humbled  her,  he  wins  her 
heart,  not  merely  by  pleasant  words,  but  by  most  valuable  presents.  2.  These  precious 
gifts  are  comfort,  hope,  and  joy.  These  are  the  present  mani  Testations  of  his  love 
which  he  promises  to  bestow  on  Israel.  He  gives,  or  rather  restores,  the  vineyards 
which  had  been  forfeited ;  that  is  to  say,  he  gives  not  only  necessaries  but  delights,  not 
only  subsistence  but  abundance.  Vineyards  affording  wine,  which  comforts  and  makes 
glad  the  heart  of  man,  imply  comfort,  with  the  subsidiary  notion  of  rest  and  peace, 
from  the  figure  of  men  sitting  restfuUy  and  peacefully  under  their  own  vine  and  fig 
tree.  The  second  gift  is  hope.  A  door  of  hope,  wide  and  effectual,  is  opened  before 
God's  people,  and  they  are  privileged  to  enter  in.  The  third  is  joy,  spiritual  joy,  so 
that  they  have  good  ground  and  a  right  disposition  to  celebrate  with  songs  of  joy  the 
praises  of  their  Maker,  who  is  at  once  their  heavenly  Husband  and  gracious  Benefactor. 
3.  We  must,  however,  note  the  manner  of  bestowal.  It  takes  place  after  much  trouble 
and  great  abasement.  He  gives  "  her  vineyards  from  thence,"  the  reference  being  to 
the  wilderness  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse.  After  difficulties  and  distresses  in  a 
land  where  they  had  been  hardly  bestead,  and  a  condition  in  which  they  had  been 
much  straitened,  they  would  have  comforts  of  a  most  valuable  kind.  Further,  the 
valley  of  Achor  denotes  the  valley  of  trouble,  and  derives  its  name  from  having  been 
the  scene  where  God  troubled  the  troubler  of  Israel,  when  Achan,  who  by  his  sin  had 
troubled  the  host  of  Israel,  was  stoned  to  death.  Siu  is  the  soul-troubler  still ;  and 
when  sin  is  slain  and  forsaken,  with  sorrow  of  heart  and  bitterness  of  repentance,  the 
door  of  hope  flies  open.  Just  as  the  valley  of  Achor  was  the  door  of  hope  to  Israel, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  the  first  place  they  got  posses-sion  of  on  entering  Canaan,  and  inas- 
much as,  valley  of  trouble  though  it  was,  it  became  the  source  of  much  good  to  them ; 
so  the  valley  of  trouble  and  humiliation  is  often  the  opening  up  of  hope  and  comfort 
to  the  believer.  Conviction  of  sin  causes  trouble.  The  awakened  sinner  is  troubled  by 
a  sense  of  guilt  and  fear  of  deserved  wrath ;  but  such  troublirg  opens  the  door  to  con- 
version and  comfort.  4.  The  history  of  Israel  repeats  itself  in  the  history  of  God's 
people  still.  (1)  The  trials  of  the  wilderness  were  past,  and  Israel  anticipated  rest 
and  happiness  in  the  land  of  promise,  but  on  the  very  threshold  a  sore  trouble  awaited 
them.  So  with  ourselves  ;  we  may  fancy  trouble  past,  and  flatter  ourselves  with  future 
happiness,  at  the  very  time  when  other  great  and  sore  troubles  are  awaiting  us.  (2) 
As  Israel  got  vineyards  from  the  wilderness,  so  God  prepares  us  for  great  mercies  by 
sore  troubles  or  severe  afflictions.  "  The  afflictions  of  the  saints  are  not  only  harbingers 
of  mercies,  but  doors  of  hope  to  let  in  mercies,  means  to  advance  their  progress.  God 
commands  li<:ht  to  shine,  not  only  after  darkness,  but  out  of  darkness.  Joseph's 
prison,  David's  persecution,  Daniel's  den,  made  way  for  the  glorious  mercies  God  had 
in  store  for  them."  Many  a  one  can  say,  "  The  undoing  of  worldly  prosperity  hag  been 
the  making  of  me  in  religion  ; "  in  times  of  trouble,  therefore,  it  is  our  duty  to  be 
patient,  and  our  privilege  even  to  be  joyful.  (3)  Instead  of  "door  ot  hope,"  the 
Septuagint  translates,  "to  open  their  understanding;"  and,  though  an  inaccurate 
rendering,  it  conveys  the  meaning  of  God's  having  opened  the  understanding 
of  Israel  to  percaiva  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  God's  hot  displeasure  against   it,  the 


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  59 

dreadfulness  of  hia  wrath,  the  holiness  of  his  commandments,  and  the  duty  of  putting 
away  sin. 

in.  BENUHOIA.'nON  0»  ISOLATRT  IS  IN  CASE  OF  ISRAEL  AKOTHEB  RESULT  OF  DlYINE 

MEROT.  He  draws  them,  and  they  run  after  him ;  he  makes  them  willing  in  the  day 
of  his  power.  Eelief  from  suffering  is  followed  hy  renunciation  of  sin ;  this  is  a 
blessed  consummation.  1.  Other  lords  had  dominion  over  her,  but  now  she  renounces 
all  these,  and  devotes  herself  to  Jehovah  alone.  So  with  sinners  when  they  give  up 
the  sin  that  does  most  easily  beset  them.  No  longer  is  some  beloved  lust  thei^ubject  of 
their  thoughts  or  the  object  of  their  affections ;  no  longer  are  they  wedded  to  sensuality, 
or  avarice,  or  ambition,  or  worldliness,  or  pride,  or  passion,  or  sin  in  any  form  ;  their 
Maker  is  now  their  Husband — even  the  Lord  of  hosts,  which  is  his  name.  Nay, 
more;  they  acknowledge  God  as  their  Lord  and  Master,  and  so  he  is;  they  look  up  to 
him  as  their  Fatnm  and  Protector,  and  so  he  is ;  they  confess  his  right  of  ownership  so 
as  to  dispose  of  them  according  to  his  sovereign  will  and  pleasure — and  they  do  well, 
for  so  he  is.  2.  But,  above  all  this,  they  can  come  nearer  to  him  and  claim  a  closer 
connection  ;  with  holy  boldness  they  can  approach  his  throne  with  more  confidence  and 
less  ap[)rehension  than  Esther  to  her  imperial  husband,  when  she  touched  the  golden 
sceptre  which  he  held  out  to  her.  The  Church  can  address  Jehovah  not  merely  as 
Baali — "  my  Lord,"  but  with  true  wifely  affection  as  Ishi — "  my  Husband."  Or,  if  the 
distinction  we  have  intimated  be  disallowed,  the  name  of  an  idol  shall  never  again  be  put 
in  the  place  of  the  living  God,  according  to  the  injunction  in  Exod.  xxiii.  13,  "  Make 
no  mention  of  the  name  of  other  gods,  neither  let  it  be  heard  out  of  thy  month."  So 
with  whatever  lust,  or  evil  appetite,  or  sinful  gratification,  or  vicious  course  we  have  had 
for  an  idol,  let  it  not  be  once  named  among  us.  3.  But  how  is  the  change  effected  ? 
It  is  God  himself  who  by  his  grace  brings  it  about.  "I,"  says  God,  "  will  take  away  the 
names  of  Baalim  out  of  her  mouth."  The  very  name  is  to  be  treated  with  abhorrence  ; 
ii  must  never  more  be  mentioned,  but  consigned  to  the  oblivion  of  the  past.  God 
himself  girds  his  people  with  stiength  for  the  sacrifice;  "  for  it  U  God  which  worketh 
in  you  both  to  will  and  to  work,  for  his  good  pleasure." 

"The  dearest  idol  I  have  known, 
Whate'er  that  idol  be, 
Belp  me  to  pluck  it  from  thy  throne, 
AJid  worship  only  thee." 

IV.  Restoration  to  peace  like  that  op  Paradise.  Once  sin  Is  renounced  and  man 
is  at  peace  with  God,  he  has  peace  with  all  around.  1.  A  scene  of  peace  did  once  pre- 
\  ail  on  earth ;  it  was  in  Paradise.  In  those  Eden  bowers  our  foreparents  enjoyed  sweet 
peace ;  they  had  peace  with  each  other,  peace  and  communion  with  God.  Day  was 
succeeded  by  night,  and  night  melted  into  day  ;  they  slept,  they  waked,  they  walked ; 
they  kept  that  Paradisaical  spot  and  dressed  it.  Above,  around,  within,  the  Divine 
favour  brightly  shone.  No  sound  of  discord  was  anywheie  heard,  nor  did  jarring  note 
intrude.  But  soon  as  man  broke  the  peace  by  turning  rebel  against  God,  the  beasts, 
that  till  then  had  been  subject  to  man  and  rendered  him  willing  service,  rose  in  fury 
and  in  fierceness  against  him.  Man  by  sin  turned  a  foe  to  himself,  roused  to  rage  the 
creatures  before  subject  to  him,  and  was  at  war  with  his  fellow.  2.  But  when  Israel 
returns  to  alle;-;iance  to  God,  the  various  sections  of  animate  creation  sliall  resume 
subjection  to  him.  Wild  beasts  of  the  most  savage  nature,  or  bloodthirsty  disposition, 
or  venomous  character,  shall  be  at  peace  with  him ;  the  fowls  of  heaven,  the  winged 
emissaries  of  the  evil  one,  that  snaich  the  Divine  Word  out  of  the  heart,  shall  lose  the 
power  of  injury;  enemies  resembling  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground,  however 
harmfi  before  m  enticing  to  low  lusts,  and  leaving  the  slimy  trail  of  sin  behind,  shall 
be  restrained  fi:om  hurting.  Not  only  so;  the  curse  of  war  shall  cease.  Jehovah 
pledges  himself  by  covenant  to  bless  Israel  with  peace  ;  but  the  promise  carries  us  on 
to  that  happy  day  when  the  Prince  of  peace  shall  restore  peace  to  the  individual  heart, 
peace  to  the  domestic  hearth,  and  peace  to  the  human  family  throughout  all  the  world. 
3  When  the  weapons  of  war  shall  have  perished,  men  shall  dwell,  not  only  in  safety, 
but  secui  ity.  They  shall  be  fearless  of  every  foe ;  fearless  of  all  the  powers  of  evil ; 
fearless  in  life,  for  "  pei  feet  love  casteth  out  fear ; "  fearless  in  death,  and  triumphant 
over  the  last  enemy.    May  the  good  Lord  hasten  that  time  when 


M  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA-  [oh.  it  1— 2a 

•  No  strife  shall  rage,  nor  hostile  fends 
Disturb  these  peaceful  years ; 
To  ploughshares  men  shall  beat  their  swords, 
To  pruning-hooks  their  spean. 

"  No  longer  hosts,  encount'ring  hnst% 
Shall  crowds  of  slain  deploru : 
They  hang  the  trumpet  in  the  hull. 
And  study  war  no  more." 

V.  Renkwai.  of  the  marriaob  contract  or  covenant.  Tf  we  take  this  Old 
Testament  picture  and  put  it  in  a  New  Testament  frame,  or  if  we  take  this  Old  Testa- 
ment iiower  and  transplant  it  to  the  New  Testament  parterre,  we  shall  realize  the 
words  of  the  apostle  to  the  Ephesians,  when  he  says,  "  Christ  also  loved  the  Church, 
and  gave  liimself  for  it ;  that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of 
water  by  the  Word,  that  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having 
spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it  should  be  holy  and  without  blemish. 
.  .  .  This  is  a  great  mystery :  but  I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church."  1. 
The  betrothal  is  in  righteousness,  in  truthful  sincerity,  without  the  suspicion  of  dis- 
simulation on  the  one  side  or  the  shadow  of  hypocrisy  on  the  other  ;  in  judgment,  with 
due  deliberation,  not  rashly,  not  unadvisedly,  not  through  some  sudden  or  fitful 
impulse ;  in  loving-kindness,  in  outward  acts  of  kindness  and  innumerable  love-tokens ; 
in  mercies,  in  bowels  of  mercy  ;  this  is  the  source  whence  all  those  countless  acts  of 
kindness  proceed,  the  fountain  from  which  such  abundant  streams  of  love  flow  forth  ; 
in  faithfulness,  in  stability  on  the  part  of  God,  •'  with  whom  there  is  no  variableness, 
neither  shadow  of  turuing,"  and  steadfastness  on  the  part  of  the  saint.  These  are  the 
precious  stones  in  the  wedding-ring  which  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,  receives — right- 
eousness and  judgment,  loving-kindness  and  mercies,  faithfulness — and  thus  the 
guarantee  of  a  union  thai;  is  to  last  for  ever. 

VI.  Revival  of  prosperity.  In  this  part  of  the  picture— and  a  beautiful  picture  is 
here  presented  to  us — we  see  a  specimen  of  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  and  of  the 
many  links  in  the  chain  of  his  providence.  The  boldness  of  the  figure,  and  the  beauty 
of  the  personification  exhibiting  the  chain  of  second  causes,  and  their  connection  with 
the  great  First  Cause  of  all,  have  been  much  admired.  When  the  people  of  God  stand 
in  need  of,  and  prayerfully  seek,  outward  comforts,  "  immediately  the  corn  and  the 
wine  and  the  oil,  as  if  they  heard  their  complaints,  shall  say,  0  Lord,  we  would  help 
Jezreel,  and  satisfy  these  thy  servants.  The  corn  shall  cry  to  the  earth,  0  earth,  let  me 
come  into  thy  bowels;  I  will  rot  there  that  so  I  may  bring  forth  Iruit  for  this  people. 
The  vines  and  the  olives  shall  desire  the  earth  to  receive  them,  to  impart  juice  and  nour- 
ishment to  them,  that  they  may  refresh  these  reconciled  ones  of  God.  The  earth  shall 
say,  Oh  that  I  may  receive  the  corn  and  wine  and  oil  that  I  may  be  frnitl'ul  in  my 
kind  1  but,  ye  heavens,  I  can  do  nothing  except  I  have  your  influences,  and  the  warm 
beams  of  the  sun  to  make  me  fructify  ;  come,  therefore,  and  assist  me,  that  I  may  bear 
fruit  for  Jezreel.  And  the  heavens  shall  cry.  Lord,  we  would  fain  help  the  earth,  that 
the  earth  may  help  the  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  that  they  may  supply  Jezreel ;  but  we 
can  do  nothing  without  thy  hand;  therefore  hear  us  and  snfl'er  us  to  ram  upon  the 
earth,  that  it  may  become  fruitful."  Thus  the  creatures  plead  with  each  other  for  the 
saints  of  God;  Gud  hears  the  heavens,  and  the  heavens  the  earth,  and  the  earth 
the  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  and  the  corn  and  wine  and  oil  supply  abundance  to  the 
people  of  God.  1.  If  the  creatures  cry  to  one  another  for  help  to  the  people  of  Gud, 
shall  we  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  appeals  of  God's  afflicted  peo|ile  when  they  cry  for  help 
to  us?  Or  shall  we  refuse  to  hearken  to  the  call  of  God  when  he  summons  us  to  help 
forward  his  cause  and  extend  his  kingdom  ?  2.  If  God  hears  his  creatures  when  they 
cry  to  him  for  our  support,  what  encouragement  we  have  to  believe  that  he  will  hear 
his  own  Son,  when,  as  Advocate  and  Intercessor,  he  pleads  oa  oui  behalf  and  in  the 
presence  of  God  lor  us  ! 


CH.  n.  1— 23.J  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  61 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  2—7. — Jehovah's  condemnation  of  faithless  Israel.  In  ch.  I.  the  prophet 
haB  painted  a  "vigorous  fresco"  (Ewald)  illustrative  of  his  domestic  sorrows.  And 
now  he  presents  an  explanation  of  the  sad  picture  in  its  prophetic  meaning.  The 
supreme  thought  of  the  Book  of  Hosea  is  that  of  Jehovah's  conjugal  love  for  Israel, 
which  she  by  her  unfaithfulness  hail  so  foully  dishonoured.  Here,  in  ch.  ii.,  accordingly, 
we  have  an  allegory  suggested  by  the  prophet's  symbolic  marriage  with  Gumer ;  wlTich 
depicts  the  deep  sorrow  of  Jehovah  on  account  of  Israel's  fall,  and  his  long-suffering 
tenderness  towards  her.  The  first  strophe  (vers.  2 — 7)  is  occupied  chiefly  with  words 
of  solemn  condemnation. 

I.  The  Divine  rbpeoach.  Jehovah  charges  Israel  with :  1.  Spiritual  adultery. 
(Vers.  2,  4,  5.)  He  was  himself  the  rightful  Husband  of  the  nation,  but  she  had 
slighted  and  rejected  his  love.  W'itli  infatuated  detenniptation  she  kept  saying,  "  I  vfill 
go  after  my  hjvers."  There  was  the  calf-worship;  and  the  calves  were  simply  idols 
(ch.  xiii.  2).  There  was  the  Biial-vvor.shi|),  with  its  shameful  impurities.  There  was 
the  infidelity  which  had  shown  itsulf  in  seiiaration  from  the  dynasty  of  David.  These 
were  spurious,  carnal  loves ;  and  the  people  who  cherished  them  were  guilty  of  spiritual 
harlotry.  2.  Ascribing  her  material  prosperity  to  her  idols.  (Ver.  5.)  Jeroboam  I. 
had  done  so :  "  Behold  thy  gods,  0  Israel,  which  brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of 
E;-'ypt''  (1  Kings  xii.  28).  Jeroboam  II.  was  still  doing  so;  during  these  gala-days 
of  his  reign  Israel  trusted  in  her  own  might,  and  boasted  of  her  military  glory. 
The  calf-worship  meant  virtually  the  deification  of  nature.  The  Baal-worship  was  the 
idolatry  of  mere  power,  apart  altogether  from  righteousness.  Among  Hosea's  fellow- 
countrymen,  as  by  so  many  in  our  own  days,  the  worship  of  the  living  God  was 
neglected  amidst  the  deification  of  the  popular  will,  reverence  for  physical  law,  and  the 
idolatry  of  worldly  success.  These  were  the  powers — Israel  judged  in  her  blinrlness — 
that  made  her  land  prosperous.  3.  Tlie  guilt  of  an  outrage  upon  the  Divine  honour. 
(Ver.  2.)  In  degrading  herself,  Israel  hiid  foully  dishonoured  her  rightful  Husband. 
For  two  centuries  now  her  infidelity  had  been  one  long  agony  to  Jehovah's  heart.  And 
how  often,  since  the  days  of  Hosea,  has  Gud  been  similarly  grieved  !  He  was  so  with 
Judah  before  her  captivity  (Jer.  iii.  8 — 11),  and  with  the  Jewish  Church  in  the  time 
of  our  Lord.  Of  how  many  Christian  communities  also  has  the  Lord  been  constrained 
to  say,  "  She  is  not  my  wife  "  1 — e.g.  the  Churches  at  Kphesus  and  Thyatira  (Rev. 
ii.  4,  20);  the  Church  of  the  dark  ages  before  the  Relbrmation  ;  every  Church  that 
remains  in  Erastian  bondage;  every  one  that  is  grossly  impure  in  doctrine  or  com- 
mnninb 

II.  The  DiviNB  threatening.  The  word  "  lest "  was  fitted  to  remind  Israel  that, 
guilty  and  fallen  though  she  was,  it  was  still  possible  for  her,  by  timely  repentance,  to 
avert  the  impending  judgments.  Should  she,  however,  stop  her  ears  to  the  Lord's 
reproaches  :  1.  Ee  will  take  away  her  temporal  prosperity.  (Ver.  3.)  At  the  time  of 
her  birth  as  a  nation,  Israel  was  in  a  low  condition  indeed.  In  Egypt  she  had  to 
struggle  for  life,  like  a  castaway  child.  The  very  continuance  of  her  existence  seemed 
a  miracle  (Ezek.  xvi.  3 — 6).  But  Gud  now  threatens  to  chastise  her  for  her  faithlessness 
by  making  her  again  a  castaway.  He  will  strip  her  of  her  material  resources,  bring  to 
the  ground  her  national  pride,  and  cause  her  to  become  like  a  parched  and  desolate 
desert.  The  Almighty  will  touch  with  his  finder  lier  choicest  possessions,  and  consign 
to  destruction  everything  which  has  become  tainted  with  the  Baal-spiiit.  2.  He  will 
involve  in  this  distress  the  individual  children  of  the  nation.  (Ver.  4.)  The  ten  tribes 
had  been  unanimous  in  their  apostasy.  Each  citizen  had  brought  his  own  contribution 
to  the  universal  guilt.  There  was  meantime  no  godly  remnant  who  could  be  thought 
of  with  comfort  as  still  the  Lord's  people.  So  all  must  suffer  in  one  common  punish- 
ment. And  what  a  dreadful  doom  to  become  "  Lo-ruhamah  " — to  be  shut  out  even 
from  the  very  "  mercy  "  of  God  1 

III.  The  Divine  discipline.  The  condemnation  is  not,  after  all,  with  a  view  to 
"a  bill  of  divorcement;"  rather  it  is  the  first  step  of  a  course  of  gracious  discipline. 
The  discipline  consists  of:  1.  Bestraining  words.  (Ver.  2.)  Jehovah's  heart  is  so  full 
of  leleuting  towards  Ephraim  that  he  summons  individual  citizens,  who  may  have 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA-  [oh.  n.  1— a3. 

become  themselyes  penitent,  to  reason  with  the  nation  at  large  ahout  its  sin.  The 
children  are  to  share  in  the  mother's  punishment ;  and  it  is  right  that  they  should 
expostulate  with  her  regarding  her  manifold  idolatry.  2.  Restraining  providences. 
(Vera.  6,  7.)  God  will  effect  a  forcible  separation  between  Israel  and  her  idols.  The 
seventy  years'  captivity  of  Judah  would  be  as  it  were  a  "  hedge  "  of  "  thorns."  The 
perpetual  exile  of  Ephraim  would  be  a  solid  wall  interposed  between  the  northern  tribes 
and  their  "  Baalim."  Such  methods  of  restraint  God  had  often  employed  heretofore. 
The  Book  of  Judges  tells  us  of  no  fewer  than  six  thorn-fences  which  God  planted  in 
succession,  to  break  off  the  seductive  alliances  formed  from  time  to  time  with  the 
idolatrous  Canaanites.  Ttie  long  drought  during  Ahab's  reign  was  a  wall  thrown  up 
between  him  and  his  Baal-worship.  But  rune  of  these  obstructions  had  been  perma- 
nently effectuaL  Only  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonish  captivities  were  so.  By  their 
long  exile  the  Jews  were  at  length  for  ever  weaned  from  all  gross  idolatry.  They  could 
not  forget  that  their  false  gods  had  given  them  no  aid  against  the  thundering  advance 
of  the  Assyrian,  or  during  the  last  agonies  of  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  3.  Restraining 
grao*.  (Ver.  7.)  It  is  here  predicted  that  the  distresses  of  the  protracted  exile  shall 
induce  repentance,  and  awaken  a  longing  desire  to  return  to  Jehovah.  By  the  moral 
discipline  of  sorrow  he  will  operate  upon  the  hearts  of  his  erring  people,  and  sweetly 
draw  them  back  to  himself.  As  the  "  mighty  famine  "  became  the  means  of  convincing 
the  prodigal  that  he  had  wandered  from  his  true  well-being  in  leaving  his  father's  house 
(Luke  XV.  14 — 19) ;  so  Israel,  in  her  days  of  sad  adversity,  shall  resolve  to  return  to 
the  home  of  her  Divine  Husband,  to  whom  she  has  for  so  long  been  unfaithful.  This 
glorious  consummation  is  still  future.  We  think  of  it  as  belonging  to  "  the  last  things." 
But  it  shall  most  surely  be  accomplished.  There  will  be  a  national  conversion  of  the 
Jews  to  the  Christian  faith.  Israel  shall  "  go  and  return  to  her  first  Husband ; "  "  for 
the  Lord  delighteth  in  her,  and  her  land  shall  be  married  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  4). 

Lessons.  1.  The  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  It  is  whoredom  and  adultery.  How 
it  debases  and  brutifies  man's  noble  nature  1  It  also  blinds  the  mind  to  the  true  source 
of  blessing  (ver.  5).  And  what  an  agony  it  must  be  to  the  pure  and  loving  heart  of 
God  I  2.-  The  unprofitableness  of  a  sinful  life.  Even  from  the  sinner's  point  of  view, 
such  a  life  never  pays.  What  expenditure  of  time  and  toil,  of  health  and  substance,  a 
career  of  vice  entails!  How  precarious,  too,  are  all  merely  temporal  blessings,  and  how 
utterly  unsatisfying  to  those  who  choose  them  as  their  soul's  portion !  3.  The  goodness 
of  God  in  the  restraints  which  he  imposes  upon  the  sinner.  He  has  many  "  hedges  " 
and  "  walls " — ^public  opinion,  conscience,  temporal  loss,  personal  sickness,  family 
bereavement,  etc.  These  become  inestimable  blessings  to  a  man  when  they  hinder  him 
in  a  course  of  sin,  and  constrain  him,  not  only  to  confess  his  folly  (ver.  7),  bat  to  turn 
from  it  to  the  Lord.— .0.  J. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — Prosperity  abused  and  blighted.  In  this  second  strophe  of  the  chapter 
Jehovah  continues  to  expatiate  upon  Israel's  Ingratitude  and  infidelity,  and  warns  her 
with  solemn  iteration  of  the  punishment  awaiting  hei'.    These  verses  speak  of — 

L  Peosperitt  plentifully  bestowed.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The  time  of  Jeroboam  II., 
to  which  this  part  of  the  prophecy  refers,  was  to  Israel  one  of  unexampled  national 
wealth.  Tlie  kingdom  seemed  as  rich  and  powerful  at  that  period  as  it  had  been  even 
in  the  days  of  Solomon.  The  ten  northern  cantons,  we  must  remember,  included  the 
fairest  and  most  fertile  districts  of  Palestine.  They  possessed  "  the  glory  of  Lebanon, 
the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  Sharon,"  the  fruitful  meadows  of  Bashan,  and  the  green 
pasture-lands  of  Gilead.  So  Ephraim  was  rich  in  "  com  and  wine  and  oil,"  in  "  wool 
and  flax,"  in  "  silver  and  gold."  But  has  not  God  bestowed  vastly  greater  gifts  upon 
our  own  country  ?  The  climate  of  our  island  is  damp,  and  its  soil  only  moderately 
fertile ;  yet  how  much  wealth  there  is  amongst  us  I  God  has  exalted  Great  Britain 
to  heaven.  The  English  nation  is  colonizing  the  world.  And  for  what  purpose  does 
the  Lord  confer  temporal  prosperity  ?  It  is  with  the  same  design  for  which  he  lends 
us  smritual  blessings — that  we  may  learn  to  know  him,  and  love  him,  and  serve  him. 

IL  Fbospebitt  shamefully  abused.  Israel's  prosperity  was  only  in  material 
things.  Although  imposing,  it  was  external  and  hollow.  It  was  not  the  wealth  of 
well-being;  for:  1.  7%e  Oiver  was  ignored.  (Ver.  8.)  "She  did  not  know,"  means 
that  she  was  not  willing  to  know.    Her  material  prosperity  b^t  pride,  and  pride 


OH.  IL 1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  63 


engendered  forgetfulness  of  God.  But  Israel  was  without  excuse.  For  she  had  been 
taught  by  Moses  (Deut.  viii.).  She  had  been  warned  by  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.).  Every 
page  of  her  marvellous  history  spoke  of  the  Divine  bounty.  The  offering  of  the  first- 
fruits — the  three  great  Hebrew  festivals — and  especially  the  Feast  of  Pentecost,  were 
all  just  so  many  solemn  thanksgivings  to  Jehovah  for  the  blessings  of  his  providence. 
It  was  true  that  the  men  of  Bpbraim  still  formally  observed  these  institutions,  but  the 
living  spirit  of  them  had  ebbed  away;  God  was  no  longer  remembered  as  the  Giver  of 
all  good.  And  are  there  not  multitudes  still,  even  in  Christian  lands,  who  make  no 
grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  mercies?  They  ascribe  their  successes  entirely 
to  their  good  luck  ;  or,  at  best,  to  their  skill,  or  enterprise,  or  industry  (Hab.  i.  16), 
without  recognizini^  the  smile  of  a  benignant  Providence  upon  their  efforts.  2.  The 
prosperity  itself  was  deified.  (Vers.  8, 12, 13.)  Ephraim  prostituted  it  to  the  worship 
of  the  powers  of  physical  nature.  The  people  became  "  lotos-eaters ; "  they  were 
enervated  with  sensuous  pleasure.  They  regarded  their  harvests  as  the  gifts  of  the 
Baalim — the  "  lovers'  wages  "  which  they  received  from  their  idols  (ver.  12).  They 
employed  their  silver  and  gold  in  the  manufacture  of  images  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth 
(ver.  8),  as  well  as  in  the  adornment  of  their  persons  for  the  celebration  of  the  idolatrous 
festivals  (ver.  13).  But  are  not  similar  evils  rampant  just  now  amongst  ourselves  ? 
The  air  is  still  full  of  the  spirit  of  Baalism — the  deification  of  force,  the  worship  of 
success.  We  meet  with  this  spirit :  (1)  In  politics.  "  Witness  the  French  saying : 
'  God  is  always  on  the  side  of  the  heavy  battalions.'  Witness  Prince  Bismarck's 
motto  :  *  Beati  possidentes.'  Witness  the  modern  English  phrase :  '  British  interests,' 
as  used  to  express  a  rule  of  diplomacy  which  some  regard  as  even  more  binding  than 
the  moral  Law,"  (2)  In  economics.  There  can  be  only  one  true  system  of  political 
economy ;  but  in  times  of  trade-disputes  the  capitalist  and  the  labourer  often  adhere  to 
diverse  systems.  The  strike  and  the  lock-out  are  an  appeal  to  physical  force — a  virtual 
offering  of  the  prayer,  "  0  Baal,  hear  us  I "  (3)  In  philosophy.  How  many  of  our 
modern  scientists  deify  nature  under  the  name  of  "  law  "  I  They  repudiate  Providence, 
and  recognize  only  force.  They  ignore  the  living  God,  and  substitute  in  his  room  some 
blind  impersonal  power.  They  exalt  proud  reason  to  the  place  which  should  be  occupied 
by  a  childlike  faith.  They  ask  us  to  accept  a  reading  of  the  universe  which  lea,ves 
out  the  fact  of  sin,  and  the  soul's  hunger  for  immortality.  (4)  In  literature.  Hdw 
many  of  our  great  authors — poets,  historians,  and  even  moralists — have  dedicated  tlieir 
golden  intellectual  gifts  to  the  service  of  materialism!  (5)  In  tocial  life.  The 
immense  increase  of  wealth  in  our  time  tends  to  foster  ostentatious  and  luxurious  habits. 
What  multitudes  "bow  the  knee"  to  the  Baal  of  commercial  success  I  With  many  life 
consists  not  in  being,  but  only  in  having.  But "  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Hosea  "  reminds 
us  that  the  love  of  the  world  is  moral, harlotry,  and  that  deference  to  its  spirit  is  Baalism. 
III.  Peosperitt  misekablt  BLiaHTED.  Israel  shall  suffer :  1.  Deprivation.  (Ver.  9.) 
She  has  refused  to  remember  God,  therefore  he  will  compel  her  to  think  of  him.  He 
is  the  real  Proprietor  of  the  corn  and  wine,  of  the  wool  and  flax.  Israel  was  only  his 
steward,  and  yet  she  has  claimed  these  precious  gifts  as  if  they  were  altogether  within 
her  own  power.  So  the  Lord  will  suddenly  withdraw  them.  He  will  send  the  foreign 
foe,  or  the  simoom,  or  the  locusts.  He  will  blast  the  ears  of  corn  when  they  are  just 
ready  for  the  sickle.  He  will  destroy  the  vine-clusters  in  the  very  hour  of  the  vintage. 
He  will  take  away  his  material  gifts  from  those  who  worship  only  a  God  of  corn  and 
wine,  forgetting  that  the  true  God  is  "  righteous,"  and  "  loveth  righteousness."  It  is  a 
simple  matter  for  Divine  Providence  to  pauperize  the  man  who  is  making  his  own 
prosperity  an  idol.  He  may  do  it  by  means  of  business  losses,  or  family  bereavement,  or 
personal  affiiction,  or  by  giving  power  to  the  monitions  of  conscience.  2.  Chastisement. 
God  can  and  will  "  curse  our  blessings  "  (Mai.  ii.  2)  if  we  persistently  misuse  them.  So 
in  store  for  poor  Israel  there  shall  be :  (1)  Shame.  (Ver.  10.)  The  Lord  will  dishonour 
her  before  her  idols  themselves  by  withdrawing  his  gifts,  and  exposing  Israel's  folly 
in  placing  her  trust  in  material  thingi.  (2)  Mourning.  (Ver.  11.)  The  people's  sin- 
fulness and  their  light-hearted  mirth,  which  they  had  unnaturally  wedded  to  each  other, 
shall  be  divorced.  What  though  Israel  still  professed  to  observe  joyfully  the  Mosaic 
festivals  ?  She  could  have  no  true  gladness  in  Jehovah,  so  long  as  she  refused  to 
recognize  his  supremacy  in  providence.  Her  mirth  was  "  the  laughter  of  the  fool," 
and  God  would  tuin  it  into  mourning.     (3)  Exile.    (Ver.  12.)     The  vineyards  and  the 


64  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oH.  n.  1— 23. 

fig  orchards  shall  become  "»  forest  "  (Ps.  ovii.  33,  34).  The  ravaging  Assyrian  shall 
come,  like  "  the  boar  out  of  the  wood,"  and  root  up  the  vine  which  was  at  first  brought 
out  of  Egypt.     Bphraim  shall  disappear  for  ever  from  among  the  nations: 

Conclusion.  We  should  cherish  gratitude  to  the  Hebrew  prophets  for  the  great 
lesson  which  they  constantly  teach,  viz.  that  national  sin  is  certain,  in  the  oouiw  of 
providence,  to  be  followed  by  national  calamity, 

"In  them  ia  plainest  taught  and  easiest  learnt 
What  makes  a  nation  happy,  and  keeps  it  so; 
What  ruina  kingdoms,  and  lays  cities  flat." 

(Milton.) 

A  nation's  strength  does  not  consist  in  its  wealth,  nor  in  its  armies,  nor  In  Its  diplomacy. 
The  true  palladium  of  a  commonwealth  is  its  mural  character.  And  the  da  stiny  of  a 
people  is  determined  by  their  willingness  to  lay  to  heart  the  lessons  of  national 
chastisement,  and  to  use  these  as  stepping-stones  to  a  purer  life. — 0,  J. 

Vers.  14 — 20. — IsraeVs  restoration.  The  word  "  therefore,"  with  which  this  strophe 
opens,  illustrates  the  blessed  truth  that  God's  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts.  The 
conclusion  here  is  not  what  the  premises  would  have  led  us  to  expect.  This  "  there- 
fore" is  of  Divine  grace,  not  of  hard  cold  intellect.  Althou°;h  Israel  has  foully  dis- 
honoured her  heavenly  Husband,  and  must  be  severely  chastised,  h£  will  not  give  her 
a  "  bill  of  divorcement "  to  put  her  away.  Bather,  her  miseries  shall  attract  his  mercies. 
Jehovah's  love  uses  even  her  shameful  unfaitlifulness  as  an  argument  for  the  bestowal 
of  his  own  matchless  grace.  These  verses  describe  the  future  restoration,  both  of  the 
literal  and  the  spiritual  Israel ;  and  they  are  also  a  parable  illustrative  of  God's  thoughts 
and  ways  towards  every  returning  prodigal. 

I.  The  methods  of  Israel's  restoration.  (Ver.  14.)  We  need  not  stay  to  speak 
of  its  Author,  even  although  the  first  "  I  "  (ver.  14)  is  emphatic.  Only  Jehovah  himself 
has  heart  and  power  equal  to  this  task.  Only  he  who  makes  the  summer  of  the  year 
cat!  produce  that  spiritual  summer  which  is  here  described  with  such  tender  pathos. 
His  methods  are  twofold.  1.  The  outward  discipline  of  the  wilderness.  After  Israel 
shall  have  endured  the  punishments  denounced  upon  her,  her  national  life  is  to  hegia 
anew.  The  generation  that  had  come  out  of  Egypt  with  Moses  had  needed  the  pro- 
tracted discipline  of  the  Arabian  desert  before  God  could  "  give  them  their  vineyards; '' 
and  so  would  it  be  again.  The  nation  must  be  taken  apart,  and  be  for  a  time  alooe 
with  God.  Similarly,  the  Lord  removes  the  individual  soul  whom  he  designs  to  bless, 
into  the  wilderness  of  temporal  loss,  or  sickness,  or  sorrow.  When  the  aged  Christian 
reviews  his  spiritual  experience,  he  generally  finds  that  the  most  marked  spots  in  it 
have  been  connected  with  his  times  of  sorrow.'  2.  2%e  inward  realization  of  the 
constancy  and  tenderness  of  the  Divine  love.  The  discipline  must  be  spiritual  also. 
Outward  providences  alone  will  not  restore  Israel.  Neither  will  the  truth  of  God 
presented  only  to  her  mind.  In  the  wilderness  the  Divine  Spirit  must  "  speak  to  her 
heart."  His  purpose  in  carrying  the  nation  into  exile  is  that  he  may  "  allure  "  her,  i.e. 
decoy  her  with  tender  words,  |iersuade  her  by  the  persistent  manifestation  of  his  love. 
He  will  stoop  to  court  her.  He  will  outbid  the  Baals.  His  inextinguishable  love  will 
woo  and  win  her  soul.  So,  oftentimes,  God  "  speaks  to  the  heart "  of  the  prodigal  when 
he  sits  by  the  swine-troughs,  in  the  time  of  the  mighty  famine.  He  "  speaks  to  his 
heart,"  to  soften  it,  comlort  it,  cleanse  it,  claim  it,  fill  it.  He  has  his  ways  of  holy 
enticement  for  "alluring;"  sinners  to  receive  and  return  bis  love. 

II.  The  BLESSED  RESULTS  OF  THE  RESTORATION,  (Vers.  15 — 20.)  Thcse  ue  described 
with  exquisite  beauty.  The  Divine  promise  is  that  in  "the  wilderness"  Israel's 
national  life  shall  begin  afresh.  God's  nuptial  covenant  with  her  shall  be  renewed. 
She  shall  be  eufeoffed  again  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  possession  of  which  she  had 
forfeited.  The  Lord  "  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence."  And  the  results  shall 
be  glorious.  1.  Fresh  hope.  (Ver.  15.)  The  valley  of  Achor  (i.e.  trouble)  wae  the 
door  by  which  Israel  had  at  first  entered  into  possession  of  the  highlands  of  Palestine. 
It  had  been  the  scene  of  a  dreadful  tragedy  (Josh,  vii.) :  the  defeat  before  Ai,  and  Acban's 
sacrilege,  conviction,  and  doom.  But  so  soon  as  Israel  purged  herself  of  "  the  accursed 
thing,"  the  valley  of  Achor  had  become  to  her  "a  door  of  hope."    Now,  however,  elie 


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  6£ 


must  again  pass  throtigh  a  still  more  doleful  Achor.  The  destruction  of  Samaria  and 
the  desolation  of  Jerusalem  would  mark  a  defeat  greatly  more  disastrous  than  the 
repulse  at  Ai,  But  tlirough  "  the  valley  of  trouble"  she  shall  come  again  to  peace  and 
rest  Does  not  the  expression  before  us  furnish  a  valuable  watchword  for  the  Christian  ? 
It  reminds  him  that  he  must  pass  through  "  the  great  tribulation"  (Rev.  vii.  14)  before 
he  can  reach  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Evfiry  ungodly  lust  is  an  Achan  in  the  camp  of 
the  soul,  which  must  be  convicted  and  stoned  and  burned.  2.  Youthful  joy.  (Ver.  15.) 
Israel,  when  restored  to  the  Divine  favour,  shall  recover  the  sprightliness  and  joy  of 
youth.  "  She  shall  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her  youth ; "  and  in  those  days  she 
could  indeed  sing.  Is  not  the  song  of  Moses  a  masterpiece  both  of  poetry  and  praise  ? 
In  conception  it  is  sublime.  In  execution  it  must  have  been  thrilling.  That  old  Red 
Sea  ode  is  the  first  song  of  redemption.  But,  in  the  days  of  her  restoration,  Israel  shall 
resume  it,  and  with  a  fuller  appreciation  of  its  meaning.  For  the  song  of  salvation  which 
returning  penitents  now  sing  is  "  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song 
of  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  xv.  3).  3.  Renewed  conjugal  love.  (Vers.  16, 17.)  In  the  rapture 
of  her  recovered  love,  Israel  shall  call  Jehovah  "  Ishi  "— "  my  Husband."  She  shall  no 
longer  use  the  name  "Baali"  In  itself,  of  course,  "Baal "  is  a  good  enough  word.  la 
Hebrew  it  is  a  common  noun,  meaning  "  master,"  "  possessor,"  "owner ; "  and  it  had  been 
used  as  a  designation  of  Jehovah.  But,  alas  1  the  word  had  at  length  been  prostituted  to 
base  purposes,  and  defiled  by  wicked  associations.  Its  purity  was  now  hopelessly  gone. 
So,  in  the  good  time  coming,  it  shall  be  used  no  more.  God  will  not  be  called  Baal,  lest 
the  word  should  tempt  Israel  to  think  of  her  old  idols.  4.  Paradisaical  peace.  (Yer.  18.) 
The  picture  here  suggests  a  return  to  the  garden  of  Eden.  The  forces  of  nature,  once  so 
hostile  (vers.  9, 12),  shall  be  brought  into  harmony  with  Israel.  Wars  shall  cease  for 
ever.  The  face  of  the  world  shall  be  changed.  How  different  this  picture  from  the  state 
of  matters  that  is  still  thought  necessary  in  order  to  the  preservation  of  the  peace  of 
Europe  I  The  favourite  maxim  just  now  is  that  the  best  security  for  peace  is  to  be  well 
prepared  for  war.  The  Baal-spirit  professes  to  see  the  basis  of  peace  in  our  arsenals  and 
ironclads ;  but  Jehovah's  plan  is  to  "  break  the  bow  and  the  sword  and  the  battle  out 
of  the  earth."  5.  An  everlasting  marriage  union,  (Vers.  19,  20.)  The  Lord  will 
forget  all  Israel's  past  infidelity,  and  treat  her  again  as  if  she  were  innocent  and  pnre. 
He  will  espouse  her,  as  if  she  were  a  chaste  virgin,  to  himself.  He  will  bestow  upon 
her,  as  bridal  gifts,  every  Divine  and  spiritual  blessing — "righteousness,"  "judgment," 
"  loving-kindness,"  "  mercies,"  "  faithfulness."  And  the  new  marriage-covenant  shall  he 
"  for  eternity  "  (ver.  19).  The  former  one,  alas !  had  been  sadly  broken ;  but  the  renewal 
of  the  conjugal  relationship  shall  be  enduring  as  Jehovah's  invincible,  unchangeable  love. 
Conclusion.  How  important  for  the  sinner  to  "  know  and  believe  the  love  that  God 
hath  to  him  "  I  The  eternal  love  of  God  is  a  fact.  Every  pure  human  attachment  is 
but  a  rill  from  the  infinite  fountain  of  the  Divine  tenderness.  Love,  no  less  than  holi- 
ness and  justice,  lies  at  the  root  of  the  Divine  wrath  against  sin.  Jehovah  our  God  is 
"  a  jealous  God  ; "  but  he  would  not  trouble  himself  to  cherish  holy  jealousy  about  the 
afiections  of  our  poor  hearts,  if  he  did  not  love  us  with  an  ardent  and  a  quenchless  love. 
Oh  for  graca  to  love  him  in  return  as  we  ought  1— G.  J. 

Vers.  21,  22. — The  golden  chain  of  causation.  This  promise  is  a  parable  in  miniature, 
and  has  been  much  admired  for  its  poetic  beauty.  It  completes  the  prophetic  picture 
of  Israel's  restoration  in  the  Messianfc  era.  Doubtless,  also,  it  refers  in  its  fulness  of 
meaning,  not  merely  to  Israel  after  the  flesh,  but  to  the  entire  Christian  Church  daring 
the  time  of  the  latter-day  glory. 

I.  Jehovah  is  the  Fibst  Oadsb  of  all  things.  "  I  will  hear,  saith  the  Lord." 
According  to  Scripture,  from  its  opening  utterance  (Gen.  i..  1)  onwards,  the  all-pervadinc; 
power  of  God  is  the  mainspring  of  the  universe,  and  his  all-controlling  superintendence 
is  its  balance-wheel.  Jehovah  is  the  First  Cause  :  1.  In  the  world  of  nature.  He  gives 
"  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil "  (Ps.  civ.  13 — 15).  The  order  of  the  year  is  in 
his  hand.  No  sunbeam  glances,  no  raindrop  falls,  but  at  his  bidding.  Therefore  he 
says  with  emphasis  and  iteration,  "  I  will  hear,  I  will  hear  the  heavens."  From  this 
we  should  learn  the  sacredness  of  nature.  The  heavens  are  holy :  they  are  "  the  work 
of  God's  fingers."  The  sea  is  holy  :  he  "  hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his 
hand."     The  flowers  are  holy:  each  of  them  "shows  some  touch  of  his  unrivallel 

HOSBA.  ' 


W  THE  BOOK  OF  UOSEA.  [oh.  n,  1-23. 

pencil."  2.  In  tin  world  of  grace.  Jehovah  is  the  ultimate  Author  of  all  spiritual 
blessing.  He  gives  the  "  corn  "  of  Bible  truth,  and  the  "  wine "  of  gospel  joy,  and  tho 
"oil"  of  spiritual  influence.  When  the  foundation-stone  of  a  place  of  worship  is  laid, 
sometimes  corn  and  wine  and  oil  are  sprinkled  upon  it — a  beautiful  expression  of  the 
great  truth,  that  "except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it." 
It  is  Jehovah  alone  who  has  "  built  up  mercy  for  ever,"  and  who  sustains  the  fabric  of 
redemption.  The  Lord,  in  the  Trinity  of  his  sacred  Persons,  is  the  First  Cause  of  our 
salvation  (Titus  iii.  4 — 6). 

IL  Attached  to  hts  throne  hakqs  a  chain  of  secosd  causes.  These  are  repre- 
sented here  by  the  "  heavens,"  and  the  "  eartli,"  and  the  "  corn  and  wine  and  oil,"  and 
by  "  Jezreel."  The  second  causes  have  a  real  efficiency  of  their  own  :  we  live  under 
"  the  reign  of  law."  Yet  they  are  at  most  only  second  causes — instrumentalities  con- 
trolled by  the  will  of  the  First  Cause.  TliertJ  can  be  no  such  reign  of  law  as  makes 
Jehovah  a  subject  or  an  alien  in  his  own  world.  Law  reigns,  but  God  governs.  He 
was,  before  any  second  causes  began  to  operate.  He  used  none  when  he  created  the 
universe,  when  he  originated  life  upon  the  earth,  when  he  instituted  the  laws  of 
matter  and  of  mind.  And,  when  he  pleases,  he  may  still  work  without  them,  both  in 
nature  and  grace.  Usually,  however,  God  does  not  dispense  with  second  causes.  In 
his  or(Uuary  providence  everything  requires  everything. 

"  All  are  needed  by  each  one ; 
Nothing  is  fair  or  good  alone." 

(Emerson.) 

Second  causes  combine :  1.  In  the  world  of  nature.  Indeed,  there  is  scarcely  any 
physical  effect  which  we  can  ascribe  to  the  operation  of  any  one  natural  force  alone. 
When  God  wills  that  it  should  rain,  or  that  we  should  have  sunshine,  he  wills  that  all 
the  physical  causes  which  produce  these  effects  respectively  should  come  into  operation. 
And,  moreover,  there  are  many  other  powers  engaged  in  the  management  of  the  world 
besides  what  we  call  physical  laws.  There  are,  e.g.,  the  power  of  animal  instinct ;  the 
power  of  human  thought  and  sentiment ;  the  power  of  love  and  sympathy ;  the  power 
of  conscience ;  the  power  of  free-will.  There  is  the  power  of  master-minds,  wielded 
sometimes  by  direct  comiuunications,  and  oftener  by  subtle  influence.  Some  men  are 
"  world-controllers,"  and  leave  their  impress  upon  millions.  2.  In  the  world  of  grace. 
In  this  region  we  call  the  subordinate  causes  "means  of  grace."  Of  these,  some  are 
inward,  such  as  faith  and  repentance.  Some  are  outward — the  Word,  the  sacraments, 
and  prayer.  Among  the  njeans  of  grace,  we  must  also  reckon  those  influences  in 
providence  which  operate  in  the  formation  of  a  godly  character — education,  early  train- 
ing, parental  example,  youthful  companionships,  disappointments,  and  afflictions.  And 
these  various  kinds  of  means  act  in  combination.  They  are  a  "  sacred  chain  that  binds 
the  earth  to  heaven  above."  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  Word  of 
God "  (Horn.  X.  17).  "  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God " 
(Rom.  viii.  28). 

III.  Pbatbb  links  itself  on  to  the  entire  chain  of  causation.  It  is  represented 
here  as  the  last  link  of  the  chain  ;  and  it  is  in  the  hands  of  Jezreel.  But  who  is 
"  Jezreel "  ?  She  is  "  the  seed  of  God,"  whom  he  has  "  sown  unto  himself  in  the  earth  " 
(ver.  23) ;  ('.«.  tho  spiritual  Israel,  the  Christian  Church  in  the  latter  days.  Just  as  the 
valley  of  Esdraelon,  in  this  beautiful  parable,  is  conceived  of  as  praying  to  "  the  corn, 
and  the  wine,  and  the  oil,"  so  the  supplications  of  God's  chosen  seed  have  their  place 
among  the  second  causes  of  things.  Believing  prayer  is,  of  course,  addressed  directly 
only  to  Jehovah,  the  First  Cause.  According  to  the  teaching  of  Scripture  and  the  testi- 
mony of  experience,  it  is  the  condition  which  God  himself  has  attached  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  his  mercies,  and  especially  of  all  spiritual  blessings  (Ezek,  xxxvL  37 ; 
Matt  rU.  7, 8). 

"  For  80  the  whole  round  world  is  every  way 
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God." 

(Tennyson.) 

But  true  prayer  takes  hold  also  of  the  second  causes.    "  They  shall  hear  Jezreel."    It 


can,  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  67 

does  80 ;  1.  In  the  world  of  nature.  How  does  man  pray  to  "  the  corn,  and  the  wine, 
and  the  oil "  ?  He  does  so  by  tilling  the  ground,  sowing  the  seed,  planting  the  vines, 
and  tending  the  olives.  He  uses  the  fixed  laws  of  nature — directing  their  action  so  as 
to  make  them  subservient  to  his  will.  The  pious  farmer's  motto  is,  "  Ora  et  labora." 
And  so  with  all  other  pursuits  of  men.  If  I  pray  rightly  that  I  may  prosper  in  some 
plan  or  enterprise,  I  use  also  the  other  practical  means  of  attention,  arrangement,  and 
diligence,  else  the  larger  number  of  second  causes  will  make  for  the  failure  of  my 
prayer.  There  must  be  a  settled  harmony  between  my  plans  of  working  and  the 
petitions  which  I  oifer.  2.  In  the  world  of  grace.  Here  prayer  is  not  merely  one  of 
the  means  of  grace,  co-ordinate  with  the  others ;  it  is  an  indispensable  condition  to  the 
successful  use  of  any  other.  Prayer  is  not  an  intermediate  link  in  the  chain.  It  is  at 
the  one  end ;  the  throne  and  will  of  Jehovah  being  at  the  other  end.  But,  while  it  is 
necessary  that  we  pray  for  spiritual  blessings,  we  must  at  the  same  time  see  that  all  the 
other  second  causes  combine  harmoniously  with  our  petitions.  E.g.  our  salvation  is  of 
grace  alone,  and  yet  the  moral  influences  which  go  to  shape  character  operate  all  the 
same.  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Clirist  has  not  repealed  the  ethical  precepts  of  the  Book 
of  Proverbs.  Paul  wrote  his  Epistle  to  the  Galatiars  to  teach  that  sinners  are  saved 
and  that  saints  are  sanctified  by  grace  alone ;  and  yet  in  that  same  Epistle  he  solemnly 
insists  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap  "  (Gal.  vi.  7).  Prayer 
is  one  second  cause ;  but  there  is  a  whole  chain  of  them  to  which  it  must  join  itself. 
It  is  not  enough  to  pray  for  one's  ovra  growth  in  grace,  or  for  the  conversion  of  one's 
children,  or  to  observe  family  worship ;  we  must  take  care  that  the  other  influences  at 
our  command  shall  harmonize  with  our  petitions,  and  conspire  to  obtain  the  answer 
which  we  plead  for. 

IV.  Universal  praterftjlnbss  on  the  part  of  man  shali.  BRnia  with  it  the 
RESTORATION  OF  NATURE.  This  text  asserts  the  deep  sympathy  of  nature  with  the 
cause  of  righteousness.  We  know  that  as  sonn  as  Adam  in  Paradise  renounced  his 
alkgiance  to  God,  the  earth  renounced  its  allegiance  to  him  (Gen.  iii.  17,  18).  But,  on 
the  other  hand,  so  soon  as  Jehovah  shall  be  at  peace  with  Israel,  and  the  people  of  the 
world  shall  have  become  "  the  seed  of  God"  in  the  day  of  the  Redeemer's  power,  all 
things  shall  become  theirs,  and  Paradise  shall  be  restored  (Ps.  Ixvii.  5 — 7).  Already, 
it  is  true,  man  possesses  a  wide  sovereignty  in  the  kingdom  of  nature.  As  holy  George 
Herbert  says,  in  his  poem  on  '  Man ' — a  poem  which  is  Miltonic  in  the  majesty  of  its 
conceptions — 

"  For  us  the  winds  do  blow ; 
The  earth  doth  rest,  heaven  move,  and  fountains  flov. 
NotI  ling  we  see,  but  means  our  good, 
As  our  delight,  or  as  our  treasure : 
The  whole  is  either  our  cupboard  of  food. 
Or  cabinet  of  pleasure. 

"  More  servants  wait  on  man 
Than  he'll  take  notice  of  ...  . 
O  mighty  love !     Man  is  one  world,  and  hath 
Another  to  attend  him." 

But,  In  the  golden  age  that  is  coming,  man's  soveroijnty  over  nature  shall  Iw  complete ; 
and  nature's  sympathy  with  man  shall  be  perfect  (Isa.  xi.  6 — 9). 

Lbssoks. — Let  us:  1.  Recognize  our  absolute  dependence  upon  God,  the  great  First 
Cause.  2.  Earnestly  seek  his  presence  and  aid,  both  in  the  discharge  of  daily  duty 
and  for  the  furtherance  of  our  spiritual  life.  3.  Accompany  our  prayers  with  assiduous 
practical  effort.  4.  Rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  ultimate  restitution  of  all  things. — 
G.J. 

Ver.  23. — (See  homily  above,  on  2%e  curse  reversed,  ch,  L  10, 11,  and  ii.  1.) — 0.  J. 

Vers.  14,  15. — Ke  message  from  home.  There  will  be  but  little  difiiciilty  in  the 
exposition  of  this  passage  if  we  remember  that  two  distinct  figures  are  blended  by  the 
prophet     On  the  one  hand  he  recalls  the  early  history  of  Israel.     He  remembers  their 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  n.  1—23. 

degradation  in  Egypt,  and  traces  the  moral  effects  upon  them  of  the  wilderness-life 
which  transformed  a  horde  of  slaves  into  a  nation ;  binding  each  man  to  his  fellow,  and 
all  to  God.  To  the  prophet,  as  a  moral  teacher,  the  wilderness  appears  the  place  for  the 
cure  of  idolatry,  for  the  reception  of  the  Law,  for  the  appointment  of  Divine  worship, 
and  for  the  gathering  of  national  and  moral  strength.  Qlancing  from  the  wilderness 
across  the  Jordan,  he  sees,  next,  the  disaster  at  Ai  which  ensued  on  sin,  and  notes  the 
way  in  which,  in  the  valley  of  Achor,  the  iniquity  was  purged,  so  that  the  people  were 
ready  for  new  victories  and  the  possession  of  the  land  of  promise.  After  recalling  these 
incidents,  Hosea  says  to  the  Israel  of  his  own  day, "  These  experiences  shall  be  repeated 
in  all  their  essential  features.  You  shall  be  taken  from  the  Egypt  of  idolatry,  you  shall 
be  led  into  the  wilderness  of  exile,  you  shall  pass  through  the  valley  of  trouble,  and  there, 
your  sin  being  discovered  and  removed,  you  shall  go  on  to  a  nobler  future  and  have  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promises."  But  with  this  figure  is  blended  another,  which  pervades 
the  first  three  chapters,  in  which  Israel  is  represented  as  a  disloyal  wife,  whose  husband 
loves  her  still,  and  seeks  by  the  gentlest  means  to  draw  her  again  to  himself.  God's 
condescension  and  wisdom  are  shown  in  these  attempts  to  set  forth  Divine  responsi- 
bilities and  privileges  by  analogies  drawn  from  human  relationships.  The  human  is 
sanctified,  and  the  Divine  is  made  natural  by  such  a  method.  Here  God  is  represented 
as  the  Husband  of  the  Church,  bearing  with  her  waywardness  and  sin,  taking  upon 
himself  her  sorrows  and  cares,  purging  her  from  all  evil,  that  at  last  she  may  appear 
radiant  in  the  sheen  of  her  white  robes,  and  crowned  with  light  in  his  presence.     (Text.) 

I.  Consider  tee  enticement  of  bin  leadinq  to  estbanoeuent  which  is  set 
before  us  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter.  The  ideal  condition  of  Israel,  and  therefore 
of  every  soul,  is  that  of  one  betrothed  to  the  Lord,  yearning  for  his  society,  mourning 
his  absence,  cheered  by  his  smile,  and  waiting  for  the  marriage.  Nothing  satisfies  the 
soul  but  God.  In  the  imperfection  of  our  friends,  in  the  mistakes  we  make  about  each 
other,  in  the  spuming  of  our  love,  in  the  loss  of  dear  ones  by  removal  or  death,  we  are 
disquieted  by  the  ordinance  of  God,  so  that,  like  Augustine,  we  may  say,  "  Cor  nostrum 
inquietum  est,  donee  in  te  requiescat."  As  Israel  said,  "  I  will  go  after  my  lovers,"  so 
one  says,  "  I  will  go  after  pleasure ; "  and  another,  "  I  will  go  after  wealth,"  as  if  the 
highest  good  could  be  found  there.  And  this  sin  is  aggravated,  because  (as  ver.  8 
implies)  all  that  is  used  or  enjoyed  in  this  vain  pursuit  is  given  to  us  by  the  God  we 
forget ;  as  the  prodigal  wasted  in  the  far  country  what  his  father  had  given  to  him.  In 
order  to  bring  us  to  thought  and  penitence,  wandering  from  God  is  made  difiBcult  to  us, 
and  often  the  words  have  been  fulfilled,  "I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns."  He 
thwarts  our  plans  and  disappoints  our  hopes.  The  idolized  friend  proves  false,  the 
adored  child  is  torn  from  our  embrace,  the  hoarded  wealth  is  swept  away.  The  fruit 
has  its  bitter  kernel,  and  the  rose  its  thorn.  Nor  is  it  only  in  what  is  outward  that  we 
recognize  a  hedge  planted  by  God  to  turn  us  back  from  eviL  When  one  is  about  to 
■in,  be  is  checked  by  the  thought  of  dishonour  to  his  father's  name,  or  by  the  reproaches 
of  conscience,  or  by  the  memories  of  old  teaching,  or  by  the  tears  of  a  mother.  He  can 
say,  as  Augustine  did  in  the  review  of  his  sinrul  life,  "  I  escaped  not  thy  scourges,  for 
what  mortal  can  ?  •  For  thou  wert  even  with  me  mercifully  rigorous,  and  besprinkling 
with  most  bitter  alloy  all  my  unlawful  pleasures,  that  I  mi<;ht  seek  pleasures  without 
alloy.  But  where  to  find  such  I  could  not  discover  save  in  thee,  0  Lord,  who  teachest 
by  sorrow,  and  woundeft  us  to  heal,  and  killest  us  lest  we.  die  from  thee." 

II.  Listen  to  the  voice  of  love  calling  to  thb  wilderness.  "  Therefore  I  will 
allure  her."  It  is  the  last  inference  we  should  expect.  Sin  and  forgetfulnesa  are  not 
inducements  to  mercy.  If  trouble  is  the  obvious  result  of  extreme  wickedness  which  is 
still  unrepented,  the  father  would  say  of  the  child,  the  husband  of  the  wife,  "  It  is  right 
■he  should  suffer,  and  till  she  returns  she  cannot  expect  blessing  from  me."  So  long  as 
lawful  authority  is  set  at  defiance,  human  law  knows  no  mercy.  God  does  not  deal 
with  us,  however,  as  we  deal  with  others.  He  did  not  cast  Israel  off  at  once,  nor  did  he 
summon  her  to  his  feet  by  the  thunders  of  Sinai  or  the  terrors  of  hell,  but  says,  "  I 
will  allure  her ;"  speaking  gently  as  Christ  did  by  his  Word  and  life,  so  that  the  sin- 
staired  felt  that,  though  no  other  mercy  could  be  had,  it  might  be  found  at  the  feet  of 
the  Friend  of  sinners.  "  I  will  draw  her  into  the  wilderness,"  the  place  of  silence  and  of 
solitude.  The  Divine  voice  is  seldom  heard  amidst  a  multitude.  God  severs  the 
individual  .from  his  fellows  when  he  would  give  him  a  message  for  himself  or  fordthers. 


Ck.  tt.  1— 23.J  tHB  BOOit  OF  HOSEi.  69 

He  spoke  to  Jacob,  not  In  the  family,  but  in  the  desert,  where  only  the  quiet  stars  wore 
watching ;  to  Moses,  not  in  the  crowdf-d  camp,  but  high  above  it,  on  Sinai ;  to  Samuel, 
not  amid  the  worshippers,  but  in  the  silent  chamber  where  the  child  slept  alone;  to 
Elijah,  not  in  the  tumult  of  Carmel'a  victory,  but  in  the  silence  of  the  cave  at  Horeb. 
So  Israel  had  been  taught,  not  in  Egypt,  but  in  the  wilderness ;  and  thus,  said  the 
prophet,  It  shall  be  again,  and  there  "  I  will  speak  comfortably  unto  her  " — literally, "  I 
will  speak  upon  her  heart" — ^that  henceforth  my  Law  and  my  love  may  be  graven  on  it. 
Such  has  been  the  experience  of  the  Christian.  Convinced  of  sin,  the  world  seemed 
dreary  as  a  desert  to  him,  till  hope  was  infused  into  his  heart  that  pardon  and  recon- 
ciliation were  not  far  from  him.  Believing  that  God  was  near,  he  lifted  up  his  trembling 
heart  in  prayer,  and  in  Christ,  the  cruciBed  and  risen  Saviour,  he  saw  God  reconciled 
to  him ;  and  the  glimpse  of  his  infinite  beauty,  of  lus  unspeakable  love,  won  his  heart 
for  ever.  Then  the  very  place  of  grief  became  the  place  where  the  fruits  of  joy  were 
growing,  and  in  the  wilderness  of  repentance  the  promise  was  fulfilled,  "  I  will  give 
thee  vineyards  from  thence,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope." 

III.  Look  fob  the  door  op  hope  in  the  valley  op  trouble.  "  The  valley 
of  Achor,"  or  of  troubling,  on  the  north  of  Gilgal  and  Jericho,  was  the  place  in  which 
Israel  was  gathered  after  the  repulse  at  Ai ;  when  the  sin  of  Achan  was  discovered  with 
such  terrible  exactitude,  and  removed  by  dreadful  expiation  (see  Josh.  vi.).  But, 
though  it  seemed  a  valley  of  despair,  it  was  really  a  place  of  hope,  because  the  camp 
was  purged  from  the  curse  and  the  people  made  ready  for  Canaan.  So,  in  the  coming 
exile  of  which  Hosea  spoke,  some  even  in  Israel  would  cast  off  their  sin  and  turn  to  the 
Lord,  and  that  valley  of  Achor  would  be  a  door  of  hope.  The  principle  of  using  the 
most  unlikely  means  for  deliverance  and  blessing  has  often  been  exemplified,  by  him 
who  brought  water  out  of  the  rock,  and  made  the  cross  the  means  of  the  world's  salvation, 
and  death  the  entrance  to  heaven.  Most  conspicuously  is  it  seen  in  our  redemption. 
1.  The  door  of  hope  was  opened/or  the  world  in  the  valley  of  trouble,  through  which 
Christ  walked  on  our  behalf.  We  are  raised  to  heaven  because  he  came  down  to  earth ; 
we  have  the  life  eternal  because  he  submitted  to  death.  But  for  his  obedience  in 
humiliation,  God's  Law  would  not  have  been  vindicated  in  its  righteousness  and  beauty ; 
but  for  his  sorrows,  we  should  have  had  no  almighty  Intercessor  whose  sympathy  is 
perfect ;  but  for  his  crucifixion,  the  handwriting  against  us  would  never  have  been  nailed 
to  the  cross ;  and  but  for  his  death,  and  burial,  and  resurrection,  and  ascension,  we  should 
not  have  seen  the  kingdom  of  heaven  opened  to  all  believers.  2.  The  door  of  hope  was 
opened  for  the  Jews,  as  a  nation,  in  the  valley  of  trouble.  Egyptian  bondage  prepared  for 
liberty,  wilderness  wandering  was  the  means  of  moral  culture,  defeat  led  to  the  putting 
away  of  sin,  the  captivity  in  Babylon  tore  up  idolatry  by  its  roots.  After  the  coming  of 
Christ,  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  amidst  tears  and  blood  was  the  opening  of  a  new  door 
of  hope,  for  by  it  the  noblest  of  the  race  began  to  look  for  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  to 
undertitand  the  spiritualityof  worship,  and  to  find  in  Christ  the  one  Centre  round  which 
the  true  Israel  would  gather.  Thus  every  nation  may  look  for  a  door  of  hope  in  its  valley 
of  trouble  ?  When  called  to  pass  through  commercial  depression,  military  disasters, 
diplomatic  defeats,  there  is  hope  of  finding  purification  from  immorality,  extravagance, 
and  lelf-indulgence,  and  a  new  and  loftier  sense  of  responsibility  to  others  and  to  God. 
3.  The  door  of  hope  is  opened  for  sinners  in  the  valley  of  trouble.  Trouble  is  not  itself 
and  of  necessity  a  good.  The  wind,  which  wafts  one  vessel  to  the  haven,  may  drive 
another  on  the  rocks.  The  liver,  which  to-day  gives  fertility  to  the  fields,  may 
to-morrow  bring  desolation  to  the  works  and  to  the  homes  of  men.  Trouble  may  injure 
uB,  yet  it  is  meant  to  bless  us ;  and  this  is  specially  true  of  the  inward  sorrow  represented 
here.  If  one  is  convinced  of  sin,  so  that  the  old  enjoyment  of  pleasures  is  gone,  and 
paradise  becomes  a  wilderness,  his  penitential  grief  is  the  true  beginning  of  the  joy  the 
publican  had,  who  went  down  to  his  house  justified  because  he  cried,  "  God  be  merciful 
to  me  a  sinner."  If  we  are  in  the  sadder  condition  of  one  who  has,  like  Israel,  forsaken 
her  first  love,  and  are  compelled  to  say,  "  Then  was  it  better  with  me  than  now,"  our 
hope  is  found  in  going  out,  like  Peter,  weeping  bitterly.  And  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  which  seems  to  mortal  eyes  so  dark  and  strange,  so  sad  and  fearsome, 
that  it  may  well  be  called  the  valley  of  Achor,  we  shall  find  in  it  the  door  of  hope — ay, 
the  door  of  heaven — and,  like  others,  we  shall  sing  in  it  as  in  the  days  of  our  youth, 
'•  Thanks  be  unto  God  which  giveth  us  the  victory."— A.  R. 


70  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  ii.  1—23. 

Vers.  21,  2'?,. — Ood's  rule  in  nature  and  in  grace.  Hosea  was  projecting  himself 
into  the  futur(>.  He  felt  as  if  standing  already  amid  the  desolation  threatened  against 
Israel.  He  saw  around  him  a  land  barren  ttirough  drought.  Its  inhabitants,  dying  of 
starvation,  were  craving  the  wonted  produce  of  vineyards  and  corn-fields,  but  looked  in 
vaiu  for  a  sign  of  coming  blessing.  Under  the  name  "  Jezreel"  they  are  represented 
as  crying  to  the  "  corn  "  and  wine  to  satisfy  them ;  but  these  are  in  bondage  to  the  earth, 
and  appeal  to  it  for  vitalizing  power.  Then  earth  takes  up  the  wail ;  every  fissure  in 
it  becomes  a  mouth  calling  to  the  heavens  for  rain.  Last  in  the  series,  the  heavens, 
not  able  to  send  rain  except  by  Divine  ordinance,  appe-d  to  him  who  is  over  them  all. 
(.Quote  text.)  Context  shows  that  spiritual  as  well  as  natural  blessings  are  portrayed. 
Pipphets  saw  the  analogies  of  nature,  the  unity  of  the  whole  Divine  economy,  and 
devoutly  believed  that  in  the  realms  of  nature  and  of  grace  the  same  God  reigned. 
Draw  out  the  analogy  between  the  spring-time  promised  here,  and  the  new  creation  in 
the  soul  of  man.    The  text  reminds  us  of — 

I.  The  personality  of  God's  bulb.  "  I  will  hear,"  etc.  1,  All  things  ultimately 
dependent  on  him.  This  denied  by  many  in  Hosea's  days  and  in  ours.  "  Nature," 
with  inanimate  forces  and  partially  investigated  laws,  so  exalted  that  a  personal  Goil  is 
declared  to  be  needless.  Hosea  believed  that  the  products  of  nature  expressed  God's 
thoughts  and  fulfilled  his  purpose,  and  that  the  cry  of  his  people  reached  him  and 
moved  him  through  the  series  of  forces  represented  by  corn,  earth,  and  heavens. 
Surrounding  nations  held  that  one  god  gave  corn,  another  wine,  etc.  (illustrate  from 
my  ihology) ;  but  Hosea  ascribed  all  to  one  God,  in  whom  all  power  centred,  to  whom  all 
cries  ultimately  came.  (Illustrate  this  re-echoed  cry  by  the  fires  on  the  beacon  hills 
telling  from  town  to  town  that  the  Armada  was  in  sight ;  or  by  the  system  of  signalling 
in  our  army  and  navy,  which  makes  known  peril  and  want  to  him  who  commands  in 
chief.)  2.  All  things  mutually  dependent  on  each  other.  Rain  necessary  to  the  earth, 
earth  to  seed,  seed  to  bread,  bread  to  man ;  so  the  withholding  of  rain,  as  in  Elijah's 
time,  brought  home  the  sense  of  guilt  to  the  sinful.  Show  intimacy  of  relation  between 
man  and  earth,  between  moral  and  material  prosperity,  from  history.  Paul's  "  whole 
creation  groaneth,"  etc.  Complete  reconciliation  between  man  and  man,  between  man 
and  God,  will  bring  about  new  heavens  and  new  earth,  in  which  righteousness  will 
dwell.  Still  true  "  the  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee,  and  thou  givest,"  etc. ;  "  Thou 
openest  thy  hand,  and  satis  fi  est,"  etc. 

II.  The  mbdiateness  of  God's  method.  Text  reminds  that  all  through  the  universe 
one  force  acts  on  another  to  effect  the  desired  result,  yet  God  is  not  the  less  working 
because  his  hand  is  unseen.  As  we  do  not  pay  the  tool,  but  the  workman  whose  skilful 
hand  uses  it,  so  we  pay  homage,  not  to  "  force  "  or  to  "  law,"  but  to  God.  The  age  wants 
what  the  prophets  had — spiritual  discernment.  Ezekiel  saw  the  "  wheels,"  but  also 
"  the  living  one"  within  them.  He  noticed  the  "  hand  of  the  man,"  but  above  it  "  the 
wing  of  the  cherubim."  If  possible  to  him,  more  so  to  disciples  of  Christ,  who  taught  so 
distinctly  the  care  of  God  even  over  birds  and  flowers.  The  Holy  Spirit,  moreover,  was 
promised  to  bring  all  such  truths  to  our  remembrance.  Show  how  God  works  through 
secondary  means.  1.  Of  our  physical  constitution  this  is  true.  (1)  The  individual  man 
is  not  created  afresh  from  the  dust.  He  has  intimate  relations  with  predecessors,  is 
affected  by  their  strength,  weakness,  prejudices,  habits,  etc.  He  is  the  result  of  com- 
plicated agencies  working  for  centuries,  yet  it  is  "  God  that  hath  made  us,  not  we 
ourselves."  (2)  Man's  support  comes  not  directly  from  God  (as  in  the  manna,  or  Christ's 
feeding  the  multitude),  but  by  process  described  in  text,  yet  he  gives  us  each  day  our 
daily  bread.  (3)  Man's  life  on  earth  is  terminated,  not  by  angel's  touch,  but  by  some 
chill,  or  infection,  or  developed  germ  of  disease,  which  brings  weakness,  then  death. 
2.  Of  our  spiritual  life  this  is  true.  (1)  Pardon  came  through  our  hearing  the  truth, 
which  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  brought  us  to  penitence  and  prayer.  (2)  Reconciliatiun 
is  possible  to  the  world  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.  (3)  Others  will  be  brought  to 
Ood,  not  by  the  voice  that  spoke  to  Abram  in  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,  and  to  Samuel  in  the 
tabernacle,  but  by  pleading  of  parents,  influence  of  teachers,  etc.  "  He  that  rejecteth 
you  rejecteth  me ; "  "  Ambassadors  for  Christ,"  etc. 

Conclusion.  1.  Sew  great  the  privilege  qf  Ood^s  people  I  "  They  shall  hear  Jezreel." 
Earth  and  heaven  are  to  supply  our  wants.  "  Meek  shall  inherit  the  earth ; "  "  All 
things  are  yours."    2.  Sow  sphndid  the  destiny  of  Ood't  people  I     "1  will  sow  her  onto 


OH.  11.1— 23.]  THE  BOOK, OP  HOSEA.  71 

me ; "  "A  handful  of  com  in  the  earth, . . .  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like  Lehanon." 
God's  Church  the  germ  of  G-od's  harvest.  Perhaps  like  seed  God's  people  must  be 
scattered,  sown,  buried,  forgotten ;  but  the  harvest  is  sure,  and  in  it  Gi>d  will  find 
his  glory.  Application :  By  his  mercies  Ood  has  said  to  you,  "  Thou  art  my  people ; " 
have  you  answered  with  loyal  heart,  "  Thou  art  my  God  "  ? — A.  B. 

Ver.  6. — Hie  delmiont  of  the  ungodly.  Israel  sinned,  not  only  by  forsaking  God  and 
by  worshipping  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  but  by  defending  this  conduct — by  justifying 
her  apostasy,  and  attributing  to  the  supposed  deities  her  mercies  and  enjoyments.  This 
is  a  common  case  with  sinners ;  who  first  do  wickedly  in  departing  from  God,  and  then 
give  God's  honour  to  another,  praising  those  whom  they  have  substituted  for  the  great 
Giver  for  what  they  owe  to  him  alone. 

L  The  unqodlt  attbibutb  theib  advantaoes  and  ehjotments  to  othebb  than 
TO  Gk>D.  It  is  not  only  professed  idolaters  who  act  thus.  Whoever  they  may  be  who 
turn  aside  from  the  Lord,  they  are  one  in  this — they  all  assign  to  inferior  beings  or 
principles  the  credit  and  honour  which  are  properly  due  to  God  alone.  For  example, 
men  deify  their  own  created  and  limited  powers  of  body  and  of  mind.  "  They  give  me 
my  bread  and  my  water,"  etc.  Or  they  attribute  all  prosperity  and  happiness  to  society, 
to  the  political  aathority  under  which  they  live,  to  human  kindred  or  patrons.  God  is 
not  in  all  their  thoughts.  The  agents  they  see,  but  him  who  is  above  all  they  see  not 
and  will  not  see. 

II.  The  imaoDLT  oonsequentlt  ENConRAOB  themselves  in  devotion  to  othebs 
THAN  God.  The  unfaithful  wife  perseveres  in  the  adulterous  connections  she  has 
formed,  because  she  persuades  herself  that  her  happiness  and  welfare  are  dependent  upon 
others  than  her  lawful  spouse.  "  I  will  go  after  my  lovers,"  etc.  Thus  men  first  forget 
God,  and  give  themselves  to  the  pleasures  and  the  service  of  sin,  and  then,  fancying 
themselves  to  be  under  obligation  to  the  gods  they  have  made,  they  addict  themselves 
the  more  zealously  to  the  debasing  worship  in  which  they  have  engaged. 

III.  The  ungodly  must  be  cosfbonted  with  the  bhambfulness  and  vilbnbss 
OF  THEIR  conssES.  The  language  of  the  prophet  is  frank  and  unsparing ;  had  it  been 
otherwise  it  would  have  been  unfaithful.  The  case  is  one  that  does  not  admit  of  nice 
language,  or  of  gentle  tones  and  bated  breath.  The  spiritual  harlotry  of  ungodliness 
must  be  exposed  and  rebuked ;  otherwise  there  is  no  prospect  of  repentance  and  of 
reformation. — ^T. 

Ver.  6,— The  way  hedged  up.  A  way  may  be  hedged  or  walled  up  on  either  side  for 
security  and  protectiun.  But  when  the  hedge  is  planted,  or  the  wall  built  right  across 
the  path,  such  a  barrier  is  of  course  intended  to  impede  progress,  and  to  render  proceed- 
ing in  that  direction  impossible. 

I.  Divine  pbovidencb  sometimes  hedges  up  the  binneb's  path.  It  does  some- 
times seem  as  if  the  ungodly  were  left  to  go  their  way  unchecked ;  as  if  there  were 
nothing  to  restrain  their  headlong  race  upon  the  downward  path ;  as  if  sentence  against 
an  evil  work  were  not  executed  speedily.  But  how  often  is  it  observed  that  Providence 
does  interpose  to  restrain  the  mad  career  of  iniquity  and  folly  !  To  change  the  figure, 
it  is  as  though  the  voice  addressed  the  raging  sea,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no 
further ;  and  here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed." 

II.  Very  vabioub  abb  the  hedges  and  walls  enoountebed  in  the  way  of  bin. 
Sometimes  sickness  and  infirmity  render  the  sinner  incapable  of  pursuing  his  evil  ways; 
sometimes  temptation  is  signally  removed  from  his  path ;  sometimes  disappointment 
and  sorrow  produce  revulsion  and  even  disgust ;  sometimes  conscience  is  awakened,  and 
sternly  forbids  indulgence  in  the  pleasures  of  sin. 

III.  Such  hedges  and  walls  arouse  a  hasty  and  vehement  resentment.  The 
bird  strikes  her  wings  against  the  iron  bars  of  the  cage  in  which  she  is  confined ;  the 
ox  kicks  against  the  goad  by  which  the  driver  urges  him.  And  the  first  impulse  of 
thp  sinner  who  encounters  a  hedge  upon  his  sinful  path,  is  to  resent,  to  resist,  to  displace 
it.  This  is  human  nature ;  and  only  calm  reflection  and  Divine  grace  can  effect  that 
it  shall  be  otherwise. 

IV.  Nevertheless,  the  intentions  of  Divine  mercy  may  in  time  be  becog- 
mSBO.    The  disappointed  adulteress,  finding  that  her  unlawful  lovers  are  indifferent  to 


1i  tEk  BOOK  .Ot*  aoSSA.  loB.  n.  1—23. 

ber,  and  have  forsaken  her,  comes  to  a  better  mind,  and  compares  with  their  treatment 
of  her  the  conduct  of  her  just  and  rightlul  spouse.  The  sinner,  learning  by  bitter  expe* 
rience  that  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,  comes  to  see  that  this  is  a  provision  of 
heavenly  love  and  pity ;  acknowledges  that  it  was  not  intended  that  the  pursnita  ot 
worldliness  and  selfishness  should  satisfy  man's  immortal  soul;  and  thus  is  led  to  seek 
forgiveness  and  reconciliation  from  f,  justly  offended  God. 

V.  The  hedqino  up  of  the  way  thus  appears  to  the  fbnitemt  sinneb  a  blessing 
IN  DisoniBE.  He  says  within  himself,  "Had  the  road  been  open,  and  my  course 
unimpeded,  perhaps  I  should  never  have  paused  until  I  had  rushed  into  ruin  and 
destruction.  How  does  it  become  me  to  adore  and  to  bless  the  very  mercy  which  I 
hated  and  despised,  to  which  I  owe  it  that  my  mad  career  was  checked,  and  that  my 
wandering  feet  have  at  last  been  led  into  the  way  of  peace  1 "— T. 

Ver.  8. — Mercies  dhused.  Ingratitude  and  insensibility  are  odious  vices;  when  dis- 
played by  God's  intelligent  creatures  towards  thelr-Maker,  they  are  hateful  sins.  The 
case  is  still  worse  when,  as  with  Israel,  the  bestowments  of  a  beneficent  Deity  are 
employed  in  the  service  of  a  rival  and  a  foe.  Jehovah  gave  to  the  people  silver  and 
gold ;  the  people  made  of  the  precious  metals  shrines  to  Baal.  Yet  this  is  a  just  picture 
of  the  conduct  of  those  who  receive  gifts  from  Heaven  and  use  them  in  the  seiTiceof  sin. 

L  Gifts  mat  be  eeceived  and  the  Giveb  unrecognized.  The  produce  of  the 
soil — corn,  wine,  and  oil;  the  mineral  wealth  of  earth — silver  and  gold, — are  all  the 
provision  of  Divine  bounty.  But,  whilst  God  opens  his  hands,  multitudes,  like  Israel, 
take  the  gifts  but  give  no  thought  to  the  Divine  Benefactor.  The  powers  of  body  and 
of  mind  which  we  possess  are  provided  by  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness.  Tec  how  often 
oaen  use  them  as  if  they  were  absolutely  their  own,  and  involved  no  responsibility  1 

II.  The  gifts  of  God  abb  sometimes  traced,  not  to  God,  but  to  his  foes.  To 
take  from  Jehovah,  and  then  to  offer  thanks  and  praise  to  Baal — such  was  the  base  and 
brutish  proc(  eding  of  Israel.  And  now  men  praise  themselves,  or  they  praise  fortune, 
or  they  praise  the  sinful  arrangements  of  society,  for  the  gifts  they  owe  to  Heaven. 
They  "do  not  know,"  even  as  Israel  "did  not  know."  It  is  blamable,  inexcusable 
ignorance,  and  only  Divine  forbearance  could  endure  it. 

III.  The  gifts  op  God  mat  even  be  tuened  against  him  as  weapons  of  bebellion. 
Israel  took  Jehovah's  gold  and  made  of  it  images  of  Baal.  How  often  do  men  employ 
the  wealth  which  God  has  enabled  them  to  get,  against  the  Giver,  and  in  the  promotion 
of  the  cause  of  error  and  of  vice  I  How  often  do  they  prostitute  the  faculties  and 
influence  which  they  owe  to  God,  to  the  service  of  Satan !  The  state,  the  Church,  are 
from  God ;  yet  both  have  too  often  been  made  instruments  of  evil.  Only  infinite 
long-8u£fering  could  permit  such  an  abuse  of  what  was  provided  and  intended  for  man's 
highest  good. 

Application.  Ingratitude  should  be  succeeded  by  repentance ;  and  the  aboM  ot 
God's  gifts  should  be  laid  aside,  and  followed  by  lowly  consecration. — T. 

Ver.  13. — Retribution.  It  was  part  of  the  office  of  the  prophet  to  exhibit  the 
righteousness  of  the  Most  High.  Justice  and  mercy,  the  attributes  which  appear  so 
harmonious  in  the  gospel,  are  equally  apparent  in  the  writings  of  the  inspired  seers  of 
the  old  covenant. 

I.  The  signs  of  apostasy  and  infidelity.  These  are  again  set  forth  under  the 
similitude  of  a  loved  and  well  cared  for,  yet  unraithful  and  adulterous  wife.  1.  For- 
getfulness  of  the  Lord,  the  Husband.  If  he  had  been  remembered,  honoured,  and 
loved,  others  would  not  have  been  permitted  to  be  his  rivals  and  successors.  To  forget 
God  is  to  fling  one's  self  in  the  way  of  temptation.  2.  The  quest  of  other  objects  of 
affection  and  intimacy.  When  faithless  Israel  went  after  strange  gods,  "  lovers,"  or 
paramours,  she  furnished  an  example  of  human  infidelity  to  God.  Men,  forgetting 
God,  worship  the  works  of  their  hands,  make  idols  of  their  talents,  their  wealth,  their 
'  influence,  their  position  in  life,  etc.  3.  Devotion  to  the  service  of  Gbd's  rivals.  As 
the  abandoned  woman  adorns  herself,  and  sets  forth  her  charms  in  order  to  attract  the 
attention  and  admiration  of  men,  so  idolaters  consume  their  substance  and  waste  their 
energies  in  superstitious  observances  ;  and  so  all  who  forsake  God  encompass  the  vain 
object!  of  their  devotion  and  affection  with  much  lavish  display  of  aeaL 


CH.a.1— 28]  tEE  600&  OF  HOSBA. 


n.  The  ATENOiNa  of  apostabt  and  infidelitt.  The  language  of  Jehovah  ig 
simple,  but  vigoroug :  "  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of  Baalim."  1.  God  observes 
with  indignation  the  unfaithfulness  of  those  whom  he  created  for  his  glory.  He  will 
not  ^ve  his  honour  to  another.  He  is  not  indifferent  or  unconcerned  when  hia  own 
depart  from  him.  2.  CM.  makes  nse  of  punitive  means  to  assert  bis  authority,  and  to 
arrest  the  downward  progress  of  those  who  are  unfaithful  to  him.  In  the  previous 
verses  are  recounted  the  several  "  judgments "  which  the  righteous  Governor  inflicts 
upon  the  disobedient.  All  affliction  is  designed  to  lead  our  thoughts  to  him  who  is  the 
great  Chastener.  3.  Retribution  is  with  a  view  to  the  repentance  and  reformation  of 
the  offender.  The  Lord  does  not  cast  off  his  people ;  he  does  not  afSict  them  willingly ; 
in  the  midst  of  wrath  he  remembers  mercy.— T. 

Ver.  14. — ComfortahU  vjordt.  In  the  later  periods  of  Jewish  history,  references  were 
frequently  made  to  the  early  experiences  by  which  Israel  had  been,  in  the  providence  of 
God,  made  a  nation.  In  this  verse  the  prophet,  in  assuring  the  people  that  the  time  of 
Divine  reconciliation  and  favour  was  approaching,  sets  forth  this  prospect  in  language 
borrowed  from  the  days  of  the  Exodus.  Then  Jehovah  had  delivered  his  people  bom 
the  bondage  of  Egypt,  had  led  them  into  the  wilderness,  and  there  had  entered  into  a 
covenant  of  espousals  with  the  nation,  and  bad  spoken  to  them  words  of  comfort  and 
of  encouragement.  Hosea  foretells  that  a  similar  experience  is  in  reserve  for  the 
smitten  but  penitent  and  returning  children  of  the  covenant. 

I.  Man's  need  of  comfobtable  words.  This  may  he  said  to  arise  from  the  fact 
that  severe  words  had  been  uttered  to  the  people's  sorrow.  God  is  faithful,  and  he 
never  flatters,  and  never  withholds  the  correction  which  is  deserved  and  required. 
When  the  voice  of  God  has  threatened,  and  the  voice  of  conscience  has  condemned, 
welcome  are  words  of  consolation  expressive  of  Divine  interest  and  favour. 

IL  The  import  of  comfortable  words  Diviite.  1.  They  are  words  of  forgiveness. 
2.  They  are  words  expressive  of  favour.  3.  They  are  words  assuring  of  gracious  help. 
4.  They  are  words  faithful  and  certain  to  be  exactly  and  entirely  made  good.  Unlike 
the  well-meant  comfortable  words  spoken  by  human  lips,  which  often  are  nothing  but 
words  and  are  altogether  vain,  the  gracious  language  of  the  Divine  Deliverer  is  powerful 
to  effect  the  purposes  of  the  utterer,  and  to  heal  the  sorrows  and  relieve  the  anxieties  of 
those  addressed. 

in.  The  effect  of  comfortable  words.  1.  They  reassure  the  timid  and  trembling. 
2.  They  bring  peace  to  the  conscience-stricken  and  alarmed.  3.  They  soothe  the 
anxious  and  distressed.  4.  They  banish  the  fears  of  the  foreboding,  and  inspire  with 
hope. 

Afplioation.  The  preachers  of  the  gospel  are  commissioned  to  "  speak  comfortably 
to  Jerusalem,"  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  pour  the  balm  of  consolation  into  the 
spuit  of  the  lowly  and  the  contrite. — ^T. 

"Ver.  16. — "  A  door  of  hope."  Still  continuing  his  reference  to  the  early  history  of 
the  chosen  people,  Hosea  assures  to  the  penitent  and  contrite  the  blessings  of  Divine 
favour,  promising  to  returning  Israel  "  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope."  As 
Achor  was  near  Jericho — upon  the  threshold  of  the  land  of  promise — the  possession  of 
this  fertile  valley  was  the  earnest  of  the  full  and  hoped-for  inheritance.  Entrance  upon 
this  was,  as  it  were,  passing  through  the  door  into  the  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey. 

I.  Mercies  fob  the  present.  1.  The  vineyards  represent  the  possessions  and 
Ijrivileges  of  God's  people.  They  contrast  with  the  dry  and  thirsty  wilderness.  They 
abound  with  proo&  of  God's  care,  with  provision  for  man's  wants.  God  gives  his 
beloved  all  things  richly  to  enjoy.  2.  The  songs  are  songs  of  deliverance,  such  as 
Israel  sang  upon  the  Bed  Sea  shore ;  they  are  songs  of  rejoidng  over  enemies  vanquished, 
safety  experienced,  fellowship  in  Divine  favour. 

IL  Pbobpeots  fob  the  future.  It  is  well  to  enter  at  the  open  door ;  but  the  open 
door  admits  to  the  apartments  of  the  house  or  palace.  A  guest  does  not  enter  by  the 
door  in  order  to  remain  standing  in  the  hall ;  he  is  welcomed  to  the  family  hearth,  and 
the  society  and  enjoyments  of  the  abcde  of  his  host.  Thus,  when  God  opens  to  his 
people  a  door,  it  is  a  door  of  hope.    What  they  are  is  a  promise  of  what  they  shall  be, 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA,  [oh.  n.  1—23. 

and  what  they  have  is  an  earnest  of  what  is  provided  for  them  In  the  future.  Through 
the  vale  of  Achor  they  enter  into  the  land  of  promise ;  and  its  abundance  is  to  them 
the  assurance  of  an  unfailing  and  jierennial  bounty.  Hope  extends  to  every  staga 
of  the  earthly  pilgrimage  and  warfare ;  there  is  progress  and  victory  before  the  Lord's 
people.  And  hope  stretches  away  to  the  infinite  hereafter,  which  afifords  for  its 
anticipations  a  boundless  and  immortal  scope. 

Application.  The  door  of  hope  is  by  the  gospel  set  open  before  every  hearer  of  the 
gospeL    What  encouragement  we  have  to  enter  in  and  to  possess  the  land  I — T. 

Vers.  19,  20. — Divine  betrothal.  The  unfaithfulness  of  the  past  is  forgotten.  The 
love  of  the  Divine  Husband  is  renewed.  A  joyous  betrothal  is  the  prelude  to  a 
hallowed,  prolonged,  and  happy  union. 

I.  The  Brideqboom.  Jehovah  condescends  to  represent  himself  as  sustaining  this 
relationship.  It  implies  on  his  part  love  and  attachment,  purposes  of  everlasting  kind- 
ness, for  the  marriage  cannot  be  broken,  and  a  provision  for  all  the  wants  of  her  whom 
he  takes  to  himself. 

II.  Tee  bbide.  Israel  is  here  the  type  of  the  Church  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  has 
purchased  unto  himself — the  bride  of  the  Lamb.  She  is  indeed  happy  and  honoured  in 
the  choice  of  her  Divine  spouse.     She  is  called  to  purity,  to  fidelity,  to  holy  service. 

III.  The  covenant  and  contract.  On  the  side  of  the  Lord  all  is  of  grace ;  and 
the  undertakings  of  the  Bridegroom  are  "  for  ever."  On  the  side  of  his  spouse,  the 
Church,  there  is  implied  the  spiritual  marriage  vow,  with  all  which  that  involves. 

IV.  The  sfibit  in  which  the  union  is  conteaoted.  This  is  faithfi^ness,  or  the 
certainty  of  the'  fulfilment  of  the  pledge  voluntarily  given.  All  God's  promises  are 
sure,  for  he  is  faithful. 

V.  The  condesckndino  pbohibe  of  the  Bkidegboom  to  the  bride.  "  Thou  shalt 
know  the  Lord."  This  knowledge  shall  be  of  all  Jehovah's  gracious  attributes,  and  in 
itself  it  is  eternal  life. — ^T. 

Vers.  21, 22. — The  great  First  Cause  of  blessing.  The  language  of  the  prophet  here  is 
language  of  true  poetry.  To  his  vivid  imagination  all  nature  is  personified,  endowed 
with  hearing  and  with  speech.  The  wants  of  the  penitent  Israel  (figured  as  Jezreel) 
are  known  to  the  products  of  the  earth  by  which  human  need  is  supplied ;  the  earth 
when  called  upon  yields  her  fruits,  and  the  heaven,  in  response  to  earth's  demands, 
pours  down  the  fertilizing  showers  which  ensure  a  plenteous  harvest ;  for  the  Lord  of 
all  hears  the  entreaty  of  the  skies,  and  bids  them  be  bountiful  and  free. 

I.  Human  wants  abb  supplied  by  physical  agencies.  Man,  though  a  spiritual 
being,  has  a  physical  nature  with  corresponding  necessities.  As  a  servant  of  the  Creator, 
he  depends  upon  nature  for  the  maiutenance  of  bodily  strength  and  the  opportunity  of 
pious  service.    To  despise  the  material  is  to  question  the  wisdom  of  the  God  of  nature. 

IL  Creation  is  a  system  asbanqed  to  secure  the  good  of  God's  intelligent 
SUBJECTS.  The  body  of  man  depends  upon  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  the  fruits  of  the 
earth  depend  upon  the  atmospheric  influences.  There  is  mutual  dependence  among  all 
parts  of  the  great  system  of  which,  through  our  corporeal  nature,  we  form  a  part.  And 
all  things  work  together,  and  by  Divine  appointment,  for  the  good  of  those  who  love  God. 

m.   God  IB    HIMSELF    THE    CONSCIOUS   AND   BENEVOLENT   MAINSPRING     OF    THE   VAST 

MACHINE.  "  I,"  Baith  the  Lord,  "  will  hear  the  heavens."  From  this  we  gather  that 
the  Divine  mind  arranges  and  controls  universal  nature,  and  that  the  delight  of  the 
great  Ruler  is  in  the  welfare  of  his  dependent  and  intelligent  creatures,  for  which  all 
things  terrestrial  and  celestial  are  fashioned  to  co-operate,  to  which  all  things  concur. 
That  there  is  physical  law  no  thoughtful  man  will  question ;  and  those  who  are  alike 
thoughtful  and  devout  will  recognize  the  Lawgiver  who  is  behind  the  law,  and  will 
delight  in  the  conviction  that  whilst  the  Divine  mind  is  infinite  wiBdom,  the  Divine 
heart  is  infinite  love.— T. 

Ver.  23. — Purposes  of  pity  tmd  of  possession.  The  name  Jexrtel  had  been  applied  by 
the  Divine  command  to  one  of  Hosea's  sons,  and  thence  to  Israel,  by  way  of  marking 
God's  displeasure  with  the  rebellious  people,  whose  capital  has  been  marked  by  deeds 
of  disobedience  and  of  bloodshed.    But  the  name  itself  was  good,  meaning  "  God  will 


OH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  75 

sow."  And  in  this  verse  it  is  declared  that  God  will  indeed  sow  Israel  unto  him  self, 
in  mercy  and  for  life  and  blessing.  It  is  thus  figuratively  asserted  that  days  of  favour 
and  of  prosperity  shall  be  accorded  to  repenting  Israel. 

I.  Mebot  combs  to  those  who  by  rebellion  had  put  themselves  betond  merot. 
In  this  respect  the  northern  tribes  are  representative,  not  of  the  Hebrew  people  only, 
but  of  the  human  race.  God  has  ever  pitied  those  who  have  had  no  pity  upon  them- 
selves. Had  there  been  no  sin,  there  would  have  been  no  room  for  mercy.  This  Divine 
attribute  is  manifested  pre-eminently  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  ia  incarnate 
compassion. 

II.  God  claims  as  his  own  people  those  who  had  thrown  ojt  his  atjthobity 
AND  their  allegiance.  Israel  was  bound  to  Jehovah,  both  by  the  common  ties  of  human 
creaturesbip  and  by  the  special  ties  of  the  covenant  he  had  made  with  the  fathers  of 
the  nation.  It  was  especially  discreditable  in  those  who  owed  so  much  to  God,  to 
forsake  his  worship,  to  despise  his  ordinances,  to  breals  his  laws,  to  defy  his  authority. 
Yet,  even  for  those  who  had  so  sinned,  there  was,  when  they  repented,  reconciliation 
and  restoration.  His  of  right  and  his  by  covenant,  Israel  now  became  his  by  actual 
possession.  The  language  of  mutual  appropriation  here  employed  is  very  beaiitiful. 
"  Thou  art  my  people,"  says  Jehovah.  And  Israel  responds,  "  Thou  art  my  God." 
When  such  language  is  sincere,  the  convictions  it  expresses  may  be  regarded  as  the 
foundation  of  all  good.  Such  a  relationship  involves  unfailing  favour  from  God  and 
unfailing  faithfulness  from  man. 

Application.  1.  Consider  the  light  this  passage  casts  upon  the  Divine  disposition 
towards  mankind.  2.  Consider  the  urgency  of  our  condition,  and  the  consequent 
desirableness  of  taking  advantage  of  this  Divine  disposition, — T. 

Vor.  6. — Divine  restraints.  "Therefore,  behold,  I  will  hedge  np  thy  way  with 
thoms,  and  make  a  wall,  that  she  shall  not  find  her  paths."  "  There  is  a  twofold  hedge," 
says  Burroughs,  "  that  God  makes  about  his  people.  There  is  the  hedge  of  protection 
to  Iteep  evil  from  them,  and  there  is  the  hedge  of  affliction  to  keep  them  from  evil. 
The  hedge  of  protection  you  have  in  Isa.  v.  5,  where  God  threatens  that  he  will  take 
away  the  hed;.;e  from  his  vineyard,  that  is,  he  will  take  away  his  protection ;  and  it  is 
said  of  Job,  that  God  had  hedged  him  about.  But  the  hedge  here  meant  is  the  hedge 
of  afBiction.  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way,  that  is,  I  will  bring  sore  and  heavy  afiSictions 
upon  you,  but  yet  in  a  way  of  mercy :  these  afflictions  shall  be  but  as  a  hedge  to  keep 
you  from  evil,  they  shall  not  do  evil  to  you  or  bring  evil  upon  you."  God  puts  restraints 
on  the  sinner  here. 

I.  These  restraints  are  manifold.  "I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thoms,  and 
make  a  wall."  The  first  metaphor  is  taken  from  a  husbandman  who,  to  prevent  the  cattle 
from  breaking  away  from  the  field,  plants  a  prickly  hedge.  The  other  figure  is  taken 
from  architecture — "a  wall."  If  the  thorns  are  insufficient,  high  and  massive  walls 
must  be  built.  What  are  the  restraints  ?  1.  There  is  the  restraint  of  o^icWon.  When 
the  wicked  purpose  some  great  crime,  affliction  comes,  breaks  their  plans,  and  strikes 
them  down.  2.  There  is  the  restraint  of  public  sentiment.  Public  opinion,  as  it  gets 
enlightened  and  strong,  is  a  tremendous  check  to  the  wicked.  The  most  daring  cower 
before  the  public  voice.  3.  There  is  the  restraint  of  conscience.  Conscience  is  a  Divine 
officer  holding  the  sinner  in. 

II.  These  restraints  are  necessabt.  It  is  necessary  that  God  should  plant  thorny 
hedges  and  build  massive  walls  around  the  sinner.  1.  It  is  necessary  for  the  $inner 
himaelf.  Were  it  not  for  these  he  would  go  galloping  to  perdition.  "0  unhappy 
men,"  says  Luther,  "  when  God  leaves  them  to  themselves  and  does  not  resist  them  in 
their  lusts!  You  bless  yourselves  many  times  that  in  the  way  of  sin  you  find  no 
difficulty.  Bless  thyself  1  Thou  hast  cause  to  howl  and  wring  thy  hands ;  thou  hast  the 
curse  of  God  on  thee.  A  dreadful  curse  to  make  pleasant  the  way  of  sin  1 "  2.  it  is 
uecessary  for  the  world.  What  would  become  of  the  world  if  the  wicked  were  not  reined 
in  ?  Were  it  not  for  restraints,  the  CsBsars,  the  Alexanders,  and  the  Napoleons  would 
soon  turn  it  into  a  Pandemonium.  3.  It  is  necessary  for  the  Church.  Had  wicked  men 
iheir  full  fling,  how  long  would  the  Church  last  1  The  flames  of  martyrdom  would  soon 
blaze  to  heaven  and  consume  Zion  to  ashes.  Thank  God  for  thorny  hedges  and 
raasBive  walls— for  all  the  restraints  he  puts  on  sinful  men. — D.  T. 


76  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [ch.  ii.  1— 23. 

Yer.  11. — The  conjunction  of  tin  and  mirth.  "  I  irill  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to 
cease."  Mirth  is  not  happiness.  It  is  but  the  mimicry  of  real  joy.  Happiness  is  a 
river  deep  and  clear;  mirth  at  best  is  but  a  sparkling  bubble.  There  is  but  little 
happiness  in  the  world,  but  there  is  much  mirth,  much  noisy  frolic  and  hilarious  glee. 
The  text  speaks  of  mirth  in  connection  with  sinfulness.  Israel,  who  had  grown  corrupt, 
had,  notwithstanding,  much  mirth.  In  relation  to  the  conjunction  of  sin  and  mirth 
we  may  remark — 

I.  That  the  conjukctioh  is  commok.  The  notes  of  jollity  and  fun  are  heard  erery- 
where  through  society.  At  theatres,  taverns,  divans,  and  social  festivities  it  flares  and 
rattles.  The  drunkard  has  his  mirth,  the  liar  his  mirth,  the  debauchee  his  mirth,  the 
blasphemer  his  mirth,  the  sabbath-breaker  his  mirth.  The  union  of  sin  and  mirth  is, 
alas !  very  common.  We  meet  it  everywhere,  in  the  dance  and  in  the  song,  in  the  joke 
and  in  the  gibe. 

II.  That  the  conjunction  is  incongkuous.  Gaiety  and  laughter  in  a  sinner  are 
most  revolting  when  rightly  regarded.  The  condition  of  a  sinner  is  one  of  awful 
solemnity ;  a  condition  upon  which  God  and  his  holy  universe  look  with  deepest 
seriousness.  1'he  sighs  of  moral  anguish  and  tears  of  bitter  remorse  become  the  sinner. 
Fun  and  laughter  are  more  unbeseeming  to  him  than  jests  and  jollities  in  a  dying 
chamber.  "  Mirth,"  says  Dr.  Young,  "  at  a  funeral  is  scarce  more  indecent  or  unnatural 
than  a  perpetual  flight  of  gaiety  and  burst  of  exultation  in  a  world  like  this ;  »  world 
which  may  seem  a  paradise  to  fools,  but  is  a  hospital  with  the  wise." 

"  The  ground  is  hollow  in  the  path  of  mirth ; 
Oh !  far  too  daring  seems  the  joy  of  earth, 
So  darldy  pressed  and  girdled  in  by  death." 

(Mrs.  F.  Hemani.) 

ni.  That  the  conjunction  is  tkmpobaht.  Amos,  who  was  contemporary  with  Hoses, 
and  like  him  was  a  prophet  of  the  ten  tribes,  describes  the  conjunction  well  and  indicates 
the  necessity  of  the  separation  :  "  Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  and  cause  the 
seat  of  violence  to  come  near ;  that  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch  themselves  upon 
their  couches,  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and  the  calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the 
stall ;  that  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  and  invent  to  themselves  instruments  of 
music,  like  David ;  that  driuk  wine  in  howls,  and  anoint  themselves  with  the  chief 
ointments  :  but  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  afiliction  of  Joseph.  Therefore  now  shall 
they  go  captive  with  the  first  that  go  captive,  and  the  banquet  of  them  that  stretched 
themselves  shall  be  removed."  1.  The  separation  is  certain.  There  is  no  mirth  for  the 
sinner  either  in  morial  conviction,  death,  the  judgment  day,  or  in  the  scenes  of  final 
retribution.  "  If  you  will  not  take  away  sin  from  your  mirth,"  says  an  old  writer, 
"  God  will  take  away  your  mirth  from  your  sin."  2.  'JTie  separation  will  he  solemn. 
It  is  said  that  Pope  Adrian  exclaimed  when  he  was  dying,  "0  my  soul,  where  art 
thou  going  ?  Thou  shalt  never  be  merry  any  more."  "  I  will  cause  all  her  mirth  to 
cease,"  says  God. 

Conclusion.  Confound  not  mirth  with  happiness !  The  brightest  gleams  of  mirth 
are  but  the  rays  of  rushlijihts ;  only  visible  in  the  dark,  and  that  must  go  out.  Happi- 
ness is  a  quenchless  sunbeam ;  it  streams  from  the  eternal  Father  of  lights.  Happiness 
will  follow  holiness  for  ever ;  mirth  will  only,  like  the  ignis  fatuus,  flare  about  wn  for 
a  short  time  at  most,  then  go  out,  and  there  is  pitch  darkness. — D.  T. 

Vers.  12,  13. — The  prosperity  of  the  wicJced.  "  And  I  will  destroy  her  vines  and  her 
fig  trees,  whereof  she  hath  said,  These  are  my  rewards  that  my  lovers  have  given  me  : 
and  I  will  make  them  a  forest,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  tliem.  And  I  will 
visit  upon  her  the  days  of  Baalim,  wherein  she  burned  incense  to  them,  and  she  decked 
herself  with  her  ear-rings  and  her  jewels,  and  she  went  after  her  lovers,  and  forgat  me, 
saith  the  Lord."    These  verses  lead  us  to  look  upon  wicked  man  in  three  aspects. 

I.  Ab  prospbrino  in  the  world.  "  I  will  destroy  her  [t.e.  idolatrous  Israel]  vines 
and  her  fig  trees."  Vines  and  fig  trees  stand  for  prosperity.  There  is  a  synecdoche 
here :  vines  and  fig  trees  mean  all  outward  prosperity.  Wicked  men  are  allowed  to 
prosper  on  this  ejirth ;  they  are  often  jnore  successful  ip  worldly  enterprises  than  the 


CH.  n.  1— S13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  77 

righteonR.    They  live  for  the  world  and  to  the  world,  and  they  have  their  reward. 
Their  ground  becomes  fruitful,  their  tra  le  prosperous,  their  profession  remunerative. 

II.  As  ASCRIBINO  THEiB  PROSPEBiTT  TO  WRONO  CAUSES.  "These  are  my  rewards 
that  my  lovers  have  given  me."  Israel  ascribed  its  prosperity  to  its  idols,  here  called 
its  "  lovers."  The  wicked  ascribe  their  success  sometimes  to  fortune,,  sometimes  to 
chance,  Rometimes  to  their  own  industry,  and  sometimes  to  their  rogueries.  They  don't 
trace  it  to  the  true  Source,  the  great  Qod. 

III.  As  DKVOTINO  TREIB  PROSPEBITT  TO  WBONO  OBJECTS.  "  And  I  Will  vlsit  upon  her 
the  days  of  Baalim,  wherein  she  burned  incense  to  them,"  etc.  "  Baalim  "  is  the  plural 
number,  by  which  some  suppose  inferior  gods  are  meant.  Israel  is- here  accused  of 
burning  incense  to  these  deii  minoret.  Wicked  men  devote  their  wealth,  not  to  the 
improvement  of  their  minds  or  to  the  true  progress  of  mankind,  but  to  their  own  selfish 
and  superstitious  ends.  God  is  recognized  in  the  use  no  more  than  in  the  pursuit  of 
their  wealth.    "  She  went  after  her  lovers,  and  forgat  me,  saith  the  Lord." 

IV.  As  DEFBivED  OF  THEIB  PKOSPEBITY  BY  THE  GREAT  QoD.  "  I  wiU  make  them  a 
forest,  and  the  beasts  of  the  field  shall  eat  them.  And  I  will  visit  upon  her  the  days  of 
Baalim."  The  threatening  is,  that  God  will  not  only  destroy  all  their  prosperity,  "  the 
vines  and  fig  trees,"  but  punish  them  for  their  idolatry.  "  I  will  visit  upon  her  the 
days  of  Baalim," 

Conclusion.  "  The  tinsel  glare  npon  a  sinner  is  too  apt  to  offend  the  weak  eyes  of 
a  saint.  Alas  I  why  should  he  envy  him  a  little  light  who  is  to  be  shrouded  in  ever- 
lasting darkness?  Why  should  we  throw  bludgeons  at  boughs  which  are  only  laden 
with  poisonous  firuits?" — D.  T. 

Vers.  14, 15.— Sottl-re*toratton.  "  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  allure  her,  and  bring  her 
into  the  wilderness,  and  speak  comfortably  unto  her.  And  I  will  give  her  her  vine- 
yards from  thence,  and  the  valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope  :  and  she  shall  sing  there, 
as  in  the  days  of  her  youth,  and  as  in  the  day  when  she  came  up  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt."  These  words  refer  to  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  friendship  and  fellowship  with 
God.  "  The  desert,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  into  which  the  Lord  will  lead  his  people  cannot 
be  any  other  than  the  desert  of  Arabia,  through  which  the  road  from  Egypt  to  Canaan 
passes.  Leading  into  this  desert  is  not  a  punishment,  but  a  redemption  out  of  bondage. 
The  people  are  not  to  remain  in  the  desert,  but  to  be  enticed  and  led  through  it  to 
Canaan,  the  land  of  vineyards.  The  description  is  typical  throughout.  What  took 
place  in  the  olden  time  is  to  be  repeated,  in  all  that  is  essential,  in  the  time  to  come. 
Egypt,  the  Arabian  desert,  and  Canaan  are  types.  Egypt  is  a  type  of  the  land  of  the 
captivity  in  which  Israel  had  been  oppressed  in  its  fathers  by  the  heathen  power  of  the 
world."  The  verses  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  subject  of  toul-restoration,  and  they 
suggest  two  facts. 

I.  That  the  btaoes  in  boul-bestoration  are  ORAOUAii.  The  reference  through- 
out here  is  to  the  emancipation  of  the  Jews  from  the  Egyptian  bondage,  their  Divine 
guidance  in  the  wilderness,  and  their  entrance  into  tlie  promised  land.  And  all  this  is 
here  employed  to  illustrate  spiritual  restoration.  We  may  remark,  therefore  :  1.  That 
the  first  step  to  soul-restoration  is  from  bondage  to  liberty.  "  I  will  allure  her,  and  bring 
her  into  the  wilderness."  Into  the  wilderness  from  where  ?  Prom  Egyptian  bondage. 
In  Egypt  the  Israelites  were  slaves,  in  the  wilderness  they  were  free.  All  souls  are  in 
moral  Egypt,  and  the  first  step  to  their  restoration  is  their  exodus  into  the  moral  Arabia. 
2.  The  next  step  is  from  despondency  to  hope.  The  valley  of  Achor,  which  was  situated 
to  the  north  of  Gilgal,  is  mentioned  by  the  prophet  with  a  manifest  reference  to  Josh.  vii. 
Through  the  sin  of  Achan  Israel  had  incurred  the  displeasure  of  the  Almighty,  and  its 
army  against  Ai  was  defeated.  But  through  the  prayers  of  Joshua  and  the  elders,  the 
Divine  favour  was  again  obtained,  and  Israel  became  triumphant,  and  the  valley  of 
Achor,  where  there  was  great  trouble,  radiated  with  "  hope."  The  victory  of  Ai  threw 
all  Canaan  into  their  hands  (Josh.  vii.  8),  and  Achor,  once  the  scene  of  great  trouble, 
became  to  them  "  a  door  of  hope."  It  was,  indeed,  the  first  place  of  which  they  took 
possession  in  Canaan ;  it  was  the  entrance  into  the  promised  land.  In  spiritual  restora- 
tion the  soul  passes  from  trouble  into  hope ;  in  the  "  deep  valley  of  affliction  it  finds  a 
door  of  hope."  Joseph  in  his  prison,  David  in  his  persecutions,  Saul  in  his  manifold 
trials, — all  found  "  a  door  of  hope."    Through  much  tribulation  we  enter  into  kingdoms. 


78  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  ii.  1—23. 

3.  The  next  Btep  is  from  steriUiy  tofruit/ulnesi.  "I  will  ffYe  her  her  vineyards  from 
thence,"  The  wilderness  was  a  barren  desert,  but  Canaan  was  a  land  of  vineyards ;  it 
abounded  with  fruit.  In  spiritual  restoration  the  soul  passes  from  the  sterile  into  the 
fruitful ;  it  leaves  the  desert  for  a  paradise.  4.  The  next  step  is  from  sadnest  to  exul- 
tation, "  She  shall  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her  youth."  The  reference  here  again 
is  to  the  song  which  the  Israelites  sang  after  they  had  crossed  the  Bed  Sea  (Exod.  xv.  1). 
The  song  of  the  redeemed  soul  at  last  will  be  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  (Bev. 
XV.  3).  Such  are  the  stages  through  which  the  soul  in  its  restoration  passes — from 
thraldom  to  liberty,  despondency  to  hope,  barrenness  to  fruitfulness,  sadness  to  exultation. 

XL  That  the  aoemot  in  soul-bestoeation  is  Divinb.  Who  is  it  that  effects  this 
restoration  ?  God.  "  I  will  allure  her,"  etc. ;  "  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards,"  etc.  No 
one  but  God  can  restore  souls.  Mark  how  he  does  it.  1.  Morally.  "  I  will  allure  her." 
It  is  not  by  force  or  violence,  not  by  menace  or  might,  but  by  the  enticements  of  the 
moral  beauty  of  his  character  and  the  charms  of  bis  love.  God  restores  souls  by 
manifesting  all  his  tenderness,  his  goodness,  his  perfections  to  them  through  Christ. 
The  power  of  the  gospel  is  the  power  of  allurement.  If  souls  are  to  come  out  of  their 
Egypt  into  the  wilderness,  God  mtist  allure  them.  2.  Lovingly.  "  Speak  comfortably 
u;ito  her."  He  declares  he  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  a  sinner.  He  assures  of  his 
readiness  to  pardon  and  to  bless.  He  says,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  etc. 
3.  Oentroudy.  "  I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence."  He  who  gave  Canaan  to 
the  Jews  gives  heaven  to  restored  souls. 

Conclusion.  Brother,  knowest  thon  aught  of  this  soul-restoration?  Have  the 
allurements  of  Divine  love  drawn  thee  out  of  Egypt  ?  In  the  midst  of  thy  deep  troubles 
hast  thou  found  a  "  door  of  hope  "  ?  Is  the  wilderness  within  thee  beginning  to  blossom 
as  the  rose,  and  do  the  fruitful  vines  refresh  thee  with  their  clusters  ?  Has  the  song  of 
Moses  and  the  Lamb  inspired  thy  heart  and  tuned  thy  voice  ?  If  so,  "  sing  praises 
unto  our  God,  sing  praises." — D.  T. 

Vers.  18,  19. — 2%e  mblime  privHtges  of  the  good.  "  And  in  that  day  will  I  make 
a  covenant  for  them  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and 
with  the  creeping  things  of  the  ground  :  and  I  will  break  the  bow  and  the  sword  and 
the  battle  out  of  the  earth,  and  will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely.  And  I  will 
betroth  thee  unto  me  for  ever;  yea, I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  righteousness,  and 
in  judgment,  and  in  loving-kindness,  and  in  mercies."  These  words  present  to  us  a  few 
of  the  many  surpassing  privileges  which  all  men  might  enjoy. 

I.    INFEBIOB  CBGATUBES  HIOBT    be    divinely    BESTBAINED    rBOH    INjmtlNO    THEM. 

"  In  that  day  will  I  make  a  covenant  for  them  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,"  etc. 
There  are  creatures  that  have  both  the  power  and  the  inclination  to  devour  man.  Prowling 
beasts  of  the  field,  and  ravenous  fowls  of  the  air,  and  creeping  scorpions  of  the  earth, 
have  at  once  the  power  and  passion  to  put  an  end  to  the  human  race.  Who  restrains 
themV  God's  hand  is  on  them.  He  holds  them  back.  Sometimes  he  withdraws 
his  hand  and  men  are  devoured.  Will  not  a  lion  devour  a  saint  as  well  as  a  sinner  ? 
It  depends  upon  whether  the  saint  has  committed  himself  to  the  Divine  protection, 
and  has  received  into  his  own  heart  au  assurance  of  Divine  guardianship.  Daniel  was 
safe  in  the  presence  of  the  ravenous  lions;  and  in  modem  times,  instances  have 
occurred  where  savage  beasts  have  been  restrained  from  inflicting  injury  on  godly  men. 
"  Thou  shalt  tread  upon  the  lion  and  the  adder  "  (Ps.  xci.  13).  I  have  an  Impression 
that  were  man  to  possess  and  manifest  th6  moral  majesty  of  goodness,  the  wildest  and 
most  savage  creatures  would  stand  in  awe  of  him. 

IL  Human  enemies  might  bb  made  to  submit  to  them.  "  I  will  break  the  bow 
and  the  sword  and  the  battle  out  of  the  earth."  Those  who  trust  in  the  Lord  need 
not  be  afraid  of  war.  The  potsherds  of  the  earth  might  strive  with  each  other, 
but  they  would  not  harm  the  good.  The  man  who  would  never  strike  a  blow  is  not 
likely  ever  to  be  struck.  The  spirit  of  the  good  man  is  to  overcome  evil  with  good. 
Imagine  an  army  drawn  up  to  attack  a  body  of  truly  Christly  men — men  who  prayed 
for  their  enemies,  and  did  good  to  them  that  despitefuUy  used  them,  and  who  held  no 
weapons  in  their  hands.  They  would  look  calmly  on  their  assailants  while  they  were 
brandishing  their  swords  and  shouldering  their  bayonets.  What  would  be  the  result? 
Why,  a  moral  force  would  go  forth  from  the  unarmed  multitude,  which  would  break 


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  79 

the  "  bow,  the  sword,  and  the  battle."  As  a  rule,  bad  as  human  nature  is,  it  » ill  not 
intentionally  injure  the  unquestionably  good  and  unoffending.  It  is  the  moral  power  of 
goodness  that  can  alone  break  "  the  bow  and  the  sword  and  the  battle  out  of  the  earth." 

III.  They  might  enjoy  a  perfect  skocjbity.  "  Will  make  them  to  lie  down  safely." 
Every  man  might  have  God  as  his  Refuge  and  Strength;  as  his  Shield  and  Buckler. 
"  The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower:  the  righteous  shall  flee  thereto  and  be  safe." 
"  Who  shall  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ?  "  "If  God  be  for  us, 
who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  What  is  the  true  safety  ?  Not  the  mere  safety  of  the  body. 
The  body  is  not  the  man ;  it  is  his — not  him.  The  body  may  be  in  safety  when  the 
soul  is  in  peril,  and  it  might  be  in  danger  when  the  soul  is  secure.  Soul-safety  is  the 
safety  of  the  man;  and  soul-safety  means  protection  from  all  that  is  unholy  in 
thought,  impure  in  feeling,  unrighteous  in  volition.  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feels  his 
spirit  safe  1 

IV.  They  might  enjoy  vital  union  with  the  EVBBLASTiNa  Fountain  op  ooOdnbss. 
"  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  fur  ever ;  yea,  I  will  betroth  thee  unto  me  in  righteousness, 
and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving-kindness,  and  in  mercies."  Here  is  a  union !  the 
closest  union,  one  represented  by  that  of  a  husband  and  wife ;  a  union  formed  by 
immutable  ties.  Righteousness,  judgment,  loving-kindness,  faithfulness, — who  can 
break  these  bonds?  "The  mountains  shall  depart,  the  bills  be  removed,  but  my  kind- 
ness shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed." 

Conclusion.  Learn  the  supreme  importance  of  moral  goodness  to  man.  With 
godliness  man  has  everything.  All  things  are  bis,  and  he  is  Christ's,  and  Christ 
is  God's.— D.  T. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — Oud  and  his  universe.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  I 
will  hear,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall  hear  the  earth ;  and 
the  earth  shall  hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the  oil ;  and  they  shall  hear  Jezreel.  And 
I  will  sow  her  unto  me  in  the  earth ;  and  I  will  have  mercy  upon  her  that  had  not 
obtained  mercy ;  and  I  will  say  to  them  which  were  not  my  people.  Thou  art  my 
people ;  and  they  shall  say.  Thou  art  my  God."  As  the  word  "  Jezreel "  literally  means 
"  seed  of  God,"  I  shall  take  it  in  its  etymological  sense,  and  regard  it  as  denoting  the 
good  in  every  age  and  land.  Our  subject  is  God  and  hii  tmiverse,  and  the  text 
contains  three  facts. 

I.  That  the  operations  of  the  universe  are  under  the  wise  direction  of  the  obeat 
God.  The  universe  is  represented  as  in  action.  The  "  heaven,"  the  "  earth,"  the 
"  wine,"  the  "  corn,"  and  "  Jezreel "  are  all  acting.  There  is  nothing  stationary.  Creation 
is  like  a  flowing  river,  there  is  not  a  particle  at  rest.  It  is  our  happiness,  however,  to 
know  that  all  its  activities  are  presided  over  by  God.  It  is  not  a  self-acting  machine  ; 
the  great  machinist  is  ever  in  it  and  with  it.  The  fact^of  his  superintendence  serves 
several  useful  purposes.  1.  To  account /or  the  unbroken  order  of  nature.  Why  does 
not  the  ocean  overflow  its  boundaries,  or  the  massive  globes  swerve  from  their  orbits? 
God  is  over  alL  2.  To  impress  us  with,  the  sanctity  of  nature.  God  is  in  all — the 
lustre  of  the  light,  the  beauty  of  the  lovely,  the  majesty  of  the  grand,  the  support  of 
the  feeble,  the  might  of  the  strong.  3.  To  inspire  with  reverence  for  Ood^s  greatness. 
How  great  must  he  be,  etc.  1 

II.  That  the  operations  of  the  universe  are  oeneballt  conducted  upon  the 
mediatory  principle.  "  I  will  hear  the  heavens,"  etc.  One  part  of  nature  is  here 
represented  as  acting  upon  another,  in  order  to  give  a  certain  result.  In  the  material 
as  well  as  the  spiritual  world,  God  woiks  out  his  plans  by  secondary  instrumentalities. 
Look  at  tMs  in  relation  to  man.  1.  In  relation  to  him  as  a  material  being.  Whence 
came  these  corporeal  frames?  how  are  they  sustained?  by  what  means  are  they  broken 
up?  All  through  secondary  means.  2.  In  relation  to  him  as  a  spiritual  being.  How 
is  he  instructed,°convei  ted,  sanctified  ?     Not  directly,  but  mediatively. 

III.  That  the  operations  of  the  universe  are  mercifully  subordinated  to  the 
INTERESTS  OF  THE  oooD.  "  Jezreel,"  the  seed  of  God,  i.e.  good  men,  are  spoken  of  as 
receiving  three  things.  1.  The  blessing  sought.  Jezreel  prayed,  and  all  nature  is 
represented  as  conveying  its  prayers  to  God.  The  universe  labours  for  the  good.  2.  The 
multipli<xition  of  their  number.  "  I  will  say  to  them,"  etc.  The  strongest  desire  of 
the  truly  good  i»  to  make  others  good.    3.  The  heightening  tf  Om  lym^athy  between 


80  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  n,  1—23. 

them  and  their  Ood.    "  I  will  say  to  them  which  were  not  my  people,"  etc    What 
a  privilege  is  this  I — D.  T. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — Spiritual  adultery.  The  indiyidualsof  the  nation  are  exhorted  to  plead 
with  their  mother  Israel,  that  she  may  turn  from  her  adulterous  courses,  and  so  avert 
the  doom  which  is  otherwise  certain  to  overtake  her.     Consider^ 

I.  Israel's  shamkless  proflioaot.  (Vers.  2,  5.)  The  sin  charged  against  Israel 
is  that  of  adultery,  in  her  relations  with  Jehovah.  Owing  to  the  peculiarity  of  these 
relations,  the  sin  was  of  a  specially  aggravateil  kind.  I.  The  people  had  withdrawn 
from  Jehovah  that  undivided  alle.;iance  which,  as  the  one  living  and  true  Q-od,  he 
demanded  of  them.  2.  They  had  set  up  idol  images  (the  calves),  and  had  changed  God 
in  their  thoughts  to  a  mere  nature-deity,  like  the  heathen  Baals.  3.  They  had  gone 
after  the  heathen  Baals  as  well.  In  form,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  kept  up ;  in 
reality,  idolatry  had  the  sole  dominion.  This  was  their  adultery.  It  was  public 
and  unblusliina;.  Even  in  the  eyes  of  the  heathen,  Israel  was  guilty  of  great  wanton- 
ness, for  the  heathen  were  not  wont  thus  lightly  to  change  their  gods  (Jer.  ii.  11). 
The  crime  for  which  Israel  is  indicted,  however,  is  not  peculiar  to  that  nation.  In  a 
deeper  regard,  it  is  the  fundamental  sin  of  the  race.  The  soul  made  by  God  for  him- 
self has  left  him,  and  gone  after  other  lovers.  It  has  turned  to  the  creature.  It  lusts 
for  illicit  satisfactions.  Its  dispositions  are  "  evil  and  adulterous  "  (Matt.  xiL  39). 
Especially  it  this  sin  committed  by  those  who,  entering  into  a  new  covenant  with 
God  by  grace,  afterwards  go  back  to  the  world. 

II.  Her  certain  punishment.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  Israel's  adultery  dissolved  de/acto  the 
marriage  relation  between  the  nation  and  Jehovah.  Ver.  2  is  the  Divine  deed  of 
separation.  Separation  is  followed  by  punishment.  Under  the  Law,  adultery  was 
punished  by  death.  This  doom  also,  as  respects  corporate  existence,  was  about  to 
overtake  Israel.  But  the  figure  in  the  text  alludes  rather  to  the  withdrawal  of  God's 
good  gifts — the  gifts  bestowed  on  Israel  in  her  relation  of  spouse — with  its  result  in 
the  reduction  of  the  nation  to  a  condition  of  utter  wretchedness  and  want.  The 
"  slaying  with  thirst "  (ver.  3)  is  not  absolute,  since  recovery  is  predicted  (ver.  7), 
but  denotes  a  state  of  extreme  anguish,  in  which  multitudes  would  actually  perish 
(Deut.  xxviii.  33,  34,  48,  65 — 68).  There  is  here :  1.  A  reminder  of  the  source  of 
natural  blessings.  God  could  take  away,  because  it  was  he  who  at  first  gave.  It  wis 
he  who  gave  Israel  all  she  had.  Hence  the  destitution  to  which  the  withdrawal  of  his 
gifts  reduced  her.  "  If  God  withdraws  his  gifts,  the  consequences  are  infinitely 
awful,  because,  altogether  unlike  the  natural  husband,  he  has  everything  in  his  posses- 
sion; if  he  does  not  give  anything  to  drink,  he  then  slays  by  thirst"  (Hengstenberg). 
2.  A  correspondence  between  sm  and  punishment.  Whiit  Israel  possessed,  she  received 
in  virtue  ot  the  marriage  covenant.  At  first  she  had  nothing.  God  had  given  her  all, 
Answerably  to  this,  she  is  punished  by  being  reiiuced  to  her  ori-inal  destitute  con- 
dition. Marriage  unfaithfulness  leads  to  the  withdrawal  of  the  marriage  siifts.  "The 
eternal  and  universal  truth  which,  in  the  verse  before  us,  is  expressed  with  a  special 
reference  to  Israel,  is,  that  all  the  gifts  of  God  are  bestowed  on  individuals  as  well  as 
upon  whole  nations,  only  in  order  to  leail  them  to  the  communion  of  1  fe  with  him,  or 
because  this  communion  already  exists.  If  we  fail  to  see  that  the  gifts  of  God  have 
this  object,  if  they  be  not  received  and  enjoyed  as  the  gifts  of  God,  if  the  spiritual 
marriage  be  refused,  or  if,  having  been  already  entered  into,  it  be  broken,  sooner  or 
later  the  gifts  will  be  withdrawn  "  (Hengstenberg).  3.  A  picture  of  the  state  of  the 
soul  from  which  Ood  has  withdrawn  himself.  The  outward  is  the  image  of  the 
inward.  The  soul  which  has  forsaken  God — which  God  has  forsaken — ^is  solitary  and 
desolate,  burnt  with  hunger,  parched  with  intolerable  thirst,  a  desert.  God's  design  in 
withdrawing  the  outward  gifts  is  that  the  soul  may  be  led  to  feel  the  deeper  misery  and 
disgrace  within. 

III.  The  one  way  or  escape.  (Ver.  2.)  Repentance — turning  from  the  evil  courses. 
God  is  unwilling  to  proceed  to  extremities,  though,  if  the  sin  be  persisted  in,  he  must. 
He  gives  here  a  final  warning,  a  last  opportunity.  There  is  thus  a  limit  to  the  Divia* 
forbearance.  The  last  appeal  will  come  some  day.  Often,  by  the  time  it  comes,  we  are 
su  sunk  in  sin  as  to  be  past  attending  to  it.  While,  however,  mercy  lasts,  the  most 
abandoned  may  return. 


CH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  g] 

IV.  The  dutt  of  the  raoiviDnAii.  •  Plead  with  your  mother,  pleacl  "  (ver.  2). 
Individuals  are  implicated  in  the  guilt  of  the  community.  They  have  a  stake  in  the 
general  well-being  (ver.  4).  They  have,  accordingly,  a  responsibility  in  connection  with 
national  backslidingB.  It  is  their  duty  (1)  to  separate  themselves  "from  the  prevailing 
wickedness ;  (2)  to  testify  against  it ;  (3)  to  use  every  means  to  try  to  bring  about 
repentance  and  reformation. — J.  O. 

Vers.  6 — ^9. — Thephilosophy  of  the  Divine  chastisementt.  The  punishment  of  Israel, 
while  retributive,  was  designed  also  to  be  reformatory.  It  would  display  the  Divine 
wisdom.    Consider — 

I.  The  delusion  undebltihq  Israel's  devotion  to  the  idols.  (Vers.  6,  8, 12.) 
1.  The  nature  of  the  delusion.  The  root  of  it  was  the  notion  that  her  prosperity  was 
attributable  to  the  assiduity  of  her  service  of  the  idols.  It  wa£  '.I  -t^  si*  thought,  who 
had  given  her  her  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  her  bread  and  water,  her  wooi  ana  fiax. 
She  ignored  the  real  Giver.  The  delusion  is  not  uncommon.  Men  put  natural  laws, 
second  causes,  their  own  skill  and  power,  or  the  skill  and  power  of  others,  in  place  of 
the  living  God.  They  forget  him.  2.  The  sourceg  of  the  delusion.  (1)  Ignorance  of 
the  true  God.  Israel  had  parted  with  the  right  knowledge  of  Jehovah  (ch.  iv.  6).  She 
had  it  not,  because  she  did  not  wish  to  have  it  (cf.  Rom.  i.  28).  (2)  Corrupt  propensities. 
The  state  of  the  heart  pointed  out  the  way  for  the  devotions.  The  heathen  idols  were 
more  congenial  objects  of  worship  than  the  spiritual,  holy  God.  3.  The  effects  of  the 
delusion.  The  prosperity  which  the  people  enjoyed  confirmed  them  in  their  adhesion 
to  the  Baals.  It  led  them  to  redouble  their  assiduity  in  serving  them  (ver.  5).  It  led 
them  increasingly  to  disregard  the  true  Giver.  Hence  the  necessity  for  breaking  up 
the  delusion  by  withdrawing  the  gifts. 

II.  The  Divine  dbalino  as  directed  to  the  breakino  up  op  this  delusion. 
(Vers.  6,  7,  9.)  God  declares  that  he  will:  1.  Block  up  Israel's  way  in  pursuit  of  her 
idols.  "  Therefore,  behold,  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  That 
is,  he  would  put  bars  and  difSoulties  in  the  way  of  the  sei-vice  of  the  idol-gods.  He 
would  interrnpt  and  suspend  their  worship.  He  would  break  up  the  sense  of  fellow- 
ship with  them.  He  would  do  this  by  means  of  afflictions.  The  effect  would  be 
to  shatter  the  dreams  of  the  worshippers.  They  would  find  to  their  discomfiture 
that  the  service  of  the  idols  was  not  all  bliss.  They  would  be  led  to  consider  de  novo 
what  they  should  do.  Unexpected  checks  in  the  pursuit  of  favourite  objects  aro 
among  Go.l's  means  of  inciting  us  to  reflection.  2.  Take  away  from  her  tie  blessings 
which  are  the  chief  support  of  her  delusion.  (Ver.  9.)  The  removal  of  the  corn  and 
wine  and  oil,  in  fulfilment  of  the  threatening,  would  show  that  these  blessings  were 
from  Jehovah,  and  were  not  the  gift  of  the  idols.  They  must  be  his,  else  he  could  not 
thus  take  them  away.  Conversely,  the  inability  of  the  idols  to  prevent  this  deprivation, 
or  to  restore  the  gifts,  or  to  help  their  devotees  in  the  time  of  need,  would  demonstrate 
the  futility  of  putting  trust  in  gods  that  were  no  gods.  The  removal  of  earthly  bless- 
ings is  intended  in  this  way  to  work  for  our  good.  God  seeks  by  it  to  break  up  falsj 
confidences.  He  would  dispel  our  illusions.  He  would  teach  us  dependence.  He 
would  lead  us  to  recognize  in  him  the  only  Giver  of  our  good. 

III.  The  behaviour  of  Israel  under  this  Divine  discipline.  (Ver.  7.)  1.  A 
first  efl'ect  would  be  to  make  Israel  more  earnest  than  ever  in  pursuit  of  her  idol-goda 
"  0  Baal,  hear  us ! "  (2  Kings  xviii.  26).  Dawning  conviction  has  often  this  result, 
The  heart  is  slow  to  believe  that  it  has  been  so  utterly  befooled.  It  tries  hard  to 
defeat  God.  2.  The  second  effect — when  she  had  had  full  experience  of  the  inability 
of  the  idol-gods  to  help  her — would  be  to  lead  her  to  bethink  herself  of  returning  to 
Jehovah.  "I  will  go  and  return  to  my  first  husband,"  etc.  She  sees  now,  like  the 
prodigal  (Luke  xv.  17,  18),  the  folly  of  her  past  conduct ;  she  realizes  its  wickedness ; 
she  feels  that  it  was  better  with  her  formerly  than  now,  and  that  "  the  way  of  trans- 
giessois  is  hard"  (Prov.  xiii.  15).  So,  cured  of  her  delusions,  she  returns  to  her  Lord. 
He,  in  turn,  is  ready  to  receive  her.  This  was  the  end  to  which  the  whole  discipline 
pointed.  God  is  equally  willing  to  receive  every  sinner  who  returns  to  him  (Isa.  Iv.  6, 7). 
The  experience  of  the  bitterness  of  the  fruits  of  sin  is  desis^ned  to  lead  to  repentance. 
Well  for  the  transgressor  when  chastisement  produces  in  him  the  result  here  described  I 
-J.  0. 

HOSXiu  „ 


M  THE  BOOK  OF  H08BA.  Loh-  n-  ^—^^ 

Vers.  10 — ^18. — Betribution,  Israel's  punishment,  while  retributive,  was  reformatory. 
It  is  equally  true  that,  while  reformatory,  it  was  retributive.  It  repaid  Israel  for  her 
sins.  It  vindicated  righteousness.  All  earthly  punishments  have  this  double  character. 
The  following  principles  come  to  light  in  the  passage : — 

L  Sin  ends  in  the  full  bevelation  of  its  hideousnbss.  (Ver.  10.)  At  first 
its  true  nature  is  concealed.  It  comes  with  fair  appearances;  it  decks  itself  in  festal 
garments  (ver.  13) ;  it  makes  large  promises.  Only  at  a  later  period  is  the  mask 
stripped  off,  and  it  appears  in  its  full  hidcousness.  Such  a  day  of  revelation  will  come 
for  every  sinner.  He  will  find  himself  put  to  shame  even  in  the  eyes  of  those  whom 
he  sought  to  serve.  How  loathsome  even  the  body  can  become  when  sin  has  wrought 
its  work  in  it  (the  drunkard,  the  harlot)!  How  much  more  the  soul  I  Every  rag 
of  deceptive  appearance  will  yet  be  stripped  oif,  and  the  foul,  abhorrent  spectacle  of 
depravity  exposed  to  the  whole  universe. 

II.  Sin  ends  in  the  dying  out  op  jot.  "I  will  also  cause  all  her  mirth  to 
tease"  (ver.  11).  This  is  literally  true,  even  in  the  present  life.  After  a  time,  sin 
ceases  to  yield  the  pleasures  which  at  first  were  found  in  it. '  The  very  capacity  for 
juy  dies  out.  The  debauchee,  the  fortune-hunter,  the  slaves  of  fashion,  the  victims  of 
iimbition,  know  this  well. 

III.  Sin  ends  in  the  withdeawal  of  abused  PBivn^EOES.  (Ver.  11.)  The 
feast  days,  new  moons,  sabbaths,  and  other  festivals,  which  Israel  had  turned  into  days 
of  unholy  carnival,  would  be  taken  from  her.  They  were  given  her  for  different  ends, 
and  she  had  abused  them.  We  cannot  hope  to  reject  God  and  yet  retain  unimpaired 
our  religious  liberties,  opportunities,  and  blessings;  e.g.  our  sabbaths.  These  will 
vanish  with  our  regard  for  the  Giver  of  them. 

IV.  Sin  ENDS  in  the  bbmoval  of  natural  blessings.  (Ver.  12.)  Failing;  in  the 
due  acknowledgment  of  God  in  the  reception  of  them,  we  may  look  for  the  withdiawa) 
uf  these  also. 

V.  Sin  ends  in  poignant  memories  of  an  evil  past.  "The  days  of  Baalim, 
wherein  she  burned  incense  to  them,  and  she  decked  herself,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  The 
memory  of  past  follies  is  no  small  part  of  the  sinner's  misery.  "  Son,  remember  " 
(LukexvL25).— J.  O. 

Ver.  14. — Israel's  recovery.  It  had  already  been  told  that  God's  dealings  with  Israel 
would  not  be  permanently  in  vain.  This  truth  is  now  expanded.  Timss  and  seasons 
are  not  specified ;  for  (1)  it  was  not  given  to  the  prophet  to  know  them  (cf.  Acts  i.  7) ; 
and  (2)  it  lay  with  Israel  itself,  in  some  measure,  to  make  the  times  and  seasons. 

1.  The  earliest  phase  of  the  predicted  allurement  is  seen  in  the  promises  held  out  in 
connection  with  the  return  from  the  Babylonian  captivity.  These  promises  embraced 
Israel  as  well  as  Judah  (Isa.  xl. — ^Ixvi. ;  Ezek.  xxxvii. ;  Zech.  viii.,  etc.).  The  result, 
however,  showed  that  Israel  was  not  yet  in  a  fit  condition  to  receive  the  fulfilment. 

2.  The  second  phase  of  the  allurement  was  in  the  preaching  of  Christ's  gospel.  This, 
which  was  addressed  to  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  tells  of  God's  redeeming  love,  and 
prays,  "  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God  "  (2  Cor.  v.  20),  Many  of  the  "  house  of  Israel " 
listened — many  still  listen — to  this  allurement.  3.  The  final  fulfilment  will  be  reached 
in  the  day  of  Israel's  national  conversion.  Then,  as  the  result,  perhaps,  of  greftt 
experience  of  trouble  (ver.  15),  God's  words  will  come  with  new  power  to  their  hearts. 
Earnest  penitence  will  ensue.  "All  Israel  shall  be  saved"  (Eom.  xi.  26).  The  fulfil- 
ment of  these  promises  is  connected  in  prophecy  with  the  coming  of  a  Redeemer  anrl 
the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  This  supposes  new  riispensational  arrangements.  There  is 
implied  the  bringing  in  of  a  new  economy,  which  yet,  from  its  nature,  would  have 
a  wider  scope  than  the  economy  which  then  existed.  Israel  participates  in  the  blessings 
of  the  new  covenant  only  as  part  of  a  larger  "  people  of  God."  This  is  the  principle 
which  legitimizes  the  extension  of  these  promises— so  far  as  they  are  not  plainly 
national — to  the  whole  Church  of  belie vers.--J.  0. 

Vers.  14 — 18. — Allurement    Wonderful  are  the  steps  of  Divine  love  in  the  history 

of  the  recovery  of  a  soul.     View  those  which  are  here  presented. 

L  Wilderness  fbepabation.  (Ver.  14.)  Chastisement  would  prepare  the  way  for 
mercy.    Isnel  wa»  to  be  taken  out  "into  the  wilderness."  There,  deprived  of  her  idols, 


CH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF   HOSEA,  83 

and  stripped  of  Tier  earthly  blessings,  she  would  bethink  herself  of  the  God  from  whom 
she  had  departed.  It  takes  much  discipline,  oftentimes,  to  bring  us  into  the  state  ^f 
mind  in  which  we  are  willing  to  listen  to  God.  Pride  needs  to  be  humbled ;  self-will 
needs  to  be  broken ;  the  heart  built  up  in  self-righteousness  needs  to  be  convinced 
of  sin.  To  this  end  God  employs  trials,  hardships,  crosses,  bereavements,  sorrows  of. 
Tarioua  kinds.     He  trains  us  by  the  wilderness. 

II.  Divine  allueembnt.  (Ver.  15.)  We  are  led  here  to  study  the  operations  of 
Divine  love  under  the  character  of  allurement.  "  I  will  allure  her."  Allurement  is  the 
art  of  reaching  the  heart  by  soft  influences.  It  is  not  compulsion.  It  is  not  conviction 
by  argument.  It  is  a  persuasive,  drawing  influence  exerted  on  the  affections  and  will 
It  is  gentle,  not  violent ;  it  is  mild,  not  passionate.  It  conquers  by  the  might  of  love. 
Some  persons  have  more  of  this  power  of  attraction,  of  fascination,  than  others.  It  is 
a  gift — an  influence,  emanating  from  the  personality.  It  cannot  be  communicated. 
The  Divine  Spirit  is  the  great  Allurer,  His  dealings  with  a  soul  are  a  secret  between 
that  soul  and  himself.  God  allures :  1.  By  solitude.  "1  will  bring  her  into  the  wilder- 
ness." He  takes  the  soul  apart  by  itself.  He  isolates  it,  as  he  did  Israel  when  he  spoke 
with  her  at  first  (Exod.  xix.  3 — 5).  We  cannot  hear  God's  voice  amidst  the  busy  hum 
of  earth.  Our  own  age  stands  much  in  need  of  more  solitary  communion.  2.  By  word. 
"  I  will  speak  comfortably  unto  her."  The  words  of  God  are  found  in  Scripture.  How 
well  fitted  the  Bible,  with  its  gracious,  tender,  comforting,  reassuring  utterances,  is  for 
this  purpose  of  allurement,  we  all  know.  It  is  shaped  and  adapted  in  every  way  to 
draw  the  soul  to  God.  3.  By  gift.  "I  will  give  her  her  vineyards  from  thence."  The 
typical  blessings  siiadow  out  the  higher.  God  attests  his  love  to  us  by  gift  as  well  as 
by  word.  He  has  given  his  Son  (John  iii.  16).  He  gives  himself.  He  gives  all  spiritual 
blessings  (Eph.  i.  3).  He  gives  eternity.  Christ  is  "the  unspeakable  Gift"  (2  Cor. 
ix.  15).  "  All  things  are  yours "  (1  Cor.  iii.  21).  4.  By  chastisement.  "  And  the 
valley  of  Achor  for  a  door  of  hope."  The  valley  of  Achor  lay  at  the  entrance  of  Canaan. 
It  was  there  that  God  "troubled"  Israel  for  the  sin  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.).  That  sin 
barred  the  entrance  to  the  land,  and  only  when  it  was  judged  and  removed  could  Israel 
proceed.  The  meaning  is  that,  so  often  as  sin  bars  the  way  to  the  possession  of  the 
inheritance,  and  brings  down  chastisement,  so  often  will  grace,  working  through  judg- 
ment on  the  sin,  bring  good  out  of  evil,  and  new  hope  out  of  the  experience  of  sorrow 
(2  Cor.  vii.  9 — 11).  Israel,  after  the  ain  had  been  put  away,  received  a  pledge  of  the 
Divine  presence  with  them  for  future  victories.  "  In  this  relation  the  Lord  here 
promises  that  the  place  of  sanctified  trial  shall  not  only  be  a  region  of  endurance,  but 
a  door  of  hope."  Trouble  becomes  a  means  of  spiritual  profiting.  5.  God's  allurement 
begets  yoy.  "  She  shall  sing  there,  as  in  the  days  of  her  youth,"  etc.  God  puts  a  new 
song  in  the  mouths  of  his  people  (Ps.  xl.  1,  2).  It  is,  as  in  the  triumph  at  the  Bed 
Sea,  a  song  (1)  of  deliverance ;  (2)  of  victory.  "  The  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  XV.).    The  joy  is  the  greater  after  the  sorrow  (Rev.  vii.  9 — 17). 

IlL  Holier  espousals.  (Vers.  16,  17.)  Won  by  the  Divine  allurements,  Israel 
ratifies  a  new  marriage  covenant  with  Jehovah.  The  new  union  is  very  different  from 
the  older  one.  It  is  a  union  marked :  1.  By  earnest  affection.  "  Thou  shalt  call  me 
Ishi" — ^"  my  Husband."  2.  By  purified  feeling.  "  And  shalt  no  more  call  me  Baali" 
— "  my  Baal."  Israel's  feelings  towards  Jehovah  would  be  purged  of  all  idolatrous 
associations.  3.  By  sincere  abhorrence  of  the  past.  "  I  will  take  away  the  names  of 
Baalim  out  of  her  mouth."  So  does  the  sinner  shudder  at  the  very  thought  of  tha 
things  which  formerly  pleased  him.  They  are  hateful  to  him.  He  would  count  it  a 
shame  even  to  speak  of  those  things  in  secret  (Eph.  v.  12).  4.  By  Jealous  care  for  the 
future.  "They  shall  no  more  be  remembered  by  their  name."  Israel  would  guard, 
in  her  future  relations  with  Jehovah,  against  the  intrusion  of  even  the  thought  of  her 
former  paramours.— J.  0. 

Vers.  18 — 23.— The  new  hetrothcU,  Jehovah,  on  his  part,  signs,  as  it  were,  a  new 
marriage  contract  with  Israel.  The  relation  will  this  time  be  an  enduring  one.  He 
will  grant  to  Israel  secuiity  and  peace.  He  will  restore  her  blessings.  He  wiU  dower 
her  with  fresh  gifts.  He  will  increase  her  fruitfulness.  The  promises  may  be  legiti- 
mately extended  to  all  the  Israel  of  faith. 

L  SBO0BITY  AND  PEACE  IH  THE  NEW  EELATION.    (Ver.  18.)    L  The  uew  oovonaat 


04  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  Ica.xt.l—i3. 

win  be,  not  merely  a  covenant  of  God  with  man,  but  a  covenant  of  Ood  with  nature 
on  behalf  of  man.  "  I  will  make  a  covenant  for  them  with  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven,"  etc.  The  idea  here  is  that  of  security.  The  figure  is 
common  in  the  prophets  (Lev.  xxvi.  6 ;  Isa.  xi.  6 — 9 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25).  Underlying 
the  promise  is  the  deep  truth  that  redemption  will  involve  a  palingenesis  of  nature 
— of  the  earth.  So  bound  together  are  man  and  nature  that  the  dissolution  of  the  tie 
between  him  and  his  God  leads  also  to  the  loss  of  his  dominion  over  the  creatures. 
This  will  be  restored.  The  animal  world  will  stand  in  awe  of  him,  will  serve  him,  will 
be  tame  before  him.  2.  The  new  covenant  will  ensure  peace,  "  I  will  break  the  bow 
Hud  the  sword  and  the  battle  out  of  the  earth,"  etc.  A  promise  like  this  can  only 
be  fulfilled  on  the  basis  of  a  universal  regeneration  of  society,  and  therefore  points  to 
the  bringing  in  of  a  covenant  not  limited  in  its  scope  to  the  literal  Israel.  On  the 
peace  tendency  of  the  gospel,  see  Foster's  two  sermons  on  *  The  Cessation  of  War  an 
Kfiect  of  the  Prevalence  of  Christianity.' 

II.  Thb  ENDURiNQNEss  OF  THE  NEW  belahon.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  The  first  covenant 
failed  because  of  (1)  want  of  depth  in  Israel's  knowledge  of  God  ;  (2)  want  of  entire 
surrender  of  heart  to  him ;  (3)  want  of  spiritual  powers,  under  the  Law,  adequate  to 
renew  the  heart.  The  new  covenant  was  not  to  be  like  that  old  one.  Compare  with 
this  passage  Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 34,  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  when  I  will 
make  a  new  covenant  with  the  house  of  Israel,  and  with  the  house  of  Judah :  not 
according  to  the  covenant  which  I  made  with  their  fathers,"  etc.  1.  The  new  covenant 
was  to  be  formed  after  a  discipline  in  which  Israel  had  learned  to  know  God  thorottghly. 
"  Thou  shall  know  the  Lord  "  (ver.  20).  Knowing  God  as  she  Lad  come  to  do,  Israel 
would  be  no  longer  under  any  temptation  to  wander  from  him.  2.  The  new  covenant 
would  be  based  ore  fuller  manifestations  of  the  character  of  God.  "  I  will  betroth  thee 
unto  me  in  righteousness,  and  in  judgment,  and  in  loving-kiniiness,  and  in  mercies" 
(ver.  19).  The  sin  of  Israel  was  the  means  of  God's  character  becoming  better  known. 
His  righteousness,  jurlgment,  loving-kindness,  mercy,  and  faithfulness  come  to  light  in 
her  history  in  many  awful  and  affecting  ways.  It  is  with  this  fuller  knowledge  of  the 
character  of  God  that  she  now  unites  herself  to  him  in  love.  The  union  is  not  one  of 
impulse,  of  haste,  of  indiscretion.  It  is  a  true,  sincere,  heartfelt,  and  intelligent  union, 
certain  never  to  be  repented  of.  Yet  fuller  knowledge  of  the  character  of  God  is  derived 
from  the  manifestation  of  his  attributes  in  the  saving  work  of  Christ.  It  is  there,  most 
of  all,  that  we  see  displayed  his  hatred  of  sin,  his  determination  to  punish  it,  his 
exalted  righteousness,  his  unspeakable  goodness  and  love.  3.  Ood  engages  his  own  attri- 
butes to  secure  the  perpetuation  of  this  new  covenant.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  He  had  prepared 
the  way  for  it;  had  laid  the  foundations  of  it  deep ;  and  he  would  now  take  the  per- 
petuation of  it  into  his  own  hands.  He  engages  his  righteousness,  mercy,  and  faithful- 
ness to  accomplish  this.  "  We  are  not  urider  the  Law,  but  under  grace"  (Kom.  vi,  14). 
The  new  covenant  has  powers  at  its  disposal  which  the  old  covenant  had  not.  It  is 
based  on  renewal,  on  regeneration.  God  sees  to  it  that  his  people,  once  spiritually 
quickened,  do  not  utterly  fall  away  again.  He  preserves  his  Church  by  judgment  and 
mercy. 

HI.  The  bevehsal  op  the  curse  in  the  new  relation.  (Vers.  21,  22.)  For 
Israel's  sake  the  land  had  been  cursed,  and  made  barren  (Deut.  xxix.  22 — 28).  That 
curse  was  now  to  be  recalled.  So  one  effect  of  redemption  will  be  the  recall  of  the 
primal  curse  on  the  earth  for  man's  sin  (Gen.  iii.  17, 18).  1,  Israel  pleads  for  the 
removal  of  the  ciirse.  The  end  of  the  chain  of  prayer  is  Jezreel.  "  They  shall  hear 
Jezreel"  (ver,  22).  Till  Israel  became  penitent,  removal  of  the  curse  was  impos- 
sible. The  success  of  the  earth's  prayer  depended  on  hers.  2.  Nature  pleads  for  the 
removal  of  the  curse.  All  her  departments  hang  together.  Each  depends  on  the 
other.  The  suffering  of  one  is  the  suffering  of  all.  The  com,  wine,  and  oil  entreat 
the  earth;  the  earth  entreats  the  heavens;  the  heavens  entreat  God  (cf.  Rom.  viii. 
19 — 22).  3.  Ood  hearse  He  answers  Nature's  prayer.  Nature  becomes  friendly. 
She  showers  her  blessings  on  the  restored  people.  The  natural  blessings  are  typical 
of  the  spiritual, 

IV,  Fkuitfulnbbs  in  the  new  relation.  (Ver.  23.)  Jezreel,  in  the  sense  of  "  I 
will  scatter,"  is  changed  into  Jezreel,  in  the  sense  of  "  I  will  sow."  Lo-ruhamah 
becomes  Buhamah;  and  Lo-ammi  become*  Aiumi  (ver.  1).     God  "sows"  Israel  in 


oa.  in.  1 — 5.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSE  A. 


85 


the  eartli,  so  that  she  becomes  greatly  multiplied.  The  spiritual  seed  is  hero  included 
with  the  natural.  The  widening  of  tiie  covenant  to  embrace  the  Grentiles  gives  the 
words,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  her  that  had  not  obtained  mercy,"  etc.,  a  greatly  extended 
appUcatioa  (ilura.  ix.  25 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9). — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  m. 


This  short  chapter  contains,  two  sections, 
of  which  the  first,  comprising  vers.  1 — 3,  is 
a  symbolic  representation  ;  and  the  second, 
consisting  of  vers.  4  and  5,  gives  the  expla- 
nation. The  prophet  bestows  his  affections 
on  a  worthless  wife,  who,  notwithstanding 
his  tender  love  to  her,  proves  utterly  un- 
faithful and  lives  in  adultery.  He  does  not 
cast  her  off,  but,  in  order  to  reclaim  her  and 
bring  her  to  repentance,  he  places  her  in 
a  position  of  restraint,  where  she  is  obliged 
to  renounce  all  intercourse  with  her  par- 
amours. Thus  it  was  with  Israel.  They 
had  had  multiplied  experience  of  God's 
loving-kindness  and  tender  mercies,  but  in 
spite  of  all  his  benefits,  great  and  manifold, 
they  were  alilte  ungrateful  and  unfaithful. 
The  remainder  of  the  chapter  foretells  the 
long  and  sorrowful  abandonment  of  Israel, 
as  though  forgotten  by  God  and  forsaken 
by  man  ;  and  closes  with  an  outlook  into 
the  far-off  future,  when  Israel's  correction 
would  issue  in  their  conversion,  so  that  they 
would  return  to  the  Lord  their  God  and 
David  their  king  in  the  latter  days. 

Ver.  1. — The  general  meaning  of  this 
verse  is  well  given  in  the  Chaldee  Targum : 
"  Go,  utter  a  prophecy  against  the  house 
of  Israel,  who  are  like  a  woman  very  dear 
to  her  husband,  and  who,  though  she  is 
unfaithful  to  him,  is  nevertheless  so  greatly 
loved  by  him  that  he  is  unwilling  to  put 
her  away.  Such  is  the  love  of  the  Lord 
towards  Israel;  but  they  turn  aside  to  the 
idols  of  the  nations."  The  word  liy  is  in 
contrast  with  't'cMUath,  as  the  second  part 
of  Jehovah's  continued  discourse.  It  is 
erroneously  and,  contrary  to  the  accents,  con- 
structed with  "  said  "  by  Kimchi  and  others 
(Bwald.  considers  it  admissible,  Umbreit 
preferable).  Kimchi's  comment  on  this 
verse  is :  "  After  the  prophet  finished  his 
words  of  consolation,  he  returns  to  words 
of  censure,  turning  to  the  men  of  his  own 
time.  And  it  is  the  custom  of  the  prophets 
to  intermingle  reproofs  with  consolations  in 
their  discourses.  But  he  says  yet  (again), 
because  he  had  already  commanded  him  to 


marry  a  wife  of  whoredoms,  and  now  he 
speaks  to  him  another  parable."  This  time 
he  does  not  employ  the  ordinary  and  usual 
word  "  take,"  but  "  love,"  plainly  implying 
that  he  had  already  mariied  her,  so  that 
her  unfaithfulness  took  place  in  wedlock; 
or  rather  indicating  the  object  of  the  union. 
Beloved  of  her  friend,  yet  an  adulteress. 
Her  friend  or  companion  is  (1)  her  lawful 
husband,  but  contemporaneously  and  con- 
tinuously with  her  husband's  love  to  her  are 
her  adulteries  with  others,  as  is  implied  by 
the  participles.  (2)  yn,  being  indefinite  as 
not  having  article  or  suffix,  is  understood  by 
some  to  be  a?  acquaintance  or  lover,  and 
preferred,  as  a  milder  term,  to  3nt«0.  The 
contrast  was  realized  in  Jehovah's  love  for 
Israel,  notwithstanding  their  spiritual  adul- 
tery in  worshipping  other  gods.  According 
to  the  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  children 
of  Israel  who  look  (^k™)  to  other  gods.  Two 
expressions  in  this  clause  recall,  if  they  do 
not  actually  reflect,  the  words  of  two  older 
Scriptures ;  thus  in  Dent.  vii.  8  we  read, 
"  Because  the  Lord  loved  you ; "  and  in 
Dent.  xxxi.  18,  "  They  are  turned  unto  other 
gods."  (3)  The  LXX.  has  ymatxa  ayaitwaoji 
TToi/ripd,  having  probably  read  yn  nant*. 
And  love  flagons  of  wine  (margin,  grapet). 
The  term  ashislie,  aecordins;  to  Eashi  and 
Aben  Ezra,  means  "  bowls,"  that  is,  "bowls 
of  wine"  (literally,  "of  grapes").  They 
probably  connected  the  word  with  the  root 
shesh,  six,  a  sextorius,  and  hence  any  other 
wine-vessel.  The  Septuagint,  however, 
renders  the  word  Trfyn/iara  ^era  (rrcuplSos, 
"cakes  witli  dried  grapes."  This  meaning 
is  to  be  preferred,  wiiother  we  derive  the 
word  from  '^^h,  to  press  together,  or  from 
E'N,  fire ;  according  to  the  former  and  correct 
derivation,  the  sense  being  cakes  of  grapes 
pressed  together;  according  to  the  latter, 
cakes  baked  with  fire.  Gesenius  differen- 
tiates the  word  from  pias,  dried  grapes,  but 
not  pressed  together  into  a  cake,  and  from 
n^ai,  figs  pressed  together  into  a  cake. 
These  raisin-cakes  were  regarded  as  luxuries 
and  used  as  delicacies ;  hence  a  fondness 
for  such  indicated  a  proneness  to  sensual 
indulgence,  and  figuratively  the  sensuous 
service  belonging  to  idol-worship. 

Ver.  2. — So  I  bought  (cioquiren)  her  to  me 
for  fifteen  pieces  of  silver,  and  for  an  homer 
of  barley  and  an  half-homer  (margin,  lethaJi) 


86 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[cH.  m.  1 — 5. 


of  barley.  In  nanating  the  prophet's  com- 
pliance with  the  Divine  command,  the  word 
max  IB  connected  by  Aben  Ezra  with  "Dl  in 
the  sense  of  making  acquaintance  with; 
but  it  is  more  Cfirrectly  referred  by  Kimchi 
to  r\-\D  with  daghesh  euphonic  in  the  caph 
u  in  'i|lp%  Bhall  meet  thee.  "  The  daghesh 
of  the  caph  is  for  euphony  as  in  miqdush, 
and  the  root  is  ma  "  (Kimchi).  The  mean- 
ing is  then  simply  ond  natuiiilly  traced  as 
follows :  to  dig,  obtain  by  digging,  acquire. 
The  price  paid  for  the  acquisition  in  this 
case  waa  either  the  purchase  money  paid  to 
the  parents  of  the  bride,  as  to  Laban  in  the 
case  of  Rachel  and  Leah  by  Jacob,  or  the 
marriage  present  paid  (nwhaT)  to  the  bride 
herself.  Another  view  represents  the 
prophet  paying  the  price  to  the  woman's 
husband  to  whom  slie  had  been  nnfiithful, 
and  who  in  consequence  resigned  her  for  so 
small  a  sum.  It  remains  for  ug  to  attend  to 
the  amount  thus  paid.  Fifteen  pieces  of  silver 
or  shekels  would  be  about  one  pound  fifteen 
shillings,  or  one  pound  seventeen  and  six- 
pence ;  while  the  price  of  the  barley  would 
lie  somewheie  about  the  same.  There  were 
fifty  or  sixty  shekels  in  a  maneh,  Greek  mina, 
and  Latin  mina;  while  the  maneh  was  one- 
sixtieth  of  a  talent  (kildeer) ;  and  thus  three 
thousand  or  three  thousand  six  hundred 
i-hekels  in  a  talent.  The  homer,  the  largest 
of  the  Hebrew  dry  measures,  contained  one 
cor  or  ten  epliahs  (=  ten  baths  of  liquids  = 
ten  Attic  /lit'Si^rai),  and  the  half-liomer  or 
lethec  {hxmi-coroe  in  LXX.)  was  half  a  cor 
or  five  epliahs.  Tliese  fifteen  ephahs,  at  a 
fliekel  each — for  under  extraorainary  cir- 
cumstances (2  Kings  vii.  1)  we  read  of  "two 
measures  of  barley  for  a  shekel" — would 
be  equivalent  to  one  pound  fifteen  or  seven- 
tcen  shillings  and  sixpence.  Both  togetlier 
— the  silver  and  the  barley — would  amount 
to  thirty  shekels,  or  three  pounds  and  ten  or 
fifteen  shillings.  Why  tliis  exact  amount? 
aud  why  such  particularity  in  the  reckon- 
ing? By  turning  to  Exod.  xxi.  32  we 
leam  that  thirty  shekels  were  the  estimated 
value  of  a  manservant  or  maidservant ;  for 
it  is  there  stated  tliat  "  if  the  ox  shall  push 
a  manservant  or  a  maidservant,  he  shall 
give  unto  their  master  thirty  shekels  of 
silver."  The  price  paid  by  the  prophet 
jiaitly  in  money  and  partly  in  kind  was 
exactly  the  price  of  an  ordinary  maidser- 
vant. The  barl  i,y  (onyi? ,  plural,  equivalent 
to  "  grains  of  barley  ")  may  hint  the  woman's 
uuchastity,  as  it  was  the  offering  for  a 
woman  suspected  of  adultery  (Numb,  t.) 
The  low  estate  of  the  person  purchased  is  a 
legitimate  inference  from  all  this.  The 
wife,  for  whom  guch  a  paltry  sum  should  be 
paid,  and  pnid  in  such  a  way,  or  to  whom 
Buoh  a  petty  gift  would  he  offered,  must  be 


supposed  to  be  in  a  condition  of  deep  de- 
pression or  in  circumstances  of  great  distress. 
Thus  the  simi  paid  by  the  prophet  for  his 
partner  symbolizes  the  servile  state  of  Israel 
when  Jehovah  chose  them  for  his  peculiar 
people. 

Ver.  3. — Thou  shalt  abide  for  me  many 
days;  thou  shalt  not  play  the  harlot,  and 
thou  shalt  not  be  for  another  man.  The 
prophet  imposes  certain  restrictions  of  a 
Very  stringent  character  on  his  wife ;  he 
places  her  in  a  state  of  isolation ;  her  past 
excesses  and  his  purpose  of  effecting  her 
reformation  necessitate  such  measures,  how- 
ever strict  and  severe  or  even  harsh  they 
may  appear.  She  is  not  to  be  admitted  into 
full  fellowship  with  her  husband,  nor  is  she 
to  be  allowed  the  possibility  of  intercourse 
with  others.  Fr.im  friend,  that  is,  husband 
and  lovers,  she  is  shut  out;  all  sexual  con- 
nection, whether  illicit  or  legitimate,  is 
peremptorily  cut  off.  The  clause,  "  thou 
shalt  abide  [or, '  sit  still ']  for  me,"  denotes 
an  attitude  of  waiting,  not  necessarily  in 
sorrow,  like  the  captive  maiden  who  before 
marriage  with  her  captor  bewailed  her 
parents  for  the  period  of  a  month,  but  in 
patient  expectation  of  her  husband's  foi- 
tuue  and  favour,  though  in  seclusion  from 
him,  as  also  exclusion  of  all  others.  During 
this  long  period  of  "  many  days "  she  is 
not  only  debarred  the  society  of  her  lawful 
partner,  but  forbidden  either  to  play  the 
harlot  with  several  or  to  attach  herself  to  a 
single  paramour.  Jerome  directs  attention 
to  the  fact  that  the  word  "  anoOier  "  has  no 
place  in  the  original  text;  otherwise  it 
would  imply  that  she  was  prohibited  from 
intercourse' with  any  other  than  her  hus- 
band, while  the  real  meaning  makes  the 
prohibition  absolute  and  inclusive  even  of 
conjugal  connection  with  her  husband.  So 
will  I  also  be  for  thee.  The  Hebrew  ex- 
positors, Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi,  repeat  the 
negative  from  the  preceding  clause  and  trans- 
late, '■  Nor  sliall  I  even  oome  to  you,"  that 
is,  for  marital  society.  This  is  not  neces- 
sary to  bring  out  the  true  sense,  which  is 
that,  as  she  was  to  be  restrained  from  inter- 
course witli  any  and  every  other  man,  so  he 
himself  also  would  abstain  from  intercourse 
with  her.  "And  also  I  will  be  for  [unto] 
tliee  [«.e.  thy  husband]  to  preserve  conjugal 
fidelity  to  thee,  but  hold  aloof  from  thee 
during  thy  detention."  Thus  separated  from 
both  lovers  and  husband,  Israel  would  for 
many  a  long  day  suspend  her  worship  of 
idols,  and  be  at  the  same  time  shut  out  from 
her  covenant  relation  to  Jehovah.  Kimchi's 
comment  amounts  to  pretty  much  the  same, 
as  does  also  that  of  Aben  Ezra.  The  ex- 
planation of  the  former  is,  "  I  said  to  her. 
Alter  thou  hast  committed  adultery  against 
me,  thy  punishment  shall  he  that  thou  shalt 


CH.  lU.  1 — 5.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


abide  in  widowhood  of  life  many  days;  and 
the  meaning  of  '  for  me '  is,  thou  slialt  be 
called  by  my  name  and  not  by  another 
man's;  thou  sbalt  say,  I  am  the  wife  of 
such  a  one,  and  thbu  shalt  not  play  the 
Jiarlot  with  others,  and  also  thou  sbalt  not 
be  the  wife  of  any  other  man  than  myself." 
Aben  Ezra  makes  mention  of  another  inter- 
pretation of  the  verse,  to  the  effect,  "  If  ye 
shall  return  to  me,  I  also  will  return  to 
you."  With  this  the  Ohaldee  Targum  is  in 
accord,  which  represents  God  as  command- 
ing the  prophet  to  say,  "  O  congregation  of 
Israel,  your  sins  have  been  the  canse  of  your 
exile  for  many  days ;  ye  shall  devote  your- 
selves to  my  service,  and  not  go  astray  nor 
worship  idols,  and  I  also  will  Ijave  compas- 
sion upon  you."  Maurer  considers  the 
expression  't«-7(*'n  equivalent  to  <«  D])'n,  viz. 
remhabere  cum  muliere;  but  to  this  lin- 
guistic usage  is  opposed.  Umbreit  renders 
the  phrase,  "and  I  will  vnly  be  for 
thee ; "  this,  however,  partakes  more  of  the 
nature  of  a  promise  than  of  a  punishment, 
and  is  not  quite,  therefore,  in  accord  with 
the  context.  Ewald  :  "  And  yet  I  am  kind 
to  thee  [i.e.  love  thee] ;  '  this  is  a  rather 
trivial,  as  also  ill-supported  idea.  Calvin's 
exposition  is  pretty  much  the  same  as  we 
liave  given,  and  is  the  following :  "  I  also 
shall  be  for  thee ;  that  is,  I  pledge  my  faith 
to  thee,  or  I  subscribe  myself  as  thy  hus- 
band: but  another  time  must  be  looked 
for ;  I  yet  defer  my  favour,  and  suspend  it 
until  thou  givest  proof  of  true  repentance. 
I  also  shall  be  for  thee ;  that  ia,  thou  shalt 
not  be  a  widow  in  vain ;  if  thou  complainest 
that  wrong  is  done  to  thee,  because  I  foibid 
thee  to  marry  any  one  else,  I  also  bind 
myself  in  turn  to  thee." 

Ver.  4. — For  the  ohildren  of  Israel  shall 
abide  many  days  without  a  king,  and  with- 
out a  prince,  and  -without  a  sacrifioe,  and 
without  an  image,  and  without  an  ephod, 
and  teraphim.  For  a  long  series  of  years 
they  were  thus  doomed  to  be  without  civil 
polity,  or  ecclesiastical  privilege,  or  pro- 
phetic intimations.  More  particu^rly  they 
were  to  remain  without  royal  rule,  or 
princely  power,  or  priestly  function,  or  pro- 
phetic instructioa.  As  the  prophet's  wife 
was  neither  to  be,  strictly  speaking,  her 
husband's  nor  yet  belong  to  another  man ; 
so  Israel,  as  represented  by  her,  was  des- 
tined to  be  deprived  of  independent  self- 
government  and  princely  sovereignty;  of 
Divine  service,  whether  allowed  as  by  sacri- 
fice— the  central  pait  of  Hebrew  worship — 
or  disallowed  as  by  statue;  of  oracular  re- 
sponses, whether  lawful  as  by  the  ephod  or 
unlawful  as  by  teraphim.  There  was  thus 
an  entire  breaking  up  of  Church  and  state 
as  they  had  long  existed;  of  all  civil  and 
ecclesiastical  relations  and  privileges  as 


they  had  been  long  enjoyed.  Without  a 
king  of  their  own  nationality  to  sit  upon 
the  throne,  or  a  prince  of  their  own  race  as 
heir  apparent  to  the  kingdom,  or  princes  as 
the  great  officers  of  state ;  without  offering 
by  sacrifice  to  Jehovah,  or  statue  by  way  of 
memorial  to  Baal ;  without  means  of  ascer- 
taining the  will  of  Heaven  in  relation  to  the 
future  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim  of  the 
high-priestly  ephod,  only  the  more  than 
questionable  means  of  soothsaying  by  the 
teraphim ; — the  children  of  Israel  were  to  be 
left.  And  what  attaches  special  importance 
to  this  remarkable  passage  is  the  undeniable 
fact  that  these  predictions  were  uttered,  not 
only  before  the  dissolution  of  the  monarchy 
and  the  cessation  of  sacrifices,  but  at  a  time 
when  no  human  sagacity  could  foresee  and 
no  human  power  foretell  the  future  absten- 
tion of  the  Hebrew  race  from  idol-worship 
so  long  practised,  and  from  heathenish  divi- 
nation resorted  to  from  such  an  early  period 
of  their  history.  Bashi,  in  his  comment, 
has  the  following:  "I  said  to  her,  Many 
days  shalt  thou  abide  for  me ;  thou  shalt  not 
go  a-whoring  after  other  gods ;  for  if  thou 
shalt  play  the  harlot,  thy  sons  shall  remain 
many  days  without  a  king,  and  without  a 
prince,  and  without  a  sacrifice  in  the  sanc- 
tuary in  Judah,  and  without  a  statue  of 
Baal  in  Samaria  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  and 
without  an  ephod  with  Urim  and  Thummim 
which  declared  to  them  secrets,  and  without 
teraphim;  they  are  images  that  are  made 
with  the  observation  of  one  hour  composed 
for  the  purpose,  and  which  speak  of  them- 
selves and  declare  secrets ;  and  so  Jonathan 
has  translated,  'Neither  will  there  be  an 
ephod  nor  one  to  give  a  response.' "  Simi- 
larly Aben  Ezra:  "Without  king,  nor  is 
there  any  objection  from  the  Chasmoneans, 
for  they  were  not  of  the  children  of  Judab 
.  .  .  without  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  nor  statue 
to  Baal,  without  ephod  to  Jehovah  and 
without'  teraphim  to  -the  worshippers  of 
idols,  which  Laban  called  his  gods."  It  is 
a  matter  of  much  consequence  that  some  of 
the  ablest  of  the  Jewish  expositors  realize 
these  predictions  as  applicable  to  their  own 
case  and  the  existing  circumstances  of  their 
nation.  Thus  Kimchi,  in  commenting  on 
this  verse,  says,  "  These  are  the  days  of  the 
exile  in  which  we  are  this  day,  and  we  have 
neither  king  nor  prince  of  Israel,  for  we  are 
in  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,  and  in  the 
power  of  their  kings  and  princes  ...  no 
sacrifice  to  God  and  no  statue  for  wor- 
shippers of  idols  .  .  .  and  no  ephod  which 
shall  declare  future  things  by  Urim  and 
Thummim,  and  no  teraphim  for  idolaters 
which  declare  the  future  according  to  the 
notion  of  those  who  believe  in  them ;  and  th  ue 
we  are  this  day  in  this  exile,  all  the  children 
of  Israel;"  tie  then  cites  the  Turgum  of 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  in.  1—5. 


Jonathan  in  confirmation  of  his  Bentiments. 
For  tlie  ephod,  comp.  Exod.  xxviii.  6—14, 
from  which  we  learn  that  it  was  "  a  short 
cloak,  covering  shoulders  and  breast,  wrought 
with  colours  and  gold,  formed  of  two  halves 
connected  by  two  shoulder-pieces,  on  each  of 
which  was  an  onyx  engraven  with  six  names 
of  tribes,  and  held  together  round  the  waist 
by  a  girdle  of  the  same  material ;  "  it  was 
part  of  the  high  priest's  attire.  The  tera- 
phim — from  the  Arabic  tarifa,  to  live  com- 
fortably, and  turfator,  a  comfortable  life, 
were  the  househcdd  gods  anil  domestic 
oracles,  like  the  Eoman  penates,  and  de- 
riving the  name  from  being  thought  the 
givers  and  guardians  of  a  comfortable  life, 
cjnn.  They  were  images  in  human  form 
and  stature,  either  graven  of  wood  or  stone 
(pesel),  or  molten  out  of  precious  metal  (mas- 
sehhah).  The  first  mention  of  them  is  in 
Gen.  xxxi.  19,  and  the  name  occurs  fifteen 
times  in  the  Old  Testament.  They  appear 
to  have  been  of  Syrian  or  Chaldean  origin. 
Aben  Ezra  says  of  tliem,  "  What  appears  to 
me  most  probable  is  that  they  liad  a  human 
form  and  were  made  for  the  pur[)Ose  of 
receiving  supernal  power,  nor  can  I  explain 
it  furlhcr."  The  two  principal  species  of 
offerings  were  tlie  nai,  or  bL  ody  sacrifice, 
and  the  nnja,  or  unbloody  oblation.  The 
former  comprehended  those  entirely  burnt 
on  the  altar,  nVy,  rad.  rhy,  to  ascend,  from 
going  up  entirely  in  the  eltar-smoke;  and 

^hn,  or  those  of  which  only  the  fat  was 
burnt.  According  to  the  object  of  the  offerer, 
they  were  ehattah,  sin  offering,  pointing 
to  expiation  or  pardon  for  something  done 
demanding  punishment ;  or  asham,  trespass 
offering,  implying  satisfaction  and  accept- 
ance, or  something  undone  demanding 
amends ;  and  ehelamim,  peace  offerings. 

Ver.  5. — Afterward  shall  the  children  of 
Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God, 
and  David  their  king.  The  note  of  time  in 
the  beginning  of  ver.  5  is  explained  by 
liashi  to  signify  "after  the  days  of  the 
Captivity;"  and  by  Kimchi  as  follows: 
"  This  will  take  place  at  the  end  of  the  days, 
near  the  time  of  salvation,  when  the  children 
of  Israel  shall  return  in  repentance." 
Though  not  comprehended  in  the  symbolic 
representation  that  precedes,  this  statement 
is  necessary  to  complete  it.  The  future  of 
Israel  is  the  burden  of  this  promise ;  the 
blessedness  of  that  future  is  its  brightness. 
It  comprises  three  items — the  reversal  of 
their  previous  career,  their  loving  return  to 
the  Lord  their  God,  and  their  cordial  recep- 
tion of  David  their  king.  Contemporaneous 
with  their  sorrow  for  the  sins  of  the  past 
was  their  serious  seeking  of  tlie  Lord  their 
Cod  and  submission  to  David  their  king. 
Their  revolt  iiom  the  Davidio  dynasty  in 


the  days  of  Eehoboam  was  immediately 
followed  by  the  idolatry  of  the  calves  which 
Jeroboam  set  up  at  Dan  and  Bethel.  _  The 
reversal  of  this  course  is  symptomatic  of 
their  complete  recovery.  The  patriarch 
David  was  long  dead  and  buried,  and  his 
sepulchre  was  in  Palestine  at  the  time  when 
the  prophet  wrote;  one,  therefore,  in  the 
Davidio  line,  a  descendant  from,  and  dy- 
nastic representative  of,  the  patriarch  must 
be  meant.  That  this  was  Messiah  there 
can  be  nn  reasonable  doubt ;  parallel  pas- 
sages in  the  other  prophets  prove  this ;  for 
example :  "  I  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over 
them,  and  he  shall  feed  them,  even  my 
servant  David  ;  he  shall  feed  them,  and  he 
shall  be  their  shepherd.  And  I  the  Lord 
will  be  their  God,  and  my  servant  David  a 
prince  among  them  "  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  25 ; 
comp.  also  zxxvii.  24).  Again  in  Jeremiah 
(xxx.  9)  we  read  to  the  same  purpose, 
"  They  shall  serve  the  Lord  their  God,  and 
David  their  king,  whom  I  will  raise  up  unto 
them."  We  can  by  no  means  conciur  with 
those  who  refer  this  promise  to  Zerubbabel  as 
a  later  occupant  of  the  Davidio  throne ;  and 
just  as  little  with  those  who,  like  Wttnsche, 
hold  that  the  prophet  has  no  particular 
period  and  no  particular  person  In  view,  but 
presents  the  prospect  of  a  happy  and  bliss- 
ful future  when  Israel  would  return  to  the 
pure  worship  of  Jehovah  and  enjoy  his  gra- 
cious protection,  and  when  the  national 
prosperity  would  equal  or  even  far  surpass 
that  under  the  glorious  reign  of  David  him- 
self The  best  Jewish  authorities  are  quoted 
in  favour  of  the  same ;  thus  Babbi  Tanchum 
says,  "  He  (the  prophet)  understands  the 
son  of  David,  occupying  his  place,  from  his 
lineage,  walking  in  his  way,  by  whom  his 
name  shall  endure  and  his  kingdom  be  pre- 
served." The  Chaldee  Targum  translates 
in  tlie  same  sense:  "They  shall  seek  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  their  God,  and  obey 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  their  king."  So 
Aben  Ezra  says  that  "  David  their  king  is 
this  Messiah,  like  '  My  servant  David  shall 
be  their  prince  for  ever'  (Ezek. xxxvii.  25)." 
The  well-known  idiom  of  one  idea  expressed 
by  two  verbs,  so  tliat  the  rendering  of  the 
clause  would  be  "They  shall  again  seek 
the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their  king," 
if  a|.>plied  here,  as  undoubtedly  it  might, 
would  weaken  the  sense,  and  so  be  unsuitable 
to  the  context.  And  shall  fear  (literally, 
come  with  trembling  to)  the  Lord  and  his  good- 
ness in  the  latter  days.  The  comment  of 
Kimchi  on  the  first  part  of  this  clause  is  as 
follows :  ^'  They  shall  tremble  and  be  afraid 
of  him  when  they  return  to  him,  and  shall 
with  repentance  wait  for  the  goodness  of 
redemption  on  which  they  have  trusted." 
A  somewhat  different  meaning  is  assigned 
to  the  words  by  Aben  Ezra:  "They  shall 


OB.  m.  1^-6.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


69 


retom  in  haste,  when  the  end  (i.e.  the  time 
of  Tedemption)  comes  to  their  own  land  with 
hasty  course  suddenly."  His  goodness  is 
taken  by  some  in  a  concrete  sense,  as  sig- 
nifying the  blessings  which  he  bestows  and 
the  good  gifts  which  he  imparts;  and  by 


others  in  the  abstract,  as  the  Divine  good- 
ness or  majesty,  to  which  Israel  resorts  for 
the  pardon  of  sin  and  the  gracious  accept- 
ance of  their  petitions  and  answer  of  their 
prayers. 


H0MTLETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — God's  mercifulwss  and  Israel's  sinfulneis  are  hrougkt  into  contrast. 
Svrne  are  disposed  to  regard  the  woman  mentioned  in  this  chapter  as  identical  vvitli 
G-omer,  whom  the  prophet  had  previously  made  his  wife ;  and  that  she  had  in  the 
mean  time  forsal^en  her  husband  the  prophet,  and  hail  formed  an  adulterous  connection 
with  another  man :  while  others  regard  the  command  of  God  to  the  prophet  and  his 
conduct  in  compliance  therewith  in  the  light  of  a  new_ transaction  with  a  ditferent 
individual.  In  either  case  the  whole  is  not  an  actual  occurrence,  but  only  a  symbolical 
representation. 

I.  The  lessonb  of  this  chapteb  akb  midway  between  the  punishment  threat- 
KNED  AND  THE  PROMISE  VOUCHSAFED.  Calviu  has  plainly  pointed  out  the  position  of 
this  chapter  in  the  series  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel.  "It  was  God's  purpose,"  he 
says,  "  to  keep  in  firm  hope  the  minds  of  the  faithful  during  the  exile,  lest,  being  over- 
whelmed with  despair,  they  should  wholly  faint.  .  .  .  This  prediction  occupies  a  middle 
place  between  the  denunciation  of  the  prophet  previously  pronounced,  and  the  promise 
of  pardon.  It  was  a  dreadful  thing  that  God  should  divorce  his  people  and  cast  away 
the  Israelites  as  spurious  children  ;  yet  a  consolation  was  afterwards  added.  But  lest 
the  Israelites  should  think  that  God  would  immediately,  as  on  the  first  day,  be  so 
jiropitious  to  them  as  to  visit  them  with  no  chastisement,  it  was  the  prophet's  design 
expressly  to  correct  this  mistake ;  as  though  he  said,  '  God  will  indeed  receive  you 
again,  but  in  the  mean  time  a  chastisement  is  prepared  for  you,  which  by  its  intensenesa 
would  break  down  your  spirits,  were  it  not  that  this  comfort  will  ease  you,  and  that  is 
that  God,  although  he  punishes  you  for  your  sins,  yet  continues  to  provide  for  your 
salvation,  and  to  be  as  it  were  your  Husband.' " 

II,  God's  love  to  Israel  unmerited  as  well  as  unrequited.  The  prophet's 
treatment  of  the  woman  whom  he  was  to  take  or  had  taken  to  be  his  wife  evinced 
extreme  forbearance  and  exceeding  tenderness.  He  loved  her  before  her  fall, — this  was 
natural  enough ;  he  loved  her  during  and  notwithstanding  her  fall, — this  was  not  to  be 
expected ;  he  continued  to  love  her  after  her  fall, — this  is  contrary  to  all  the  ordinary 
feelings  and  instincts  of  humanity.  This  continued  affection  was  designed,  as  it  was 
calculated,  to  win  her  back  from  the  error  and  evil  of  her  ways.-  But  where  is  the  man 
who  under  ordinary  circumstances  would  act  so  ?  Where  is  the  husband  that  would 
treat  a  worthless  wife  with  such  mildness  and  compassion  ?  But  what  man  cannot 
find  in  his  heart  to  do,  what  man  cannot  bring  himself  to  do,  God  does  in  his  treatment 
of  Israel  and  in  his  dealings  with  sinners  in  general ;  "  For  my  thoughts  are  not  your 
thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith  the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are 
higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  my  thoughts  than 
your  thoughts."  Notwithstanding  all  God's  love  to  his  people  Israel,  from  the  very 
commencement  of  their  national  existence  they  showed  a  special  proueness  to  apostasy, 
readily  and  recklessly  turning  aside  to  idolatrous  worship ;  yet  God's  love  continued 
through  it  all,  and  outlived  it  all.  It  was  love  to  the  unlovable  and  unloving,  to  the 
undeserving  and  ungrateful;  the  current  of  his  love  runs  on  like  the  river  broad  and 
deep,  which  never  ceases  in  its  course  tiU  its  waters  form  part  of  "  the  shining  levels  of 

the  sea."  

in.  The  accompaniments  of  idolatry  have  a  seductive  tendency.  Idolatry 
was  usually  associated  with  voluptuousness  and  sensuality  ;  and  indulgences  of  this 
sort  tended,  no  doubt,  to  attract  many  votaries,  and  served  as  inducements  to  idol- 
worship.  Whether  we  "  take  flagons  of  wine  "  to  be  the  right  rendering  of  the  original,  as 
the  Authorized  Version  does,  or  rather  "  raisin-cakes,"  the  nature  of  the  attraction  will  be 
much  the  same— -fondness  for  self-indulgence.  The  Levitical  priests  were  forbidden  the 
use  of  wine  when  they  ministered  before  the  Lord  ;  the  Nazarites  were  total  abstainers 


90  THK  BOOK  OP  HOSE  A.  [ch.  m.  1—5. 

all  the  time  of  their  vow ;  but  the  worshippers  of  Idols — priests  and  people  alike — are 
represented  as  drinking  bowls  or  flagons  of  wine.  Baisin-cakes,  sweet  and  luscious, 
formed  parts  of  idolatrous  repasts,  and  served  as  appetizing  morsels  in  idol-feasts  and 
for  idol-worshippers.  How  like  the  seductive  pleasures  of  sin  in  general !  But  they 
neither  last  long  nor  satisfy  while  they  do  last.  The  meat  offerings  of  Mosaic  ritual 
were  of  a  severer  sort,  and  less  calculated  to  gratify  the  taste  and  please  the  palate. 

IV.  The  mebciful  pbovision  made  fob  Isbael  in  the  season  of  heb  sepabation, 
If  the  prophet  had  already  espoused  the  woman  whom  he  is  directed  to  love,  the  pieces 
of  silver  and  measures  of  barley  could  neither  be  dowry,  nor  purchase,  nor  present  in  any 
proper  sense.  How,  then,  are  we  to  understand  the  matter  ?  Probably  we  may  regard 
the  expenditure  here  indicated  as  a  suitable  allowance  for  her  support — a  sufficient 
maintenance  for  her  during  the  period  of  her  separation  from  her  husband.  She  may 
now  be  conceived  as  living  apart  from  her  husband — shut  out  a  mensa  et  a  thoro,  as  it 
is  said,  and  so  deprived  of  lier  proper  means  of  subsistence.  During  this  sad  state  of 
things,  which  her  own  guilt  has  brought  about,  she  is  still  the  prophet's  wife,  and 
neither  forgotten  nor  forsaken  by  him.  True,  in  one  way  she  is  unpitied  and  unde- 
serving of  pity,  because  of  her  vileness,  yet  in  another  she  is  not  entirely  bereft  of  her 
husband's  affection  ;  in  spite  of  her  grievous  departure  from  the  path  of  rectitude  and 
virtue,  his  love  follows  her,  still  striving  for  her  reformation  and  yearning  for  her 
restoration.  Meantime  he  provides  her  with  nearly  fifty  bushels  of  barley  for  food, 
and  with  nearly  two  pounds  sterling  in  cash  for  raiment  and  other  necessaries  of  life. 
The  money  and  grain  together  would  afford  a  sufBcient,  though  uot  very  sumptuous, 
support.  Thus  Goii's  treatment  of  his  Israel  is  symbolized.  Though  they  were 
separated  by  sin  from  his  immediate  presence,  and  though  they  had  forfeited  his  favours 
and  proved  themselves  unworthy  of  his  love,  yet  he  has  not  entirely  and  finally  cast 
them  off.  His  eye  still  rests  upon  them ;  his  mercy  provides  for  them  in  their  state  of 
isolation ;  they  are  deprived  indeed  of  the  honour  and  dignity  they  once  enjoyed  and 
might  still  have  retained,  and  they  possess  no  longer  the  means  of  living  in  luxury  and 
splendour  as  aforetime,  yet  they  are  allowed  the  necessary  means  of  subsistence 
and  an  humble  maintenance,  with  the  prospect  and  for  the  purpose  of  their  ultimate 
lestoration  to  full  favour,  and  unstinted  possession  of  all  the  benefits  and  blessings 
still  in  store  for  them. 

V.  Israel's  solitary  and  sequestered  state.  She  is  doomed  to  sit  in  solitary 
widowhood.  Restrained  from  all  licentious  intercourse  on  the  one  hand,  she  is  not 
restored  to  conjugal  ri^lits  on  the  other.  She  was  not  to  be  a  harlot,  neither  was  she 
to  be  a  husband's.  That  husband,  however,  still  regards  himself  bound  to  her,  and 
while  she  abides  for  him  he  promises  her  a  like  return :  "  So  will  I  likewise  be  to  thee- 
ward."  He  would  still  have  regard  to  her  and  respect  for  her ;  feelings  of  kindness 
would  animate  him  towards  her;  his  guardian  care  and  watchful  providence  would 
still  be  exercised  on  her  behalf  and  for  her  benefit.  The  meaning  and  application  of 
ver.  3  is  well  given  in  the  following  comment:  "He,  his  affections,  interest,  thoughts, 
would  be  directed  towards  her.  The  word  "  towards"  expresses  regard,  yet  distance  also. 
Just  80  would  God,  in  those  times,  withiiold  all  special  tokens  of  liis  favour,  covenant, 
providence ;  yet  would  he  secretly  uphuld  and  maintain  them  as  a  people,  and  withhold 
them  from  falling  wholly  from  him  into  the  gulf  of  irreligion  and  infidelity."  Sin  is 
the  cloud  that  darkens  our  sky  and  shuts  out  the  bright  light  of  our  heavenly  Father's 
countenance ;  yet  behind  the  dark  cloud  of  afflictive  providences  he  hides  a  shining 
face. 

VI.  The  conditions  op  the  covenant  which  God  makes  with  his  people.  1.  We 
see  here  the  Divine  considerateness.  God  might  have  made  out  a  bill  of  divorce,  and 
dismissed  them  at  once  and  for  ever.  He  does  not  deal  with  us  with  the  rigour  of  law 
or  in  the  strictness  of  justice,  but  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  tender  mercies  and 
loving-kindnesses.  2.  The  condition  he  proposes  to  us  is  that  we  be  to  him  a  people, 
and  he  will  be  to  us  a  God.  When  punished  lor  sin  it  is  wise  and  well  to  justify  God's 
w»jrs  with  us ;  we  must  wait  with  patience,  and  that  perhaps  for  many  days,  until  God 
again  lift  on  us  the  light  of  his  countenance.  But  besides  all  this,  we  must  not  turn 
again  to  folly,  as  Israel  was  strictly  enjoined  to  eschew  harlotry  in  the  future;  in  other 
words,  to  shun  every  form  of  idolatry  in  all  time  to  come.  So,  In  dependence  on  Divine 
graoe^  we  must  resolve  to  follow  the  Lord  fully,  not  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  not 


OH.  m.  1—5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  91 

worahlpping  tlie  idols  of  ow  own  pride,  or  passion,  or  sensntility,  or  sin  of  any  sort,  and 
never  more  to  go  a-whoring  from  our  CM.  3.  Another  condition  of  the  covenant 
between  the  sovereign  and  his  once  rebel  but  now  repentant  subjects  is  implied  in  this 
passage,  and  w^U  stated  in  the  following  words :  "  If  they  will  be  for  God  to  sei-ve 
him,  he  will  be  for  them  to  save  them.  Let  them  renounce  and  abjure  all  rivals  with 
God  for  the  throne  in  the  heart,  and  devote  themselves  entirely  to  him,  and  him  only, 
and  he  will  be  to  them  a  God  all-sufficient.  If  we  be  faithful  and  constant  to  God  io 
a  way  of  duty,  and  will  never  leave  nor  forsake  him,  he  will  be  so  to  us  in  a  way  ol 
mercy,  and  will  never  leave  nor  forsake  us." 

Vers.  4,  5.— 2%e  applicability  of  these  verses.    There  is  an  Important  question  in 

connection  with  these  verses  which  presses  for  solution,  and  that  is — Are  the  children  of 

Israel  the  descendants  of  the  ten  tribes  exclusively  ?    Or  has  the  expression,  as  used 

by  the  prophet,  that  wider  and  larger  signification  in  which  we  popularly  employ  it, 

namely,  as  including  all  the  descendants  of  Jacob  or  Israel,  in  other  words,  all  the 

Jewish  or  Hebrew  race?    These  questions  involve  a  prior  consideration.     The  ten 

tribes  were  carried  away  into  captivity  and  left  in  the  lands  of  Assyria,  B.O.  722 

according  to  the  common  chronology ;  the  two  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  were 

carried  into  captivity  in  Babylon  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  years  subsequently. 

After  a  lapse  of  seventy  years'  captivity  the  latter  were  permitted  to  return  to  their 

own  land,  and  large  numbers  availed  themselves  of  that  permission.    But  what  became 

of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  ?    They  are  still  spoken  of  by  some  as  the  lost  tribes ;  some, 

again,  identify  them  with  the  Afghans;  others  with  the  American  Indians.     Such 

theories  are  easily  enough  formed,  but  can  scarcely  be  said  to  be  founded  on  facts.    It 

is  admitted  that  the  fifty  thousand  who  returned  belonged  mainly  to  the  two  tribes  of 

Judah  and  Benjamin,  while  many  of  those  two  tribes  remained  behind  in  Babylon,  and 

comparatively  few  of  the  members  of  other  tribes  joined  their  brethren  in  the  return  to 

Palestine.     Where,  then,  are  we  to  look  for  the  main  body  of  the  ten  tribes  ?    We 

will  try  to  answer  this  interesting  and  important  question  as.  best  we  can,  and  with  a 

view  to  its  bearing  on  the  subject  before  us.     After  the  restoration  of  the  temple 

and  city  of  Jerusalem,  we  find  that  there  was  an  immense  increase  of  the  inhabitants 

of  Palestine  in  the  time  and  under  the  rule  of  the  Maccabees.     May  we  not  regard  it 

as  more  tlian  probable  that  lingerers  out  of  all  the  tribes  were  attracted  to  their  native 

land  after  the  restoration  of  its  capital,  and  the  revival  of  the  country's  prosperity  ? 

But  largo  bodies  still  remained  behind  in  the  lands  of  their  dispersion ;  there  would  be 

a  natural  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  remnants  of  the  two  tribes  and  the  ten  to 

"ravitate  towards  each  other.     Thus  they  may  be  supposed   to  have  amalgamated. 

Hence  James  addresses  his  Epistle  to  "  the  twelve  tribes  which  are  of  the  dispersion," 

that  is,  "scattered  abroad,"  according  to  the  Authorized  Version;   and   Paul   says, 

"  Unto  which  promise  our  twelve  tribes  instantly  serving  God  day  and  ni^ht,  hope  to 

come."     We  may  cite,  as  confirmatory,  the  opinion  of  the  late  Dr.  M'Qaul.     He  says, 

"  I  feel  strongly  inclined  to  the  opinion  that  the  ten  tribes  are  now  found  mingled  with 

the  other  two.     I  do  not  mean  that  the  ten  tribes  returned  from  Babylon,  for  in  Ezra 

and  Nehemiah  we  are  told  particularly  who  did  return,  but  that  the  main  body  of  the 

Jews  who  remained  in  Babylon,  who  were  dispersed  in  Egypt  and  other  countries,  and 

who  never  returned,  naturally  min^^led  with  their  brethren  of  the  other  tribes,  and  that 

this  intermixture  increased  after  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple."    Their  return 

to  the  house  of  David,  intimated  in  ver.  ."5,  presupposes  some  such  reunion  with  their 

brethren  as  that  of  which  we  speak.     We  are,  therefore,  inclined  to  believe  that  the 

Judahites  as  well  as  the  Israelites  are  comprehended  in  this  plural  patronymic  of  "  the 

oliiidren  of  Israel."  

I.  The  oobrbspondence  of  the  condition  of  the  Jkws  with  that  herb  specified. 
The  state  of  the  Jewish  people  at  the  present  day,  as  well  as  during  centuries  past, 
corresponds  most  exactly  with  that  here  described  by  Hosea.  And  where,  it  may  be 
asked,  is  it  possible  to  find  any  other  nation  whose  condition — political  and  religious — 
is  the'same  or  even  similar  ?  Their  condition  is  precisely  what  is  here  described  with 
respect  to  Church  and  state,  or  public  worship  and  civil  government.  No  doubt  in 
their  dispersion  they  are  subject  to  the  king  or  rulers  of  the  countries  where  they  dwell ; 
they  have  kings  over  them,  but  not  of  their  own  nation ;  they  have  laws  by  whicli 


92  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  ra.  1—6. 

tliey  are  governed,  but  those  laws  are  not  their  own,  nor  the  laws  which  God  had 
given  them.  They  have  no  king  nor  rulers  to  defend  them  from  aggression  without, 
nor  Icing  and  high  officers  of  state  as  the  legislative  and  executive  powers  within. 
Kings  of  countries  where  they  have  sojourned  have  been  mean  enough  and  wicked 
enough  to  rob  and  plunder  and  oppress  them  cruelly, 

II.  The  confusion  of  theib  ciroumstances.  "  Here,"  says  an  old  commentator, 
"  is  much  privation — six '  withouts : '  (1)  '  without  a  king ; '  (2)  '  without  a  prince ; '  (3) 
'  without  a  sacrifice ; '  (4)  '  without  an  image ; '  (5)  '  without  an  ephod ; '  (6)  '  without 
teraphim ; '  but  the  last  verse  maltes  up  for  all:  'They  shall  return,  and  seek  the  Lord 
their  God,  and  D.ivid  their  king.'  These  'withouts'  show  the  wonderfully  confused 
estate  that  Israel  was  to  he  in  for  many  days,  many  years,  both  in  regard  of  their  civil 
and  of  thiir  Church  estate."  They  had  corrupted  their  way,  setting  up  idols  in  Dan 
the  place  of  judgment,  and  in  Bethel  the  house  of  God;  and  that  corruption  now  ends 
in  ooufusion  of  both  their  civil  and  Church  estate.  They  had  combined  the  ordinances 
of  God  with  their  own  devices,  that  is,  the  sacrifice  and  ephod  with  the  image  and  the 
tcraphioi ;  now  they  are  deprived  of  both. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Vers.  1 — 8. — ITosea  detains  Oomer  in  seclusion.  This  chapter,  like  ch.  1.,  !s  written 
in  prose ;  all  the  other  twelve  being  rhythmical.  It  deals,  as  ch.  i.  does,  with  the 
personal  life  of  Hosea,  giving  one  further  glimpse  of  the  bitter  domestic  sorrow  by 
which  Gou  made  him  a  prophet.  The  same  wonderful  providence  which  had  led  him 
to  marry  Gomer  at  the  first  now  impelled  him  to  rescue  her  from  the  wretchedness 
into  which  she  bad  fallen.  And  his  own  quenchless  love  for  his  erring  wife  became  a 
parable  to  him  of  Jehovah's  infinite  compassion  towards  Israel. 

I.  Hosba's  new  eelation  to  Gomer.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  For  we  take  the  "  woman  " 
here  to  be  Gomer,  and  "her  friend"  to  be  the  prophet,  her -husband.  After  she  had 
borne  him  three  children  (ch.  i.  3 — 9),  she  fell  into  adultery  and  forsook  him.  It 
would  seem,  too,  that  she  by-and-by  became  the  slave  of  her  paramour.  But  Hosea,  as 
he  sat  in  his  blighted  home,  thought  of  poor  Gomer  with  compassionate  tenderness. 
She  was  still  "  beloved  of  her  friend."  He  felt  that  he  must  seek  her  out,  and  say  to 
her  (as  King  Arthur  said  to  Guinevere),  "  I  loathe  thee,  yet  I  love  thee."  He  resolved 
to  buy  her  back.  Her  ransom  cost  him  in  money  only  one-half  of  the  ordinary  price 
of  a  female  slave ;  the  rest  of  the  payment  being  made  in  barley — the  usual  coarse  food 
of  the  class  to  which  she  now  belonged.  The  inexpensiveness  of  the  ransom  shows  to 
what  a  deptb  of  degradation  Gomer  had  fallen.  This  was  so  great,  indeed,  that  the 
prophet  could  not  at  once  restore  her  to  her  place  at  his  table,  or  to  the  other  rights  of 
a  dutiful  wife.  He  will  bring  her  home  at  first  only  as  his  ward.  He  will  protect  her 
from  her  sins.  He  will  test  her  penitence  by  a  lengthened  probation,  looking  forward, 
however,  to  the  time  when  the  "  receiving  "  of  her  again  shall  be  as  "  life  from  the 
dead  "  to  his  long-widowed  heart.  It  is  pleasant  to  think  of  Gomer  as  not  only  rescued 
from  her  sinful  courses,  and  by-and-by  restored  to  her  earthly  husband,  but  as  eventually 
also  won  back  to  the  love  of  Jehovah.  It  is  delightful  to  cherish  the  hope  that  the 
three  children  too  became  God's;  their  original  names  being  purged  of  their  vile 
associations,  and  becoming  suggestive  of  spiritual  blessing  (Jezreel,  Kuhumah,  Ainmi}, 
so  thab 

"  When  soon  or  late  they  reached  that  coast, 
O'er  life's  rongh  ocean  driven. 
They  would  rejoice — no  wanderer  lost— 
A  family  in  heaven  I" 

(Bums.) 

IT.  The  btmcot.io  meaning  of  this  new  eei,ation.  (Vers.  1,  4,  5.)  Generally,  U 
is  a  sign  of  Jehovah's  love  towards  Israel,  notwithstanding  her  idolatry  and  sensuality 
(ver.  1).  It  reflects  the  debasement  to  which  sin  leads,  the  disciphne  which  God 
metes  out  to  the  penitent,  and  the  irrevocable  covenant  of  love  which  he  makes  with 
those  who  return  to  him.    Hosea's  family  history  stands  out  as  a  picture  and  a  predic- 


CH.  III.  1— S.  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA,  98 

tion.  In  particular,  his  new  relation  to  Gomer  foreshadowed :  1.  IsraePs  long  tedwsien. 
(Ver.  4.)  Although  the  primary  reference  of  the  passage  is  to  the  ten  tribes,  the 
prophecy  really  embraces  the  whole  Hebrew  nation.  God  has  not  utterly  rejected 
Israel;  she  is  still  "a  people  near  unto  him;"  but  he  does  not  meantime  dwell  with  her 
as  of  old.  The  specific  features  of  her  seclusion  are  noted  in  the  six  "  withouts  "  of  the 
verse,  and  these  arrange  themselves  naturally  into  three  pairs.  The  whole  representa- 
tion strikingly  describes  what  has  been  the  actual  condition  of  the  Jewish  nation  during 
the  last  eighteen  hundred  years.  (1)  Without  civil  polity.  It  had  been  a  passion  with 
Israel  to  have  a  king.  But  within  three  generations  after  the  Lord  gave  Hosea  this 
oracle,  the  ten  northern  tribes  were  "  without  a  king,  and  without  a  prince,"  And 
when  at  last  "  Shiloh  "  came,  "  the  sceptre  "  finally  "  departed  from  Judah  "  also.  That 
was  a  memorable  day  on  which  the  spiritual  leaders  of  the  nation  professed  so  empha- 
tically their  willing  subjection  to  the  world-power:  "We  have  no  king  but  Caasar" 
(John  xix.  15)  ;  but  during  all  the  subsequent  centuries  Jerusalem  lias  "sat  solitary,'" 
and  "  is  become  as  a  widow."  (2)  Without  temple  service.  The  temple  was  the  centre 
of  the  Hebrew  religious  system.  When  it  was  destroyed  the  Mosaic  ritual  collapsed. 
Such  worshi])  as  the  Jews  now  offer  is  conducted  "  with  maimed  rites."  How  sad  that 
they  should  be  "  without  a  sacrifice  " !  Sacrifice  was  the  very  soul  of  the  Hebrew  worship. 
Every  sinner  needs  a  sacrifice  of  atonement  before  he  can  stand  in  God's  graciou.s 
presence  ;  but  the  poor  Jew,  who  still  clings  to  the  old  covenant,  has  none.  It  follows 
that  he  is  also  "  without  an  ephod."  The  ephod  was  part  of  the  dress  of  the  high 
priest.  In  the  breast  of  it  were  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  by  which  Jehovah  gave 
responses.  But  now,  alas  I  to  the  Jew  "the  oracles  are  dumb."  He  has  no  altar,  no 
priest,  no  access !  (3)  Without  gross  idolatry.  In  Hosea's  time  the  nation  was  attempt- 
ing to  combine  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  of  the  Baalim  ;  but  the  Lord  tells  him  that 
for  "  many  days  "  the  people  shall  be  without  any  god,  true  or  false.  They  shall  be 
"  without  an  image,"  J.e.  any  public  monument  of  idolatry  such  as  the  two  golden 
calves  were.  And  "  without  teraphim,"  t.  e.  those  portable  household  gods  which  were 
sometimes  kept  as  tutelary  deities,  and  worshipped  as  the  givers  of  earthly  prosperity. 
It  is  a  fact  that  ever  since  the  Assyrian  exile  the  Hebrew  nation  have  not  been  able  to 
endure  any  gross  idolatry.  They  doubtless  break  the  fiist  commandment  after  the 
more  refined  fashion  of  civilized  peoples;  many  Jews,  e.g.,  are  money-lovers,  and 
"  covetousness  is  idolatry."  But  they  have  been  at  least  free  from  the  guilt  of  setting 
up  "an  image"  or  of  worshipping  "teraphim."  Israel  was  to  "abide  many  days"  in 
this  long  seclusion;  and  it  has  already  lasted  for  two  millenniums.  During  all  that 
period  the  Jewish  nation  has  been  the  miracle  of  history.  Its  situation  since  Christ 
came  is  one  of  the  most  convincing  of  the  external  evidences  of  Christianity.  And  that 
situation  shall  continue  until  Messiah,  the  Prince  of  the  house  of  David,  shall  assemble 
all  the  children  of  Jacob  under  his  spiritual  sceptre.  2.  Israel's  final  restoration. 
(Ver.  5.)  This  is  to  take  place  "  afterward " — "  in  the  latter  days,"  i.  e.  in  gospel 
times,  and  as  one  of  "  the  last  things"  of  the  Christian  dispensation.  Buth  Jewish  aud 
Christian  commentators  understand  by  "  the  latter  days"  the  Messianic  economy,  which 
was  to  be  ushered  in  by  the  advent  of  the  Messiah  himself.  The  restoration  shall  be 
characterized  by:  (1)  Eeligioui  earnestness.  They  shall  "seek  Jehovah  their  God," 
and  make  the  most  assiduous  efforts  to  find  him.  The  Jews  as  a  nation  are  not  yet 
doing  this.  It  is  true,  doubtless,  that  there  are  many  devout  families  among  them — 
many  who  cherish  the  deep  piety  which  Sir  Walter  Scott  has  expressed  so  beautifully 
in  his  "  Hymn  of  the  Hebrew  Maid,"  in  '  Ivanhoe.'  But  among  the  cultured  Jews 
much  scepticism  prevails.  Many  are  pantheists,  like  the  eminent  Jew  Spinoza.  And 
among  the  mercantile  Jews  there  is  often  an  excessive  devotion  to  wealth,  together 
with  indifference  to  all  religion.  '•  In  the  latter  days,"  however,  the  Hebrew  nation 
shall  diligently  "  seek  Jehovah  their  God."  (2)  Loyalty  to  King  Jesus.  They  shall 
resume  also  the  allegiance  to  the  royal  line  of  David'  which  the  ten  tribes  renounced 
when  they  apostatized  from  Jehovah  under  Jeroboam  I.  The  Jewish  rabbis  them- 
selves acknowledge  that  "  David  "  in  this  verse  means  the  Messiah.  But  Ohristeudom 
is  persuaded  that  he  began  to. reign  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  that  he  is  reigning 
still.  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  "the  Root  and  the  Branch  of  David."  His  birth  Gabriel 
announced  beforehand  to  his  mother  (Luke  i.  32,  33) ;  and  Israel,  at  the  time  of  hev 
restoration,  shall  accept  that  angelic  oracle  and  rejoice  in  it.    (3)  Holy  reverence/or  he 


»*  THE  BOOK   OP  HOSBA.  [cH.  m.  1— 5. 

DMn«  Eiuband.  Israel  "  shall  fear  Jehovah  and  his  goodness."  She  shall  have  such  a 
grateful  remembraQce  of  his  loviDg-kindness  in  forgiving  her  adultery  as  shall  constrain 
her  to  the  most  vigilant  obedience.  "  In  the  latter  days  "  her  heart  shall  say  "  Amen  " 
to  the  devout  sentiment  of  the  ancient  psalm,  "There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that 
thon  mayest  be  feared  "  (Fa.  czxx.  4).  She  shall  find  that  to  know  the  Lord  (ch.  ii. 
20)  and  to  partake  of  "  his  goodness"  are  blessings  inseparable  from  each  other. 

CoNOLT7BlON.  The  threatened  isolation  of  Israel  has  been  abundantly  fulfilled  ;  and 
shall  not  also  the  promised  restoration  ?  If  ver.  4  has  already  become  matter  of  history, 
and  aa  very  marvellously,  may  we  not  expect  that  ver.  5  shall  also,  in  the  Lord's  time  ? 
We  are  sure  that  it  shall.  Jehovah's  promise  must  be  fulfilled.  "  Oh  that  the  salvation 
uf  Israel  were  come  out  of -Zion  I "— C.  J. 

Ver.  1. — "  The  love  of  the  Lord  toward  the  ehUdren  of  IvraelT  This  exquisitely 
beautiful  phrase  comes  in  the  midst  of  a  passage  of  the  most  jiainful  and  distressing 
character.  As  a  fond  husband  may  tenderly  love  his  wife,  even  though  she  abandon 
herself  to  a  course  of  infidelity  and  profligacy,  so  the  God  of  Israel  is  represented  as 
cherishing  towards  his  people,  even  in  their  defection  and  apostasy,  the  sincerest  com- 
passion, the  most  invincible  affection. 

L'HOW   THE   LOVE   OF    THE    LoBD    TO    ISRABt    WAS    FIRST    DISPLAYED.      1.    In    their 

selection  iirom  amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth  as  the  object  of  his  special  favour  and 
calling.  2.  Inthecommunicationtothemof  peculiar  advantages  and  privileges.  They 
were  the  depositaries  of  his  truth,  the  conservators  of  his  worship. 

n.  How  THE  LOVE  OF  THE   LORD   TO  ISRAEL   WAS    TRIED   AND    TESTED.      1.   By  their 

forgetfulness  of  him.  2.  By  their  neglect  of  his  ordinances.  3.  By  their  rejection  of 
his  messengers  and  prophets.  4.  By  their  addictedness  to  idolatry.  5.  By  their 
violation  of  his  commandments.    6.  By  their  blasphemy  of  his  Name. 

III.   How  THE  LOVE  OP  GoD  END0BED  AND  TRIUMPHED  IN  THE  TEST  TO  WHICH  IT  WAS 

SUBJECTED.     1.  Israel  was  spared,  although  deserving  abandonment  to  destruction. 

2.  Promises  of  grace  were  addressed,  when  threats  of  desertion  were  to  be  expected. 

3.  Opportunity  of  repentance  and  recoaciliatioa  was  afibrded,  and  Israel  was  entreated 
not  to  abuse  it. — ^T. 

Ver.  4. — The  Tdnglese  state  and  prtestless  Church.  The  singular  symbolism  of  this 
book  is  intended  vividly  to  depict  the  misery  of  Israel,  by  which  she  was  to  be  driven 
in  penitence  and  contrition  to  seek  again  the  Divine  favour  she  had  forfeited.  The 
woman  whom  the  prophet  purchased  and  married  was  to  be  deprived  at  once  of  her 
husband  and  of  her  lovers,  and  in  this  forlorn  and  anomalous  state  was  to  be  an  emblem 
of  Israel,  cut  off  at  the  same  time  from  Jehovah,  her  true  Husband,  to  whom  she  had 
been  unfaithful,  and  from  the  spiritual  paramours  after  whom  she  had  gone,  but  in 
whom  no  help  and  no  joy  were  now  to  be  found. 

L  The  privation  op  kino  and  prince  was  punishment  for  national  infidblitt. 
Jehovah  was  himself  the  King  of  the  Israelites ;  their  kingdom  was  a  theocracy.  He  had 
sent  Moses  the  lawgiver ;  he  had  raised  up  judges  ;  he  had  heard  their  prayer  and  given 
them  a  king.  In  revolting  from  the  house  of  David,  the  ten  tribes  had  dishonoured 
God.  Whether  we  are  to  look  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  threat  in  the  collapse  and 
captivity  of  the  northern  kingdom,  or  in  the  present  dispersion  of  Israel,  is  immaterial. 
The  lesson  is  plain.  The  nation  which  misuses  national  privileges  and  neglects  national 
op]^x>rtunities  shall  lose  them  both,  and  without  a  head,  a  corporate  life,  a  settled 
abiding-place,  shall  learn  the  truth  of  the  saying, "  The  Lord  reigneth.  He  taketh 
down  one,  and  setteth  up  another." 

II.  The  privation  of  religious  privileges  was  punishment  fob  ibrbligion  and 
SPIBITUAL  rebellion.  The  Hebrews  were  highly  favoured  in  their  possession,  not  only 
of  the  Law,  but  of  a  priesthood,  a  dispensation  of  sacrifices  and  festivals  and  various 
means  of  communion  with  Heaven.  As  preparatory  to  a  more  spiritual  economy,  these 
arrangements  were  invaluable.  But  the  enjoyment  of  them  was  justly  madedependent 
upon  their  proper  estimation  and  employment.  The  northern  tribes,  by  their  secession, 
forfeited  some  of  these  advantages,  and  they  largely  corrupted  to  their  own  injury  such 
as  remained.  The  time  came  when,  in  Oriental  captivity,  they  mourned  the  loss  oi 
advantages  they  had  too  often  desiiised  and  misused.    And  now,  as  they  are  scattered 


OH.iu,!— 5.]  THE  liUOK  OP  HOSEA.  95 

among  the  nations,  they  posaesg  neither  the  sacrifices  of  the  heathen  nor  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Messiah,  and  are  either  condemned  to  a  barren  and  unhappy  seclusion  or  to  a 
yet  sadder  alliance  with  the  deists  of  the  lands  in  which  they  dwell.  A  lesson  to  all 
who  neglect  the  precious  opportunities  with  which  they  are  favoured  by  Providence, 
"  Walk  in  the  light  whilst  ye  have  the  light,  lest  darkness  come  upon  you." — T. 

Ver.  6. — Eeturning  to  Qod.  This  is  another  instance  of  the  remarkable  conjunction 
of  threat  and  promise.  It  seems  as  if  the  prophet  no  sooner  uttered  a  word  of  denun- 
ciation, a  prediction  of  wrath,  than  he  followed  it  up  with  a  prospect  of  reconciliation 
and  an  assurance  of  blessing. 

I.  The  occasion  of  this  bbtdbn.  There  is  no  note  of  exact  time  ;  but  the  reference 
is  to  "  the  latter  days,"  to  a  period  described  as  "  afterward."  Comparing  this  language 
with  the  context,  we  infer  that  this  return  to  Qod  should  follow  upon  departure  from 
God,  and  upon  a  bitter  experience  of  the  evil  consequences  of  such  forsaking.  How 
often,  as  in  the  case  of  Israel,  is  it  necessary  that  the  sinner  should  learn  that  "  the  way 
of  transgressors  is  hard  " !  Surely  chastening,  which  is  designed  to  produce  a  juster 
estimate  of  sin  and  a  sincere  desire  for  deliverance,  is  not  to  be  resented,  but  rather 
received  with  humility,  that  it  may  lead  to  contrition,  repentance,  and  amendment. 

II.  The  pdbposb  of  this  kbturn.  Observe :  1.  To  whom  should  Israel  return.  To 
"  the  Lord  their  God,"  whom  they  had  forsaken  in  order  to  worship  the  vain  gods  of  the 
heathen,  but  who,  nevertheless,  had  a  claim  upon  them  that  none  other  had,  and  who 
never  ceased. to  be  their  God.  In  this  Israel  represents  mankind ;  whoever  returns  to 
the  Lord,  returns  to  his  own,  proper,  rightful  God.  To  "  David  their  king,"  from 
whose  djTinsty  they  had  revolted  in  the  pridp,  self-sufficiency,  and  rebelliousness  of 
their  heart.  David  was  repre.sentative  of  the  theocracy,  for  he  was  "the  Lord's 
anointed,"  and  he  was  an  emblem  of  him  who  was  David's  Son  and  David's  Lord.  So 
that  whoever  returns  to  the  Lord  by  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  returns  unto  David, 
whose  "  sure  mercies  "  are  ratified  in  the  Divine  Saviour.  2.  In  what  spirit  Israel 
should  return.  They  should  "  seek  "  the  Lord,  and  should  "  fear  "  or  approach  with 
reverential  devoutness  the  Lord  and  his  goodness.  The  spirit  thus  described  is  a  spirit 
of  true  earnestness,  a  spirit  of  lowly  repentance,  and  a  spirit  of  trembling  confidence  in 
that  "  goodness  "  upon  which  alone  a  contrite  sinner  ':aa  rely,  and  upon  which  he  can 
never  rely  in  vain. — T. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Love  to  the  adulteress.  It  has  been  shown  in  ch.  ii.  that  the  punish- 
ment of  Israel  is  designed  to  work  for  the  nation's  moral  recovery.  A  new  symbol  is 
accordingly  employed  to  set  forth  this  aspect  of  the  truth ;  as  formerly  the  punitive 
aspects  of  God's  dealing  witli  the  nation  had  been  exhibited  in  the  symbols  of  ch.  i. 
The  symbol  is  ngain  drawn  from  the  prophet's  relations  to  his  wife. 

I.  The  pbophet's  continued  love  fob  his  unfaithful  wife.  (Ver.  1.)  Gomer, 
adhering  to  her  adulterous  courses,  had  apparently  left  lier  husband,  and  had  sunk  to 
a  condition  of  great  wretchedness.  The  prophet,  however,  had  not  lost  his  love  for  her. 
She  was  still  a  woman  "  beloved  of  her  friend,"  i.e.  her  husband.  His  love  was  the 
more  remarkable  that  it  is  rarely  a  husband  retains  his  love  "for  an  adulterous  wife. 
Hosea,  it  may  be  inferred,  felt  that  there  was  something  uncommon  in  his  relations 
with  this  woman.  He  did  not,  therefore,  renounce  her  when  she  abandoned  him.  He 
still  cherished  towards  her  a  husband's  affection ;  retained  his  love  for  her,  though 
unworthy  ;  followed  her  in  her  devious  ways  with  a  pure,  steadfast,  unalterable,  and 
wholly  disinterested  regard.  In  this  his  love  became  a  fit  image  of  Jehovah's  love 
"  toward  the  children  of  Israel."  It  was  the  image  of  it  then,  while  the  kingdom  of 
Israel  stood,  and  the  people  were  zealous  in  their  pursuit  of"  other  gods ; "  and  it  would 
be  still  more  the  image  of  it  when  the  threatenings  of  the  previous  chapter  had  taken 
effect,  and  the  people  were  eating  the  bitter  fruits  of  their  sins.  Is  it  not  also  the 
image  of  God's  love  to  the  sinful  world  as  a  whole  ?  We  had  departed  from  him,  and  had 
bestowed  our  affections  adulterously  on  the  creature ;  but  he  did  not  on  this  accoimt 
cease  to  love  us.  He  saw  us  lost,  sinful,  and  degraded  ;  but  he  still  looked  on  us  with 
pity,  and  sought  opportunity  for  our  recovery.  He  so  loved  us  that  he  gave  his  Son  as 
the  price  of  our  salvation.  This  love  of  God  to  sinners  finds  no  explanation  in  the 
nature  of  its  objects.    It  is  love  to  the  unworthy,  to  the  wicked,  to  the  ungrateful ; 


9«  THE   BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  in.  1—5. 

a  love,  therefore,  entirely  pure,  self-caused,  unbought,  and  disinterested.    How  warmly 
should  our  love  go  back  to  him  who  has  thus  loved  us  I 

II.  Thk  pbophet's  treatment  or  his  wife.  (Vers,  2—4.)  Consider  Jiere :  1.  The 
condition  in  which  he  found  her.  It  was  a  very  deplorable  one.  She  had  sank  so  low 
that  it  became  necessary  to  "  buy  "  her.  The  price  paid — fifteen  pieces  of  silver  and 
a  homer  and  a  half  of  barley — seems  the  equivalent  of  the  price  of  a  slave.  If  so,  it  is 
an  additional  token  of  her  deeply  humbled  state.  Either  (1)  she  bad  sunk  to  the 
condition  of  a  slave,  and  required  to  be  redeemed  out  of  it ;  or  (2)  "  it  was  perhaps  an 
allowance,  whereby  he  brought  her  back  from  her  evil  freedom,  not  to  live  as  his  wife, 
but  to  be  honestly  maintained,  until  it  should  be  fit  completely  to  restore  her  "  (Pusey). 
Barley  was  the  coarsest  food,  so  that,  if  maintenance  was  the  object,  her  condition  was 
still  a  bard  and  unenviable  one.  In  this  see  a  picture  o(  the  state  to  which  sin  reduces 
those  who  follow  after  it.  It  is  a  picture  true  to  the  life  as  respects  the  state  to  which 
sin  reduced  Israel.  But  it  is  surely  not  less  triie  in  the  representation  it  gives  of  the 
results  of  a  life  of  sin  generally.  The  sinner,  in  beginning  his  career,  promises  himself 
liberty  and  happiness.  He  cheats  himself  with  the  belief  that  he  is  taking  the  true 
way  to  obtain  these  objects  of  universal  desire.  How  soon  he  finds  out  his  mistake  1 
He  obtains  neither  of  the  things  he  wishes.  The  pleasure  he  found  in  his  vices  soon 
dies  out.  His  means  are  squandered.  Friends  desert  him.  His  character,  reputation, 
influence,  are  gone.  He  finds  himself  the  victim  of  evil  habits,  perhaps  of  disease.  He 
has  lost  his  own  self-respect.  He  feels  that  he  has  forfeited  the  respect  of  others. 
What  remains  for  him  but  poverty  and  disgrace ;  or  perhaps  a  life  of  crime  ?  The  whole 
history  is  depicted  in  the  memorable  parable  of  the  prodigal — the  beginning,  waste  ol 
substance  in  riotous  living;  the  end,  snatching  a  morsel  at  the  swine-trougb  (Luke 
XV.  11 — 32).  "  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard "  (Prov.  xiii.  15).  The  prophet's 
wife  should  be  a  warning  to  every  female  tempted  to  go  astray.  2.  The  restraint 
under  which  he  placed  her.  He  did  not  admit  her  at  once  to  full  conjugal  rights.  He 
put  her  under  trial.  He  bound  her,  in  the  mean  time,  to  refrain  from  further  immoral 
conduct.  She  was  not  to  play  the  harlot.  He,  on  his  part,  would  abide  in  separa- 
tion from  her.  This  was  to  continue  "  many  days."  It  would  take  a  long  time  to 
wean  her  from  her  immoral  ways,  and  thoroughly  to  test  her  disposition.  The  intention 
was  that  she  might  be  trained  to  be  again  a  faithful  wife  to  him.  Analogous  to 
this  would  be  God's  method  of  dealing  with  Israel.  "  For  the  children  of  Israel 
shall  abide  many  days  without  a  king,"  etc.  In  the  light  of  the  subsequent  history 
this  prophecy  is  very  striking.  There  is  involved  in  it :  (1)  Long  exile.  The  peopiu 
were  to  abide  "  many  days "  without  king  or  prince  (civil  guvernment),  without 
sacrifice  or  pillar  (religious  worship),  without  ephod  or  teraphim  (means  of  inquiring 
into  the  future).  This  implies  expulsion  from  their  own  land.  Tbe objects  of  Jehovah 
and  idol  worship  are  mixed  up  in  this  description  to  indicate  the  then  mixed  state  oi 
the  nation's  religion,  and  to  show  that  in  exile  "  the  Lord  would  take  away  both  the 
Jehovah-worship  and  also  the  worship  of  the  idols,  along  with  independent  civil 
government "  (Keil).  (2)  -Continued  preservation.  The  nation,  it  is  further  implied 
though  cast  off,  was  not  to  be  destroyed.  It  would  still  be  the  object  of  a  Divine  care. 
It  would  preserve  its  identity  and  distinctness  through  the  "  many  days."  "  God  would, 
in  those  times,  withhuld  all  special  tokens  of  his  favour,  covenant,  providence ;  yet  would 
he  secretly  uphold  and  maintain  them  as  a  people,  and  withhold  them  from  falling 
wholly  from  him  into  the  gulf  of  irreligion  and  infidelity "  (Pusey),  (3)  Ultimate 
recovery.  God's  end  in  his  treatment  of  the  nation  was  its  salvation.  Its  banishment 
was  not  to  be  perpetual.  A  day  of  recovery  was  set  for  it  (ver.  5).  It  will  be  admitted 
that  the  prophecy  has  had,  in  its  firut  two  parts,  a  singular  fulfilment.  The  tribes — 
remnants  both  of  the  ten  and  of  the  two — are  at  this  hour  precisely  in  the  condition  of 
the  prophet's  wife.  They  are  in  a  manner  "  waiting  on  God,  as  the  wife  waited  for  her 
h  usband,  kept  apart  under  his  care,  yet  not  acknowledged  by  him ; "  not  following  after 
idolatries,  yet  cut  off  through  unbelief  in  Christ  from  full  covenant  privilege.  They 
have  been  in  this  condition  "  many  days,"  "  praying  to  God,  yet  without  sacrifice  for 
sin  ;  not  owned  by  God,  yet  kept  distinct  and  apart  by  his  providence  for  a  future  yet 
to  be  revealed"  (PuseyV  The  object  of  the  present  exile  is  (1)  to  wean  Israel 
entirely  from  idols, — this  end  may  be  said  to  be  effectually  accomplished ;  (2)  to 
train  her  to  value  lost  privileges;  (3)  to  educate  her  to  constancy;  (4)  to  create  a 


CH.  IT.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


97 


longing  for  reconciliation  and  restoration.  These  ends  attained,  restoration  will  follow. 
In  a  similar  way  God  often  deals  with  sinners  for  their  good,  cutting  them  off  from  the 
objects  of  their  sinful  desire,  trying  them  by  experiences  of  privation,  leaving  them 
without  tka  comforts  of  his  presence  and  the  privileges  of  his  worship,  so  teaching  them 
the  vanity  of  past  pursuits,  inciting  them  to  seek  him,  and  preparing  them  to  receive  his 
mercy  when  it  is  at  length  proposed  to  them. 

III.  The  REsuiiT  of  God's  treatment  of  Isbael.  (Ver.  5.)  "Afterwards  shall 
the  children  of  Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord  their  God,  and  David  their  king,"  etc. ; 
that  is,  Israel,  when  recovered  to  God,  would  return  to  its  allegiance  to  the  Davidic  house, 
and  specially  to  him  whom  prophecy  pointed  to  as  the  Messiah.  It  is  to  be  noticed :  1. 
Return  to  God  is  the  designed  end  of  moral  discipline.  2.  Return  to  Gcd  b  connected 
with  submission  to  his  Son.  3.  The  result  of  return  to  God  is  experience  of  his  goodness." 
"  They  shall  fear  the  Lord  and  hh  goodness  in  the  latter  days."  4,  God  is  to  be  gerved 
by  those  who  return  to  him  in  holy  "  fear."  This  fear  is  awakened  by  the  experience 
of  his  "goodness,"  as  well  as  by  the  remembrance  of  his  chastisements.  It  is  a  holy, 
filial  fear,  born  of  reverence  and  love,  and  dreading  to  displease  One  so  good.  It  has 
nothing  in  common  with  the  slavish  fear  which  combine*  love  of  lin  with  dread  of 
the  Funisher  of  it. — J.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  1. — A  new  and  distinct  division  of 
the  book  commences  with  this  fourth  chapter 
and  continues  till  the  close.  What  had  pre- 
viously been  presented  in  figure  and  Bymljol 
is  now  plainly  and  literally  stated.  The 
children  of  Israel  are  summoned  in  the  first 
verse  of  this  chapter  to  hear  the  charge 
preferred  against  them  and  the  sentence 
pronounced.  Having  convened,  as  it  were, 
a  public  aeeembly  and  cited  the  persons 
concerned,  the  prophet  proceeds  to  show 
cause  why  they  are  bound  to  give  an  atten- 
tive hearing.  In  Gtod'a  controversy  with 
the  people  of  the  land  the  prophet  acts  as 
his  ambassador,  accusing  the  people  of  great 
and  grievous  sins,  and  vindicating  the  justice 
of  God's  judgmeiits  in  their  punishment. 
The  M  with  which  the  last  clause  of  the 
verse  commences  may  be  either  causal  or 
recitative,  and  may  thus  specify  either  the 
ground  or  subject  of  controversy.  It  is 
commonly  understood  here  in  the  former 
sense.  Israel  is  chaiged  with  want  of  truth, 
mercy,  and  the  knowledge  of  God.  Kisnchi 
comments  on  this  controversy  as  follows : 
"  With  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  of  Israel 
I  have  a  controversy,  for  I  gave  them  the 
land  on  the  condition  that  they  should 
exercise  righteousness  and  judgment,  and 
on  this  condition  I  pledged  myself  to  tliem 
that  my  eyes  would  be  upon  them  from  the 
beginning  of  the  year  to  the  end  of  the 
year.  But  since  they  practise  the  opposite 
— cursing,  lying,  etc. — I  ttlso  will  act  with 
them  in  a  way  contrary  to  what  I  assured 
them,  and  will  hide  my  face  from  them." 
He  adds,  "There  were  some  righteous 
among  them,  but  they  were  few,  and  they 
HOSEAi 


hid  themselvea  from  the  face  of  the  mul- 
titude who  were  wicked."  Truth  and  mercy 
are  at  once  Divine  attributes  and  hnm»n 
virtues ;  it  ii  in  the  latter  sense,  of  course, 
that  they  are  here  employed.  Truth  in- 
cludes works  as  well  as  words,  doing  as 
well  as  saying;  it  implies  uprightness  in 
speech  and  I>ehaviour — thorough  integrity 
of  character  and  conduct.  Mercy  goes  be- 
yond and  supplements  this.  We  sometimes 
say  of  such  a  one  that  he  is  an  honest  but 
a  hard  man.  Mercy  combined  with  truth, 
on  the  contrary,  makes  a  man  kind  as  well 
as  honest,  benevjlent  as  well  as  upright. 
In  a  somewhat  similar  sense  the  apostle 
conjoins  goodness  and  righteousness  when 
he  says,  "  Scarcely  for  a  righteous  man  will 
one  die :  yet  peradventure  for  a  good  man 
some  would  even  dare  to  dia"  The  know- 
ledge of  God  is  the  real  root  of  these  two 
virtues  of  truth  and  mercy.  If  we  know 
God  as  he  is  in  himself  and  as  he  stands  in 
his  relations  to  us,  we  shall  conform  our 
conduct  to  his  character  and  our  actions  to 
his  will.  If  we  know  God  to  be  a  God  of 
truth, who  delighteth  in  truth  in  the  inward 
parts,  we  shall  cultivate  truth  in  our  hearts, 
express  it  with  our  lips,  and  practise  it  in 
our  lives.  If  we  know  God  as  a  God  of 
mercy,  who  has  shown  such  boundless  mercy 
to  US  in  pardoning  our  multiplied  and  aggra- 
vated offences,  we  shall  imitate  that  mercy 
in  our  relations  to  our  fellow-man;  nor  shall 
we  enact  the  part  of  the  merciless  man  in 
the  parable,  who  owed  his  lord  ten  thousand 
talents,  and  who,  having  nothing  to  pay, 
was  freely  forgiven  the  debt ;  but  finding  his 
fellow-servant,  who  owed  him  only  an  hun- 
dred pence,  laid  hands  on  him  and  took  him 
by  the  throat,  saying,  "  Pay  me  that  thou 

B 


98 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  IV.  1—19. 


owest,"  and,  deaf  to  that  fellow-servant's 
supplications,  cast  him  into  prison  till  he 
should  pay  the  debt.  The  intimate  con- 
nection of  the  knowledge  of  Gnd  with  the 
virtues  in  question  is  confirmed  by  the  Pro- 
phet Jeremiah,  "  Did  not  thy  father  eat 
and  drink,  and  do  judgment  and  justice,  nnd 
then  it  was  well  with  him?  He  judged  the 
cause  of  the  poor  and  needy ;  then  it  wag 
well  with  him :  was  not  this  to  know  me, 
saith  the  Lord  ?  " 

Ver.  2. — Having  given  a  picture  of  Israel 
negatively,  he  next  pieseuts  the  positive 
side.  Tlie  absence  of  the  virtues  specified 
implies  the  presence  of  the  opposite  vices. 
In  tlie  most  vivid  and  impr(  soive  manner 
the  prophet,  instead  of  enumeiating  pro- 
saically the  vices  so  prevalent  at  the  time, 
expresses  them  more  emphatically  by  a 
s  pecies  of  exclamation,nsin  g(l)infiuitives  ab- 
solute instead  of  finite  verbs ;  thus :  "Swear- 
ing, and  lying,  and  murdering,  and  steal- 
ing, and  committing  adultery."  They  may, 
however,  be  regarded  as  in  the  ncjminative 
as  subjects  to  B';..  Instead  of  either  supply- 
ing NIB* S,  to  allot,or  closely  connecting  "  allot " 
with  the  verb  "to  lie,"  whlcli  immediately 
follows,  it  is  better  to  understand  the  two 
verbs  separately,  as  expressing  two  dift'erent 
■pecies  of  sin ;  that  is,  swearing  or  cursing, 
and  lying.  So  the  Beptuagint  renders  them 
by  the  nouns  apit  koI  ^eiSos,  equivalent  to 
"  cursing  and  lying ; "  as  also  the  Chaldee, 
"  they  swear  falsely  and  lie."  The  com- 
mandments which  the  children  of  Israel 
thus  violated  were  I  he  third,  the  ninth,  the 
sixth,  the  eighth,  and  the  seventh.  (2) 
The  construction,  adopted  in  the  LXX.,  Vul- 
gate, and  by  Luther  in  his  version,  takes 
the  infinitives  (nounal  expressions  of  habi- 
tual or  continued  actions)  as  nominatives 
to  the  yeihparatsu;  thus:  "Cursing,  and 
lying,  and  murder,  and  theft,  and  adultery 
abound  (ke'xutoi  or  c/cKexuTai)  in  the  land ; " 
"  Maledictum,  et  mendacium,  et  homioi- 
dium,  et  furtum,  et  adulterium  inundaver- 
unt; "  and  Luthei  translates,  "Gottesl'astem, 
Liiger,  Morder,  Stehlen,  and  Ehebrechen  hat 
iiberhand  genommen."  The  common  mode 
(3)  of  constructing  the  infinitives  indepen- 
dently as  above  in  (1)  or  gerundively  as  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  and  in  either  case 
understanding  an  indefinite  subject  to 
paraUu,  is  preferable  on  the  whole ;  thus  : 
"  By  swearing,  etc.,  they  break  out."  The 
allusiou  to  the  water  overflowing  its  hanks 
and  spreading  in  all  directions,  implied  in 
the  Septuagint  Version,  is  approved  by 
Jerome  in  bis  Commentary;  "He  (the  pro- 
phet) did  not  say  est,  but,  to  deuinnstiate 
the  abundance  of  crimes,  introduced  inun- 
daverunt  (overflowed)."  The  common  mean- 
ing of  jparats  is  to  tear  or  break — break  in 
upon,  especially  with  violence,  m  robbers 


and  murderers ;  so  paritsim  hag  the  sense  of 
murderers  and  robbers.  It  is  better,  there- 
fore, to  take  the  verb  here  as  a  present 
perfect  contieotins  past  and  present,  and  to 
translate  i  t  '■  brei  i  k  through,"  or  "  into,' '  that  is, 
as  burglars  into  houses.  SoKimohi,  though 
flj,'uratively  :  "  They  break  through  the  wall 
which  is  the  fence  of  the  Law,  and  multiply 
transgressions."  Similarly,  De  Wette  hat 
"  Gewaltthat  iiber  sie ;  "  and  Maurer  like- 
wise: "Jurare  et  mentiri  et  oocidere  et 
funiri  et  adulti  rari  1  Violenter  agunt  et  san 
guines  sanguines altingunt."  TheMassoretio 
accentuation  favours  (putting  athnach  at 
naopi)  this  construction ;  while  the  context, 
which  speaks  of  bloodshed,  is  quite  in  keep- 
ing with  acts  of  violence. 

Vers.  3 — 5. — These  verses  relate,  with 
much  particularity,  the  sufferings  conse- 
quent on  sins,  especially  such  as  are  speci- 
fied in  the  preceding  verses.  The  mourning 
of  the  land  mentiimcd  in  ver,  3  may  be 
understood  either  figuratively  or  literally. 
If  in  the  former  way,  there  are  many  Scrip- 
ture pai  allels  which  represent  nature  in  full 
accord  with  human  feeling-^,  eympatliizing 
with  man,  now  in  joy,  again  in  sorrow ;  for 
example  :  ''  The  little  hills  rejoice  on  every 
side ; "  the  valleys  "  shout  for  joy,  they  also 
sing;"  on  the  other  hand,  "The'  earth 
mourneth  and  fadeth  away,  the  world  lan- 
guisheth  and  fadeth  away,  the  haughty 
people  of  the  earth  do  languish."  But,  if 
the  expression  be  taken  littrally,  it  conveys 
a  solemn  fact,  and  one  in  perfect  harmony 
with  the  entire  tone  and  character  of  the  old 
economy,  according  to  which  moral  evil 
tran^mutes  itself  into  physical  evil,  and  im- 
presses itself  in  dismal  characters  on  the 
face  of  inanimate  nature.  The  Hubi  ew  com- 
mentators seem  to  understand  the  statement 
literally ;  thus  Eashi :  "  The  land  shall  be 
laid  waste,  and  there  shall  be  great  mourn- 
ing ; "  likewise  Kimchi :  "  The  land  of  Israel 
si. all  be  laid  waste  and  desolated."  The 
latter  has  this  further  comment :  "After  the 
land  of  Israel  shall  have  been  lai  1  waste, 
man  and  beast  bhall  be  out  off  out  of  it.  But 
under  the  beasts  of  the  field  the  prophet 
does  not  mean  the  wild  beasts,  but  the  large 
dome  stic  animals  which  dwell  with  the  sons 
of  men,  likewise  called  iTn,  It  is  also  pos- 
sible that  even  the  beasts  that  roam  »t  lar^je 
are  included,  for  the  wild  beast  does  not 
come  to  inhabited  places  that  are  laid  wasle, 
unless  they  are  partially  inhabited."  He 
also  adds,  in  reference  to  the  fowls  of  heaven, 
"  When  he  speaks  of  the  fowls  of  heaven,  it 
is  because  most  of  the  fowls  ilo  not  dwell 
in  the  wihlerncss,  but  in  inhabited  places, 
where  tliey  finil  seeds  and  fruits  and  blos- 
soms of  trees.  Or  the  fowls  of  heaven  are 
mentioned  by  way  of  hyperbole  to  represent 
the  mutter  iu  its  totality ;  and,  according 


.  IV.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


99 


to  this  sense,  it  is  UBi^d  in  the  Prophet 
Jeremiah;  and  it  explains  itself  in  like 
manner  in  one  of  these  two  ways."  With 
the  mourning  of  the  land  the  dwellers  there- 
in languish.  Nor  is  this  languishing  condition 
confined  to  rational  beings;  it  comprises  the 
irrationiil  as  well,  and  that  without  excep- 
tion. The  dominion  assigned  man  at  the 
beginning  over  the  whole  creation  of  God  is 
here  reversed  in  the  case  of  Israel ;  while  the 
denunciation  of  wrath  has  that  reversal  for 
its  dark  background.  The  terras  of  the 
dominion  to  man  by  the  Creator  are,  "  Have 
dominion  over  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over 
the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living 
thing  that  moveth  upon  tlie  earth ; "  but  in 
this  denunciation  these  terras  are  reversed 
and  read  backwards,  being,  "  with  the  beasts 
of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls  of  heaven ; 
yea,  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also."  Thus  all 
nature,  inaniraale  and  animate,  and  all  crea- 
tion, rational  and  irrational,  are  involved  in 
the  consequences  of  Israel's  sin.  The  par- 
ticles "  yea,  even,"  preceding  "  the  fishes  of 
the  sea  "  (such  as  the  Sea  of  Galilee  or  other 
inland  seas  and  rivers),  show  the  entirely 
unexpected  as  well  as  unusual  nature  of  the 
event.  The  Chalilee  paraphrases  the  clause 
as  follows:  "And  even  the  fislies  of  the  sea 
shall  be  diminished  in  number,  on  account  of 
their  (Israel's)  sins."  Earth  refuses  susten- 
ance to  man  and  beast,  no  longer  yielding 
grass  for  the  cattle  or  herb  for  the  service  of 
miin  ;  the  waters  of  the  sea,  being  lessened  by 
drought  or  becoming  putrid  by  stagnation, 
no  longer  supply  their  accustomed  quota  of 
fishes  for  human  food.  An  illustration  of 
tlie  literq,!  sense  has  been  quotud  by  Eosen- 
miiller  and  Pusey  from  Jerom^.  It  is  the 
following :  "  Whoso  believeth  not  that  this 
befell  the  people  of  Israel,  let  him  survey 
Illyricum,  let  him  survey  the  Thraces,  Mace- 
donia, the  Pannonias,  and  the  whole  land 
which  stretches  from  the  Propontis  and 
Bosphorus  to  the  Julian  Alps,  and  he  will 
experience  that,  together  with  man,  all  the 
creatures  also  fail,  which  afore  were  nourished 
by  the  Creator  for  the  service  of  man."  The 
Je  before  -n  is  explained  by  Abarbanel  in  the 
sense  of  through,  as  though  the  inliabitants 
would  be  slain  by  wild  beasts ;  by  Hitzig 
as  extending  to ;  by  Keil  as  of  in  enuraera- 
tiou.  It  is  simply  with.  Ver.  4  looks  like 
an  interj(.cted  clause,  coming  in  the  middle 
of  the  enumeration  of  Divine  judgments ; 
and  the  purpose  is  not  so  much  to  justify 
the  severity  of  those  judgments  as  to  inti- 
mate their  inefBoaoy,  owing  to  the  incor- 
rigible character  of  the  people.  There  is 
(1 )  the  rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version, 
Tet  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another. 
This  seems  to  show  that  mutual  reproof  was 
out  of  place,  since  one  was  as  bad  as  another ; 
or  that  every  one  was  to  look  to  his  own  sins,  I 


and  not  throw  the  blame  on  others;  but 
this  rendering  is  not  tenable  nor  capable  of 
being  supported  by  such  an  expression  as 
ish  Wsh.  The  correct  rendering  (2)  is 
rather,  oiily  let  no  man  strive  (wifft  them), 
and  let  no  man  reprove  them.  This  import! 
(a)  that  reasoning  with  them  would  be  use- 
less, and  reproof  thrown  away,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  desperate  obstinacy  of  these 
offenders ;  or  (6)  that  they  were  so  self-willed 
that  they  would  not  allow  any  one  to  re- 
prove them  for  their  conduct.  The  rendering 
(I)  is  favoured  by  Kimchi :  "  Let  a  man  not 
strive,  nor  reprove  his  fellow  for  his  wicked- 
ness, for  it  profits  him  not,  because  he  also 
does  evil  like  him."  The  fact  often  ex- 
perienced in  a  season  of  public  calamity, 
th  it  every  one  comes  forth  as  a  corrector  of 
morals,  and  transfers  to  his  neighbour  the 
cause  of  such  calamity,  Hitzig  illustrates  by 
the  following  words  ofCiirtius:  "Quod  in 
ad versis  rebus  fieri  solet,  alius  in  alium  oul  • 
pam  transferebat."  The  explanation  (2,  6), 
which  is  pretty  much  that  of  Ewald,  is  sup- 
ported by  the  comments  of  Kashi  and  Aben 
Ezra.  The  former  explains  :  "  Ye  warn  the 
true  prophets  against  striving  with  you  and 
against  reproving  you ; "  the  latter :  "  There 
is  no  one  that  strives  with  another  or  re- 
proves him :  and  yet  it  was  the  right  of  the 
priest  to  reprove  Israel ;  but  now  they  turn 
to  reprove  the  priest,  for  he  also  is  wicked 
in  his  works."  But  (3)  Puaey's  rendering, 
though  only  a  slight  modification  of  the 
preceding,  conveys  a  different  sense.  It  ig 
"  Only  men  let  him  not  strive,  and  let  not 
man  reprove,"  which  he  explains  as  follows : 
"God  had  taken  the  controversy  with  his 
people  into  his  own  hands;  the  Lord,  he 
said  (ver.  1),  had  a  controversy  (r«6)  with 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Here  he  forbids 
man  to  intermeddle ;  man  let  him  not 
strive  (he  again  uses  the  same  word).  The 
people  were  obstinate  and  would  not  hear ; 
...  so  God  bids  man  to  cease  to  speak  in 
his  Name.  He  himself  alone  will  implead 
them,  whose  pleading  none  could  evade  or 
contradict."  The  rendering  (2)  is,  in  our 
opinion,  decidedly  entitled  to  the  preference 
both  on  the  ground  of  simplicity  and  agree- 
ment with  the  following  clause.  That  clause, 
for  thy  people  are  as  they  that  strive  with 
the  priest,  is  thought  by  Abarbanel  to 
allude  to  the  opposition  of  Korah  and  his 
company  to  Aaron  the  high  priest,  as  re- 
corded in  Numb,  xvi.,  and  referred  to  in 
Ps.  cvi.  In  the  former  passage,  at  the 
eleventh  verse,  it  is  asked,  "And  what  is 
Aaron,  that  ye  murmur  against  him  1 "  while 
in  the  latter,  at  ver.  16,  we  read  the  state- 
ment: "They  envied  Moses  also  in  the 
camp,  and  Aaron  the  saint  of  the  Lord." 
This  allusion,  by  which  the  Israelites  of  the 
prophet's  day  were  compared  to  the  Korab- 


100 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA. 


[oh,  it.  1—19. 


ites,  will  appear  to  most  as  far-fetched. 
(1)  The  usual  acceptation  is  both  simplar 
and  more  satisfactory.  It  takes  the  expres* 
sion  to  denote  such  contumacy  as  is  reproved 
in  Deut.  xvii.  12,  "  The  man  that  will  do 
presumptuously,  and  will  not  hearken  unto 
the  priest  that  Btandeth  to  minister  there 
before  the  Lord  thy  God,  or  unto  the  judge, 
even  that  man  shall  die  :  and  thou  shalt  put 
away  the  evil  from  Israel."  The  contuma- 
oiousness  of  Israel  is  thus  compared  to  that 
of  persons  who  were  so  obstinate  and  pre- 
sumptuous as  neither  to  obey  nor  reverence, 
but  rather  rebel  against,  the  true  priests  of 
Jehovah,  who,  in  his  Divine  Name  and  by 
Divine  authority,  instructed  or  reproved. 
Such  persons  neither  feared  God  nor  re- 
garded man.  It  was  the  refractoriness  of 
pupils  acting  in  opposition  to  their  teacher, 
or  of  a  people  rising  in  rebellion  against 
their  spiritual  instructors.  Thus  the  Chuldee 
understands  It :  "  And  thy  people  contend 
[quarrel]  with,  their  teachers."  The  last 
clause  of  ver.  4  is  fairly  well  explained  by 
Kimchi  (except  that  he  explains  kaph  of  cer- 
tainty and  not  similitude)  as  follows :  "  The 
prophet  says,  The  priest  should  have  taught, 
striven  with,  and  reproved  the  people ;  but 
at  this  time  the  people  strjve  with  the  priest ; 
for  it  is  not  enough  that  they  do  not  receive 
his  reproof,  but  they  strive  with  and  re- 
prove him,  after  the  way  they  say, '  A  gene- 
ration that  judges  its  judges.'  Or  the 
explanation  is,  '  Tlie  priest  is  as  wicked  as 
they,  and  if  he  reproves  them  so  also  they 
reprove  him.'"  (2)  The  LXX.  has  i>s 
avn  Keyoiisvos  Upebs,  as  a  priest  spoken 
against.  The  text  being  thus  somewliat 
doubtful,  Michaelis  made  a  very  slight 
change  in  the  pointing,  putting  a  patach 
instead  of  tiere  in  the  word  for  "  contend ;  " 
thus :  'a'TO?  instead  of  'ano?,  so  that  the 
translation  would  be,  "  And  thy  people  are 
as  my  adversaries  (those  who  contend  with 
me),  O  priest."  The  people  that  should 
have  learnt  the  Law  from  the  lips  of  the 
priest  would  not  even  snbmit  to  reproof 
from  the  Most  High  himself.  The  expres- 
sion, "  priest-disputers "  or  "  priest-gain- 
sayers,"  is  ailmitledly  an  unusual  one,  and 
given  as  a  specimen  of  the  peculiarities  of 
this  prophet's  style,  to  which,  however,  there 
is  a  parallel  iu  "  boundary-movers  "  (of.  ch. 
T.  10).  Still,  we  see  no  real  advantage 
gained  by  the  conjectural  emendation  of 
Michaelis,  though  some  are  disposed  to 
accept  it  on  the  ground  that  the  representa- 
tion of  the  incorrigibleness  of  a  people  by 
gainsaying  opposition  to  the  priest  appears 
incongruous  with  the  immediately  suc- 
ceeding denunciation  of  the  priesthood. 
The  objection  is  obviated  by  understanding, 
aa  above,  opposition  to  the  true  priests  of 
the  Lord.     Another  conjectural  reading  is 


that  of  Beck,  riz.  VJOM  rspj,  equivalent  to 
"and  my  people  are  like  their  priests." 
Such  oonjectuial  emendation  is  needless  as 
useless. 

Ver.  6.— The  parallelism  of  this  verse  is 
marked  by  the  peculiarity  of  dividing  be- 
tween the  two  members  whdt  belongs  to  the 
sentence  as  one  whole.  Instead  of  saying 
that  the  people  would  fall  (literally,  stumble) 
in  the  day,  and  the  prophet  with  them  in 
the  night,  the  meaning  of  the  sentence, 
divested  of  its  peculiar  foi-m  of  parallelism, 
is  that  people  and  prophet  alike  would  fall  to- 
gether, at  all  times,  both  by  day  and  by  night, 
that  is  to  say,  there  wonld  be  no  time  free 
from  thecoming  calamities;  and  there  would 
be  no  possibility  of  escape,  either  for  the 
sinful  people  or  their  unfaithful  priests ;  the 
darkness  of  the  night  would  not  hide  them, 
the  light  of  the  day  would  not  aid  them ; 
destruction  was  the  doom  of  priests  and 
people,  inevitable  and  at  all  times.  And  I 
will  destroy  thy  mother.  Their  mother  was 
the  whole  nation  as  such — the  kingdom  of 
Israel.  The  expression  is  somewhat  con- 
temptuous, as  though  he  said  of  the  indi- 
vidual members  that  they  were  truly  their 
mother's  children — resembling  her  erewhile 
in  sin  and  soon  in  sorrow.  (1)  Though  the 
verb  nm  is  seldom  used  in  Qal  to  denote 
"  likeness,"  Abarbanel,  as  quoted  by  Koseu- 
muUer,  translates,  "I  have  been  like  thy 
mother,"  and  explains  of  the  people  ad- 
dressing priest  and  prophet  as  a  mother 
reproving  her  petulant  children  in  order 
to  improve  them.  Besides  the  far-fetched 
nature  of  such  a  rendering,  there  is  the  for- 
midable grammatical  objection  that,  in  the 
sense  of  "  similitude,"  this  verb  requires  to 
be  constructed  with  I'  or  el,  so  that  it  should 
be  I'  immeka  or  el  immeJia.  ■  "  This  word, 
when  derived  from  demuth,  likewise  has  el 
with  seghol  after  it ;  but  without  el,  it  has 
the  meaning  of  destroy,"  is  the  statement  of 
Aben  Bzra.  The  LXX.,  assigning  to  the 
verb  the  sense  of  "  similarity,"  renders  the 
phrase  by  vi^ktI  ofiotwaa  r^v  fnjrepa  ffou,  "  1 
have  compared  thy  mother  to  night."  (2) 
Jerome,  connecting  the  verb  with  nn  or  dd"J, 
understands  it  in  the  sense  of  "  sileuoe  : "  "  I 
have  made  thy  mother  silent  in  the  night ; 
that  is,  "  Israel  is  delivered  up  in  the  dark 
night  of  captivity,  sorrow,  and  overwhelming 
distress."  The  Syriao  likewise  has :  «  And 
thy  mother  has  become  silent"  (il  ehathheth 
be  read).  The  Chaldee,  though  more  para- 
phrastic, brings  out  nearly  the  same  sense : 
"  I  will  overspread  your  assembly  with 
stupefaction."  To  the  same  purport  is  the 
exposition  of  Bashi :  "  My  people  shall  be 
stupefied  as  a  man  who  sits  and  is  over- 
whelmed with  stupor,  so  that  no'  answer  is 
heard  from  his  mouth."  The  meaning 
"  destroy  "  is  well  supported  by  the  cognate 


ca,  IV.  1— ioj 


tHE  BOOK  Oi'  HOSEA. 


101 


Aiabic,  and  gives  a  good  sense ;  thaa  Oese- 
nius  renders :  "  I  destroy  thy  mother,  that  ia, 
lay  waste  thy  country."  Bather,  the  nation, 
collectively,  is  the  mother ;  while  the  mem- 
bers individually  are  the  children.  Nor 
shall  private  persons  escape  in  the  public 
catastrophe — root  and  branch  are  to  perish. 
Kimchi's  comment  on  ti'DT  is :"  I  will  cut  off 
the  whole  congregation,  so  that  nb  congre- 
gation iriiall  remain  in  Israel ;  for  they  shall 
be  scattered  in  the  exile,  the  one  here,  the 
other  there." 

Ter.  6. — ^My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack 
of  knowledge.  Here  the  verb  is  plural  and 
its  subject  singular,  because,  being  coUeo- 
tive,  it  comprehends  all  the  individual 
members  of  iSxe  nation.  The  word  iDiais 
rendered  (1)  by  Jerome  in  the  sense  ,of 
"silence : "  "conticuit  populus  mens,"  which 
he  explains  to  mean  "  sinking  into  eternal 
silence."  So  also  the  Chaldee.  (2)  The 
LXX.,  understands  it  in  the  sense  of  "  like- 
ness:"  "  My  people  are  like  (,&iwiiSii)  as  if 
they  had  no  knowledge."  Aben  Ezra  dis- 
proves this  sense  as  follows :  "  This  word,  if 
it  were  from  the  root  signifying  '  likeness,' 
would  have  after  it  d  with  segJiol,  as,  '  To 
[el  with  leghoT]  whom  art  thou  like  in  thy 
greatness'?'  (Ezek.  xxxi.  2);  but  without 
the  word  til  it  has  the  meaning  of  *  cutting 
off.' "  So  Kimchi :  "  Here  also  it  has  the 
sense  of  '  cutting  off.' "  The  article  before 
'  knowledge  "  implies  renewed  mention  and 
refers  to  the  word  in  ver.  1 ;  or  it  may  em- 
phasize the  word  as  that  knowledge  by  way 
of  eminence,  which  surpasses  all  other  know- 
ledge, and  without  which  no  other  know- 
ledge can  really  prove  a  blessing  in  the 
end.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  the  most 
excellent  of  all  sciences.  Paul  counted 
all  things  but  loss  in  comparison  with  its 
possession;  and  our  blessed  Lord  himself 
says,  "This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 
know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent ; "  while  the 
Prophet  Isaiah  attributed  the  captivity  to 
its  absence  :  "  My  people  are  gone  into  cap- 
tivity because  they  have  no  knowledge." 
Because  thou  hast  rejected  knowledge  .  . . 
seeing  thou  hast  forgotten  the  Law  of  thy 
Ood.  The  cause  of  this  ignorance  is  here 
charged  on  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  priest- 
hood. They  rejected  knowledge  and  forgot 
the  Law  of  their  God.  The  two  concluding 
clauses  of  this  verse  may  be  regarded  as 
"  split  members  "  of  a  single  sentence.  As 
rejection  implies  the  presence  of  the  object 
rejected,  while  forgetfulness  implies  its 
absence  from  the  mind  or  memory,  some 
have  understood  rejection  of  knowledge  as 
the  sin  of  the  priest,  and  forgetfuluess  that 
of  the  people.  This  separation  is  not  neces- 
sary, for  what  men  continue  for  a  time  to 
despise  they  will  by-and-by  forget.     The 


forgetrulness  is  thus  an  advance  upon  re- 
jection. The  sin  of  these  priests  was  very 
great,  for,  while  the  priests'  lips  were  re- 
quired to  keep  knowledge,  they  neither 
preserved  that  knowledge  themselves  nor 
promoted  it  among  the  people;  hence  the 
indignant  and  direct  address.  Thus  Kimchi 
says :  "  He  addresses  the  priestly  order  that 
existed  at  that  time:  Thou  hast  rejected 
the  knowledge  for  thyself  and  to  teach  it  to 
the  people,  consequently  I  will  reject  thee 
from  being  a  priest  unto  me.  Since  thou 
dost  not  exercise  the  ofSce  of  priest,  which 
is  to  teach  the  Law,  I  will  reject  thee  so  that 
thou  shalt  not  be  a  priest  in  my  house."  I 
will  also  reject  thee  that  thou  shalt  be  no 
priest  to  me  ...  I  will  also  forget  thy 
children,  even  L  The  punishment  resembles 
the  offence ;  the  human  delinquency  is  re- 
flected in  the  Divine  retaliation.  To  make 
this  the  more  pointed,  the  "thou  on  thy 
part  (attah)  "  at  the  head  of  the  sentence 
has  its  counterpart,  or  rather  is  counter- 
balanced by  the  "  even  I "  or  "  I  too  {gam 
ant)"  at  its  dose.  The  severity  of  the 
punishment  is  augmented  by  the  threat 
that,  not  only  the  then  existing  priests,  but 
their  sons  after  them,  would  be  excluded 
from  the  honour  of  the  priesthood.  This 
was  touching  painfully  the  tenderest  part. 
It  needs  scarcely  be  observed  that  forget- 
fuluess is  only  spoken  of  God  in  a  figurative 
sense,  and  after  the  manner  of  men,  that 
being  forgotten  which  is  no  longer  the 
object  of  attention  or  affection.  "The 
meaning  of  »»,"  says  Kimchi,  "  is  by  way  of 
figure,  like  the  man  who  forgets  something 
and  does  not  take  it  to  heart."  The  un- 
usual form  '^KDKQK  has  been  variously  ac- 
counted for.  The  Massorites  mark  the  aleph 
before  eaph  as  redundant ;  it  is  omitted  in 
several  manuscripts  of  Kennicott  and  De 
Bo5si,  as  also  some  of  the  early  printed 
editions.  Kimchi  confesses  his  ignorance 
of  its  use.  Olshausen  treats  it  as  a  copyist's 
error;  but  Ewald  " regards  it  as  an  Aram- 
lean  pausal  form."  Some  take  the  reference 
to  be  to  Israel  as  a  kingdom  of  priests  (Exod. 
zix.  6)  rather  than  to  the  actual  piitsthood. 
Vers.  7, 8. — As  they  were  increased;  rather, 
multiplied.  Whether  Dana  be  taken  as  in- 
finitive with  BufSx  and  prefix,  ot  as  a  noun, 
it  will  am  junt  to  the  same.  The  reference 
is  rather  to  the  multitude  of  the  population 
than  to  the  greatness  of  their  prosperity  or 
the  abundance  of  their  wealth.  In  the 
latter  sense  it  is  understood  by  the  Chaldee 
paraphrast,  but  in  the  former  by  the  Syriao 
translator.  So  also  Kimchi,  where  he  says, 
"  As  for  Aaron  the  priest  their  father,  the 
Law  of  truth  was  in  his  mouth ;  but  now 
that  his  sons  have  multiplied  and  spread 
abroad,  they  have  sinned  against  me  and 
forgotten  my  law ;  according  as  I  did  them 


102 


THE  BOOK  OF  HObEA. 


[CH.  IV.  X— 10 


good  they  did  evil."  He  also  gives  as  the 
explanation  of  others,  "  As  I  inoreaaed  them 
in  wealth  and  riches,  they  sinued  against 
me."  Their  glory  will  I  change  into  shame. 
The  "  therefore  "  ef  the  Authorized  Version 
is  inserted  nnnecesBarily.  Both  the  Chaldee 
and  Syriac  render,  "  And  they  changed 
their  glory  into  shame ;  "  as  they  took  TOK 
for  the  infinitive  I'pn,  and  that  in  the  sense 
of  tlie  preterite ;  or  the  infinitive  in  the 
geniiidival  sense:  "clianging  their  glory 
into  shame."  Kimchi  ezphiins  the  meaning 
correctly :  "  Therefore  I  made  them  heads 
over  the  people  and  expiators,  yet  if  they  do 
not  observe  my  Lavr  I  will  change  their  glory 
into  shame;  and  the  people  will  contemn 
and  despise  them."  Their  numbers  multi- 
plied with  the  multiplication  of  idols,  and 
the  apostasy  of  the  people  kept  pace  with 
both ;  and  now  as  a  fit  punishment  they  are 
to  be  deprived  of  their  priestly  glory—  their 
dignity  and  splendour.  They  eat  up  the 
sin  of  my  people.  The  word  nmn  may  be 
"understood  in  either  of  two  senses ;  and  the 
meaning  of  the  verse  will  GoiTespond  thereto. 
It  may  either  mean  that  these  faithless 
priests  lived  upon  the  sin  of  the  people, 
deriving  tlieir  livelihood  and  profit  from  the 
people's  idolatrous  practices;  or  that  they 
were  delighted  with  their  Bin,  approving 
rather  than  reproving  them  for  the  same. 
The  other  explanation  understands  the  word 
of  sin  offering,  and  is  thus  expressed  by 
Kimchi:  "  They  are  only  priests  for  eating 
up  the  sin  and  trespass  offering  which  the 
people  offer  on  account  of  sins,  not  for  teach- 
ing the  Law  or  right  way."  To  their  iniquity 
they  lift  up  (each  one)  his  soul.  They  set 
their  heart  upon  and  eagerly  desire  the  con- 
tinued practice  of  sin  on  the  part  of  the 
people  that  they  may  profit  by  the  sacrifices. 
Thus  Kimchi  explains  this  clause  in  ac- 
cordance with  his  exposition  of  the  former : 
"  The  priests  lift  up  every  one  his  soul  to 
the  sin  of  the  people,  saying,  When  will  they 
bin,  and  bring  sin  offering  and  trespass 
offering  that  we  may  eat?" 

Ver.  9. — Like  people,  like  priest.  As  it  bad 
fared  witli  the  people  who  had  sinned  and 
liad  been  punished,  as  is  stated  in  tbe  third 
and  fifth  verses;  so  shall  it  be  with  the 
priest  or  whole  priestly  order.  He  has  in- 
volved himself  in  sin  and  punishment  like 
the  people,  and  that  as  the  consequence  of 
his  extreme  unfaithfulness;  whereas  by 
faithful  dealing  with  the  people  and  dis- 
charge of  his  duty  he  might  have  delivered 
bis  own  soul,  as  stated  oy  Ezek.  xxxiii.  9, 
"  Nevertheless,  if  thou  warn  the  wicked  of 
his  way  to  turn  from  it ;  if  he  do  not  turn 
from  his  way,  he  shall  die  in  his  iniquity ; 
but  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul."  It  is 
well  explained  by  Kimchi  ■■  follows :  "These 
two  eaphi  of  UkeneM  aie  by  way  of  abbtevi- 


ation,  and  the  ezplaTiation  is — the  people  are 
like  the  priest  and  the  priest  is  like  the 
people.  And  the  meaning  is  that,  as  the 
people  and  the  priest  are  equal  with  respect 
to  sin,  so  shall  they  be  equal  in  relation  to 
punishment."  And  I  will  visit  upon  him 
his  ways,  and  his  doings  I  will  bring  back 
to  him.  The  retribution  here  threatened 
includes  the  whole  priestly  order,  not  people 
and  priest  as  one  man,  according  to  Pusey, 
who,  however,  makes  the  following  excellent 
comment  on  vhhya:  "The  word  rendered 
doings  signifies  great  doings  when  used  of 
God,  hold  doings  on  the  part  of  man.  These 
bold  presumptuous  doings  against  the  Law 
and  will  of  God,  God  will  bring  back  to  the 
sinner's  bosom,"  or  rather,  down  overwhelm- 
ingly upon  his  head.  The  singular  indi- 
vidualizes ;  so  both  Aben  £zra  and  Kimchi : 
"  Upon  every  one  of  them." 

Ver.  10. — For  they  shall  eat,  and  not  have 
enough  :  they  shall  commit  whoredom,  and 
shall  not  increase.  This  part  of  the  verse 
states  the  punishment  to  be  inflicted  and 
the  reward  to  be  received ;  it  is  thus  an 
expansion  of  the  closing  clause  of  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  with  an  obvious  allusion  to  the 
sin  specified  in  the  eighth  verse.  To  eat 
and  not  be  satisfied  may  occur  in  time  of 
famine,  or  be  the  effect  of  disease  or  the 
consequence  of  insatiable  craving.  "  Since," 
says  Kimchi,  "they  eat  in  an  unlawful 
manner,  their  food  shall  not  be  to  them  a 
blessing."  This  was  one  of  the  pi  inishments 
threatened  for  violation  of  the  Law,  as  we 
read  in  Lev.  xxvi.  26,  "  When  I  have  broken 
the  staff  of  your  bread,  ten  women  shall 
bake  your  bread  in  one  oven,  and  they  shall 
deliver  you  your  bread  again  by  weight: 
and  ye  shall  eat,  and  not  be  satisfied."  Fur- 
ther, the  multiplication  of  wives  or  concu- 
bines would  not  increase  their  posterity ; 
Solomon  long  previously  had  beeu  a  notable 
exemplification  of  this.  "  So  in  their  cohabi- 
tation with  their  women,  sin  e  it  is  in  a 
whorish  manner,  they  shall  not  increase,  for 
they  shall  not  have  children  by  them ;  or,  if 
they  have,  they  shall  die  from  the  birth." 
The  Hiph.  hiznu  has  rather  the  intensive 
sense  of  Qal  than  that  of  causing  or  en- 
couraging whoredom.  Because  they  have 
left  off  to  take  heed  to  the  Lord.  The  verbal 
lishmor  either  (1)  has  Jehovah  for  its  object, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version ;  or  (2)  durho 
or  darkair  may  be  supplied,  as  is  done  by 
Kimchi  and  Aben  Ezra.  The  former  has, 
"To  observe  his  ways,  for  they  have  no 
delight  in  him  and  in  his  ways ;  to  observe 
his  ways  they  have  left  off; "  the  latter  has, 
"  They  have  forsaken  Jehovah,  to  observe 
his  way  or  his  Laws."  But  (3)  Kimchi 
informs  us  that  "  Saadiah  Gaon  of  blessed 
memory  has  connected  the  word  with  the 
verse  that  oomcw  after  It;  they  have  for- 


CH.  IV.  1—19,] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


103 


saken  the  Lord  to  obaerra  whoredom  and 
wine  and  new  wine." 

Ver.  11. — ^It  makes  no  great  difference 
whether  we  regard  this  verse  as  concluding 
the  foregoing  or  commencing  a  new  para- 
graph, though  we  prefer  the  latter  mode  of 
connecting  it.  It  states  the  debasing  influ- 
ence which  debauchery  and  drunkenness  are 
known  to  exercise  over  both  head  and  heart ; 
they  dull  the  faculties  oi  the  former  and 
deaden  the  affections  of  the  latter.  The 
heart  is  not  only  the  seat  of  the  affections, 
as  with  ns ;  It  comprises  also  the  intellect 
and  \\iU ;  while  the  word  ns\  is  not  so  much 
to  take  away  as  to  captivate  the  heart.  Bashi 
gives  the  former  sense:  "The  whoredom 
and  drunkenness  to  which  they  are  devoted 
take  away  their  heart  from  me."  Kimchi's 
explanation  is  judicious :  "  The  whoredom 
to  which  they  surrender  themselves  and  the 
constant  drunkenness  which  they,  practise 
take  their  heart,  so  tliat  they  have  no  under- 
standing to  perceive  what  is  the  way  of 
goodness  along  which  they  should  go."  He 
further  distinguishes  the  tirosh  ftom  the 
yayin,  remarking  that  the  former  is  the  new 
wine  which  takes  the  heart  and  suddenly  in- 
toxicates. The  prophet,  having  had  occasion 
to  mention  the  sin  of  whoredom  in  ver.  10, 
makes  a  general  statement  about  the  conse- 
quences of  that  sin  combined  with  drunken- 
ness in  ver.  10,  as  not  only  debasing,  but 
depriving  men  of  the  right  use  of  their 
reas  )n  and  the  proper  exercise  of  their 
natural  affeetiona.  The  following  verses 
afford  abundant  evidence  of  all  this  in  the 
insensate  conduct  of  Israel  at  tlie  time  re- 
ferred to. 

Vers.  12—14. — ^The  first  of  these  verses 
exhibits  the  private  life  of  the  people  as 
depraved  by  sin  and  folly ;  the  second  tlieir 
public  life  as  degraded  by  idolatry  and  lewd- 
ness; wliile  the  third  points  to  the  corre- 
sponding chastisement  and  its  cause.  My 
people  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks  (literally, 
wood),  and  their  staff  declareth  unto  them. 
Kasbi  explains  "  stocks,' '  or  literally, "  wood," 
to  mean  "  a  graven  image  made  out  of  wood ; " 
while  Aben  Ezra  prefaces  his  exposition  of 
this  by  an  observation  which  serves  well  as 
a  link  of  connection  between  the  eleventh 
and  twelfth  verses.  It  is  as  follows :  "  The 
sign  that  they  are  in  reality  without  heart, 
is  that  my  people  turn  to  ask  counsel  of 
its  stocks  and  wood."  Kimehi  not  unaptly 
remarks,  "They  are  like  the  blind  man 
to  whom  his  staff  points  out  the  way  in 
which  lie  should  go."  The  stupidity  of 
idolatry  and  the  sin  of  divination  are  here 
combined.  By  the  "  wood  "  is  meant  an 
idol  carved  out  of  wood;  while  the  staff 
may  likewise  have  an  image  carved  at  the 
top  for  idolatrous  purposes,  or  it  may  denote 
%  mode  of  divination  by  a  staff  which  by 


the  way  it  fell  determined  their  course. 
Theophylaot  explains  this  method  of  divina- 
tion as  follows :  "  They  set  up  two  rods,  and 
muttered  some  verses  and  enchantments; 
and  then  the  rods  falling  through  the  in- 
fluence of  demons,  they  considered  how  they 
fell,  whether  forward  or  backward,  to  the 
right  or  the  left,  and  so  gave  answers  to  the 
foolish  people,  using  the  fall  of  the  rods  for 
signs."  Cyril,  who  attributes  the  invention 
of  rabdomancy  to  the  Ohaldeans,  gives  the 
same  account  of  this  method  of  divination. 
Herodotus  mentions  a  mode  of  divination 
prevalent  among  the  Scythians  by  means 
of  willow  rods ;  and  Tacitus  informs  us  that 
the  Germans  divined  by  a  rod  cut  from  a 
fruit-bearing  tree.  "They  (the  Germans) 
out  a  twig  from  a  fruit  tree,  and  divide  it 
into  small  pieces,  which,  distinguished  by 
certain  marks,  are  thrown  promiscuously  on 
a  white  garment.  Then  the  priest  of  the 
canton,  if  the  occasion  be  public — if  private, 
the  master  of  the  family — after  an  invoca- 
tion of  the  gods,  with  his  eyes  lifted  up  to 
heaven,  thrice  takes  out  each  piece,  and  as 
tliey  come  up,  interprets  their  signification 
according  to  the  marks  fixed  upon  them." 
The  sin  and  folly  of  any  people  consulting  an 
idol  of  wood  about  the  success  or  otherwise 
of  an  undertaking,  or  deciding  whether  by 
a  species  of  teraphim  or  staff  divinalion,  is 
sufficiently  obvious.  But  the  great  aggra- 
vation of  Israel's  sin  arose  from  the  circum- 
stance not  obscurely  hinted  by  the  possessive 
"  my  "  attached  to  "  people."  That  ri  people 
like  Israel,  whom  God  had  chosen  from  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth  and  distinguished 
by  special  tokens  of  Divine  favour,  and  to 
whom  he  had  given  the  ephod  with  the  truly 
oracular  Urim  and  Thummim,  should  for- 
sake him  and  the  means  he  had  given  them 
of  knowing  his  will,  and  turn  aside  to  gods 
of  wood,  evinced  at  once  stupidity  unac- 
'Countable  and  sin  inexcusable.  "The 
prophet,"  says  Calvin,  "calls  here  the 
Israelites  the  people  of  God,  not  to  honour 
them,  but  rather  to  increase  their  sin ;  for 
the  more  heinous  was  the  perfidy  of  the 
people,  that,  haying  been  chosen,  they 
had  afterwards  forsaken  their  heavenly 
Father.  .  .  .  Now  this  people,  that  ought  to 
be  mine,  consult  their  own  wood,  and  tlieir 
staff  answers  them  I "  For  the  spirit  of 
whoredoms  hath  caused  them  to  err,  and 
they  have  gone  a-whoring  from  under  their 
God.  In  this  part  of  the  verse  the  prophet 
attempts  to  account  for  the  extreme  folly 
and  heinous  sin  of  Israel,  as  described  in 
the  first  clause.  It  was  an  evil  spirit,  some 
demoniac  power,  that  had  inspired  them  with 
an  insuperable  fondness  for  idolatry,  which 
in  proplietic  language  is  spiritual  adultery. 
The  consequence  was  a  sad  departure  from 
the  true  Gi>d  and  a  sinful  wandering  away 


164 


tHE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  iv.  1—19. 


from  hia  wonhip,  notwitbslanding  his  amaz- 
ing condeecension  and  love  by  which  he 
placed  himself  in  the  relation  of  a  husband 
towards  them. 

Ver.  13. — They  saorifloe  upon  the  tops .  of 
the  momitalns,aud  bum  incense  upon  the  hills, 
under  oaks  and  poplars  and  elms,  because  the 
shadow  thereof  is  good.  The  prophet  here 
enlarges  on  the  gin  of  idolatry  mentioned 
in  the  preceding  verse,  and  explains  fnlly 
how  it  showed  itself  in  the  public  life  of  the 
people.  Two  places  are  specified  as  scenes 
of  idolatrous  worship :  one  was  the  tops  of 
mountains  and  hills ;  the  other  under  every 
green  tree,  here  specified  as  oaks,  poplars, 
and  terebinths,  whether  growing  alone  or  in 
groves,  in  vale  or  upland.  The  hills  and 
mountain-tops  were  selected  on  account  of 
their  elevation,  as  though  the  worshifipers 
were  thus  brought  nearer  to  the  objects  of 
their  adoration ;  the  green  trees  as  affording 
shade  from  the  soorching  heat  of  an  Eastern 
Bun^  secrecy  for  their  lioentious '  rites,  and 
a  sort  of  solemn  awe  associated  with  such 
shadow.  In  such  scenes  they  not  only  slew 
victims,  but  burnt  odours  in  honour  of  their 
idols.  The  resemblance  to,  if  not  imitation 
of,  the  rites  of  heathenism  in  all  this  is 
obvious.  Among  the  Greeks  the  oa^  was 
sacred  to  Jupiter  at  Dodona,  and  among  the 
old  Britons  the  Druidical  priests  practised 
their  superstitions  in  the  shadow  of  the  uaks. 
The  poplar  again  was  sacred  to  Hercules, 
affording  a  most  grateful  shade ;  while  in 
Ezek.  vi  13  we  read  that "  under  every  thick 
terebinth"  was  one  of  the  places  where 
"  they  did  offer  sweet  savour  to  their  idols." 
The  inveterate  custom  of  these  idolaters  ig 
implied  in  the  Fiel  or  iterative  form  of  the 
verb ;  the  singular  of  the  nouns,  under  oak 
and  poplar  and  terebinth,  intimates  that 
scene  after  scene  of  Israel's  sin  passes 
under  the  prophet's  review,  each  exciting 
his  deep  indignation;  the  mention  of  the 
goodly  shadow  seems  designed  to  heighten 
that  feeling  of  just  indignation,  as  though 
it  came  into  competition  or  comparison 
with  "the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,"  the 
abiding-place  of  him  that  "dwelleth  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High." 
Therefore  your  daughters  shall  oommit 
whoredom,  and  your  spouses  (properly, 
daughtert-in-law)  shall  oommit  adultery.  n'?a 
primarily  signifies  "bride,"  but  for  the 
parents  of  the  bridegroom,  *<  daughter-in- 
law,"  its  secondary  sense.  The  bad  example 
of  the  parents  acts  upon  their  children  and 
reacts  npon  themselves ;  on  their  children  in 
causing  bad  conduct,  on  themselves  by  way 
of  chastisements.  The  parents  had  been 
guilty  of  spiritual  whoredom  by  their  idola- 
try; their  daughters  and  daughters-in-law 
would  commit  whoredom  in  the  Uteral  and 
oam«l  sense.  This  would  wound  the  parents' 


feelings  to  the  quick  and  pain  them  in  the 
teuderest  part.  Their  personal  honour 
would  be  compromised  by  such  scandalous 
conduct  on  the  part  of  their  daughters; 
their  family  honour  would  be  wounded  and 
the  fair  fame  of  posterity  tarnished  by 
such  gross  misconduct  on  the  part  of  the 
daughters-in-law.  The  following  observa- 
tions are  made  on  the  last  member  of  tliis 
thirteenth  verse  by  the  Hebrew  commen- 
tators: "Because  the  men  of  the  house  go 
out  of  the  city  to  the  high  mountains  and 
under  every  green  tree  there  to  serve  idols, 
therefore  their  daughters  and  daughters-in- 
law  have  opportunity  to  commit  whoredom 
and  adultery  "  (Kimchi).  To  like  purpose 
A  ben  Ezra  writes;  "The  sense  is — On  the 
bare  mountains  and  so  on  the  hilla  they 
sacrifice ;  they  say  to  the  priests  of  Baal  that 
they  shall  saciifice ;  and  therefore,  because 
the  men  go  out  of  the  cities  in  order  to  bum 
incense,  the  daughters  and  daughters-in-law 
remain  in  the  houses  behind,  therefore  they 
commit  whoredom."  Somewhat  different  is 
the  explanation  of  Bashi :  "  Because  ye  asso- 
ciate for  idolatry  after  the  manner  of  tlie 
heathen,  and  the  heathen  associate  with 
you,  and  ye  form  afSnities  with  them,  your 
daughters  also  who  are  born  to  you  by  the 
daughters  of  the  heathen  conduct  them- 
selves after  the  manner  of  their  mothers, 
and  commit  whoredom." 

Yer.  14. — ^I  will  not  punish  your  daughters 
when  they  oommit  whoredom,  nor  your 
spouses  when  they  oommit  adultery.  The 
spiritual  adultery  of  parents  and  husbands 
would  be  punished  by  the  carnal  adultery 
of  daughters  and  wives ;  sin  would  thus  be 
punished  by  sin.  Their  own  dishonour  and 
disgrace,  through  the  unfaitlifulness  of  per- 
sons so  near  to  them,  would  impress  them 
with  a  sense  of  the  dishonour  done  to  God, 
the  spiritual  Husband  of  his  people ;  their 
feeling  of  pain  and  shame  in  consequence 
would  convey  to  tliem  a  clearer  notion  of 
the  abhorrence  which  their  offences  had 
occasioned  to  God.  But  their  punishment 
would  become  more  severe,  and  their  pain 
intensified  by  the  Divine  refusal  to  avenge 
them  by  punishing  the  lewdness  that 
caused  such  dishonour.  While  punish- 
ment would  prevent  the  sin  and  consequent 
reproach,  impunity,  or  the  postponement  of 
punishment,  would  leave  the  offenders  to  go 
on  in  their  course  of  sin  and  shame.  Aben 
Ezra  comments  on  this  fourteenth  verse  as 
follows:  "The  sense  is — It  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  if  the  daughters  commit  whore- 
dom ;  for  they  themselves,  when  they  go  up 
to  the  tops  of  the  mountains  to  bum  in- 
cense, eat  and  drink  with  harlots  and  oom- 
mit whoredom — all  of  them.  And,  behold, 
the  sense  is,  not  that  he  shall  not  punish 
then  at  sU,  but  he  speaks  in  regard  to,  is. 


CH.  IT.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK   OP  HOSBA. 


16S 


in  cnmpariaon  with,  the  fathers;  for  they 
teach  them  to  commit  'whoredom  doing  ao- 
oording  to  their  works.  Perhaps  the  daugh* 
ters  are  still  little,  therefore  I  shall  not 
punish."  Bitshi  thinks  that  this  threatening 
refers  to  the  disuse  of  the  bitter  waters  of 
jealousy,  so  that  suspected  guilt  could  not 
be  detected.  But  there  is  nothing  to  inti- 
mate such  a  reference ;  nor  would  it  be  in 
kiieping  with  the  scope  of  the  passage, 
i^gain,  some,  as  in  the  margin  of  the 
Authorized  Veisinn,  read  the  words,  not 
Ifldicatively,  but  interrogatively — "Shall  I 
nut  punish,"  etc.?  This  would  require 
such  a  meaning  to  be  read  into  the  pas- 
sage as- the  following:  "Assuredly  I  shall 
punish  them;  and  not  the  daughters  and 
daughters-in-law  only,  but  the  parents  and 
husbands  still  more  severely,  because  of 
their  greater  criminality."  Equally,  unsatis- 
factury  is  the  explanation  of  Theodoret,  who, 
taking  -T^Q  in  a  good  sense,  which  it  has 
with  the  accusative,  understands  it  of  God's 
refusing  any  protection  or  preservation  of 
their  daughters  and  spouses  from  outrage 
at  the  hands  of  a  hostile  soldiery,  so  that 
such  sins  as  they  themselves  had  been  guilty 
in  private,  would  be  committed  with  the 
females  of  their  family  in  public.  For  they 
themselves  are  separated  with  whores,  and 
they  saorifioe  with  harlots:  The  change  of 
person  appears  to  imply  that  God  turns 
away  with  inexpressible  disgust  from  such 
vileness,  and,  turning  aside  to  a  third  party, 
expliiins  the  grounds  of  his  procedure.  The 
Q'desheth  were  females  who  devoted  them- 
selves to  licentiousness  in  the  service  of 
Ashtaroth,  the  Sidonian  Venus.  Persons  of 
this  description  were  attached  to  idol  temples 
and  idolatrous  worship  in  heathen  lands  in 
ancient  times,  as  in  India  at  the  present 
time.  The  'Speaker's  Commentary'  calls 
them  "devotee-harlots," and  cites  an  allusion 
to  the  custom  from  the  Moabite  Stone,  as 
follows:  "I  did  not  kill  the  women  and 
maidens,  for  I  devoted  them  to  Ashtar- 
kemosh."  After  stating  the  humiliating 
fact  that  fathers  and  husbands  in  Israel, 
instead  of  uniting  with  their  wives  in  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  separated  themselves, 
going  aside  with  these  female  idolaters  for 
the  purpose  of  lewduens,  and  shared  in  their 
sacrificial  feasts,  the  prophet,  or  rather  God 
by  the  prophet,  impatient  of  the  recital  of 
such  shameless  licentiousness,  and  Indig- 
nant at  such  presumptuous  sinning,  closes 
abruptly  with  the  declaration  of  the  reck- 
lessness, and  denunciation  of  the  ruin  of  all 
such  offenders,  in  the  words— the  people  that 
doth  not  understand  shall  fall;  margin,  be 
punished;  rather,  dashed  to  Pie  ground,  or 
plunge  into  ruin  (nilbat).  Both  Aben  Ezra 
•nd  Kimchi  give  from  the  Arabia,  as  an 
alternative  sense  of  nilbat,  to  tJaU  iugu  error. 


Vers.  15 — 17. — In  this  section  the  prophet, 
M  if  despairing  of  any  improvement  or 
amendment  on  the  part  of  Israel,  still  reso- 
lutely bent  on  spiritual  whoredom,  addresses 
an  earnest  warning  to  Judah.  From  proxi- 
mity to  those  idolatries  and  debaucheries 
so  prevalent  in  this  northern  kingdom,  and 
from  the  corruption  at  least  of  the  court  in 
the  southern  kingdom  during  the  reigns  of 
Joram,  Ahaziah,  and  Ahaz,  Judah  was  in 
danger;  and  hence  the  prophet  turned 
aside,  with  words  of  earnest  warning,  to  the 
sister  kingdom  not  to  involve  herself  in  the 
same  or  similar  guilt.  Bashi's  brief  com- 
ment here  is,  "Let  not  the  children  of 
Judah  learn  their  ways." 

Ver.  15. — And  oome  not  ye  tmto  Oilgal, 
neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aveu,  nor  swear.  The 
Lord  livetL  From  a  solemn  warning  in 
general  terms,  he  proceeds  to  a  specific  pro- 
hibition. The  prohibition  forbids  pilgrim- 
ages to  places  of  idol-vrorship,  such  as  Gilgal 
and  Beth-aven ;  it  also  forbids  a  profession 
of  Jehovah-worship  to  be  made  by  persons 
inclined  to  idolatrous  practices.  Gilgal,  now 
the  village  of  Jiljilia,  which  had  been  a 
school  of  the  prophets  in  the  days  of  Elijah 
and  Elisha,  had,  as  we  may  rightly  infer 
from  passages  in  Hosea  and  Aiuos,  become 
a  seat  of  idolatrous  worship.  The  Hebrew 
interpreters  confound  the  Gilgal  here  re- 
ferred to  with  the  still  more  renowned  Gil- 
gal between  Jericho  and  the  Jordan,  where 
Joshua  circumcised  the  people  a  second  time, 
and  celebrated  the  Passover,  and  where, 
manna  failing,  the  people  ate  of  the  old 
corn  of  the  land.  "  And  why,"  asks  Kimchi, 
"  to  Gilgal  ?  Because  at  Gilgal  the  sanc- 
tuary was  at  the  first  when  they  entered  the 
land ;  therefore  when  they  went  to  worship 
idols  they  built  high  places  there  for  the 
idols.  But  with  respect  to  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  what  need  has  it  to  go  to  Gilgal  and 
to  leave  the  house  of  the  sanctuary  which  is 
in  their  own  cities?"  And  Beth-el,  now 
Beitin,  had  become  Beth-aven — the  house  of 
God  a  house  of  idols,  after  Jeroboam  had  set 
up  the  oalf  there.  Judah  was  to  eschew 
those  places  so  perilous  to  purity  of  worship ; 
also  a  practice  hypocritical  in  its  nature 
and  highly  dangerous  in  its  tendency, 
namely,  confessing  Jehovah  with  the  lipa, 
and  by  a  solemn  act  of  attestation  indica- 
tive of  adherence  to  his  worship,  but  belying 
that  confession  by  complicity  in  idolatrous 
practices,  like  the  peoples  who  "  worshipped 
Jehovah,  but  served  their  own  gods."  Kim- 
chi observes  as  follows :  "  For  ye  engage  in 
strange  worship,  and  yet  swear  by  the  Name 
of  Jehovah ;  this  is  the  way  of  incensing  and 
despising  him." 

Ver.  16.-— For  Israel  slideth  back  as  a  baek- 
sliding  heifer  :  now  the  Lord  will  feed  them 
as  a  lamb  in  a  large  place.    This  verse  om- 


106 


THE  BOOK  OP  H08EA. 


[oh.  IT  1—19. 


Tejt  the  reason  of  the  wnniing  contained  in 
the  preceding ;  and  that  reason  is  the  punish  - 
inent  wbicli  is  to  overtake  Israel   as  the 
consequence  of  their  refractoriness.    If  this 
view  of  tlie  connection  be  correct,  it  will 
help  to  the  right  understanding  of  a  difficult 
jiassage.    The  "  backsliding,"  according  to 
the  Authorized  Version,  is  rather  "  stubborn- 
ness,"  "  intractableuess,"    or   "  uiimanage- 
ablenesB."      Keil  rondej-s  it  "refractory." 
This  refractoriness  was  Israel's  sin  ;    the 
people  would  have  their  own  way,  and  be- 
came refractory,  like  an  unmanageable  heifer, 
which   rebels  upon  being  trained.      Aben 
Kzra  explains  nnnb  (wliioli,  by  the  way,  has 
Uere  before  the  tone  syllahle)  as  follows: 
"  'D  is  he  who  turns  aside  from  the  way  tliat 
is  appointed  him,  so  that  he  does  not  walk 
-  in  it.    And,  behold,  he  compares  Israel  to  a 
stubborn  cow,  with  which  a  man  cannot 
plough,"    So  also  Kimchi :  "  Like  a  heifer 
which  goes  on  a  crooked  way,  and  curves 
itself  from  under  the  yoke,  that  a  man  cannot 
plougli  with  it;  so  Israel  are  crooked  under 
their  God,  as  they  have  taken  upon  them 
the  yoke  of  the  Law  and  of  the  command- 
ments which  he  commanded  them,  and  curve 
themselves  under  the  yoke,  and  break  from 
off  them  the  yoke  of  the  commandments." 
Israel  rebelled  against  instruction,  waxed 
stubborn  and  intractable.   Tliey  would  liave 
their  own  way,  and  worshipped  according  to 
their  own  will,  in  indulging  all  the  while 
with  a  high  hand  in  vilest  lusts.    Now  the 
lieason  of  punishment  is  arrived;    and  as 
tliey  refused  instruction  and  rebelled  against 
Divine  guidance,  God,  in  just  judgment  and 
deserved  punishment,  leaves  them  to  them- 
selves.     Carried  into  captivity,  they  inay 
worship  what  tliey  will,  and  live  as  they 
list.     In  these  circumstances  they  will  re- 
semble a  lamb  taken  away  into  a  wilderness, 
and  left  there  to  range  the  wild  and  live  at 
liirge,  but  without  provision  aud  without 
protection.      Untended  by  the  shepherd's 
watchful  care,   unguarded  from    ravening 
wolves  or  other  beasts  of  prey,  that  lamb  is 
in  a  lost  and  perishing  condition.   So  shall  it 
be  with  Israel.  Aben  Ezra  gives  as  an  alter- 
native sense :  "  Now  (Jehovah  will  feed  them 
like  a  lamb)  alone  in  a  wide  place,  and  it 
wanders  to  and  fro."     Eimchi  cites  as  the 
opinion  of  others :   "  Some  say,  Now  will 
Jehovah  let  them  feed  alone  in  a  wide  place, 
like  a  lamb  which  bleats  and  goes  to  and 
fro,  and  neither  rests  nor  feeds."    Another 
meaning  has  been  attached  to  the  verso,  to 
the  effect  that  Israel,  subdued  by  ohustiiie- 
ment,  will  renounce  their  stubbornness,  and, 
rendered  tractable  and  tame,  become  like  a 
lamb,  which,  brought  to  feel  its  helplessness 
amid  a  wilderness,  requires  and  receives  the 
shepherd's  care.  We  much  prefer  the  former. 
Ver.  17. — Sphraim  is  joined  to  idols:  let 


him  alone.  Ephraim  being  the  dominant 
tribe,  gave  its  name  to  the  northern  kingdom. 
The  idols  were  Ephraim's  folly,  and  to  that 
they  were  wedded;  aud  in  consequence 
they  are  left  to  their  folly,  and  at  tlie  same 
time  surrendered  to  their  fate.  They  may 
persist  in  their  folly ;  they  cannot  be  pre- 
vented. "Give  him  rest,"  as  the  words 
literally  mean,  from  exhortations  and  ex- 
postulations, from  remcmstranees  and  re- 
pioofs;  he  will  persist  in  his  folly,  prepare 
for  liis  fate,  and  perish  by  his  sin.  This 
abandonment  of  I<^phraim  proves  tlie  des- 
perate nature  of  his  case.  Left  to  his  own 
recklessness,  be  is  rushing  towards  ruin. 
Judab  is  warned  to  stand  aloof  from  the 
contagion,  lest  by  interfereufe  he  might 
get  implicated  in  the  sin  and  involved  in 
the  punishment  of  Ephraim.  Tne  Hebrew 
commentators  express  the  word  rendered 
"joined  to"  in  the  Antliorized  Version 
(ver.  17)  by  words  imp.jrtiug  "  yoked  to,' 
"  allied  with,"  and  "  eleaving  to."  Again 
ran,  imperative  of  mr\,  is  explained  by 
them  as  follows : — Rashi :  "  Leave  off,  O 
prophet,  and  prophesy  not  to  reprove  him, 
for  it  is  of  no  use."  Aben  Ezra  :  "  Let  him 
alone  till  God  shall  chastise  him;  perhaps 
his  eyes  shall  then  open."  Kimchi:  "Je- 
hovah says  to  the  prophet,  Cease  to  reprove 
him,  for  it  is  of  no  use.  ...  As  a  man  who 
is  angry  witli  liis  fellow,  because  he  will  not 
hearken  to  him  when  he  re[)ioves  him,  and 
says,  Since  tliou  hearkenest  not  to  me,  I  will 
cease  for  ever  to  reprove  thee." 

Vers.  18, 19.— The  first  of  these  two  verses 
gives  a  picture  of  the  degeneracy  of  the 
times;  the  second  predicts  the  destruction 
that  would  ensue.  Their  drink  is  sour 
(margin,  is  gone):  they  hava  committed 
whoredom  continually.  If  the  first  clause 
be  taken  literally,  (1)  it  denutes  a  charge 
of  drunkenness  preferied  against  Epiiraim. 
To  this  vice  the  people  of  the  northern 
kingdom,  as  is  well  known,  were  addicied: 
the  wine,  from  oft-repeated  potntions,  be- 
came sour  in  the  stomach  and  pioducud 
loathsome  eructations.  (2)  Some,  connecting 
closely  the  first  and  second  chaises,  and 
translating  as  in  the  margin,  explain  the 
meaning  to  be  that  **  when  their  intoxica- 
tion is  gone  they  commit  whoredom."  But 
though  drunkenness  and  debauchery  fre- 
quently go  together,  it  is  rather  during  the 
former  than  afterwards  that  the  latter  is  in- 
dulged in.  (3)  The  first  clause  had  better 
be  uiiilerstood  fignratively,  and  the  latter 
either  literally  or  figuratively,  or  both.  Tiius 
the  sense  is  the  degeneracy  of  principle 
among  the  people  in  general,  or  rather 
among  the  principal  men  of  that  day.  By 
the  liaeat  wine  becoming  vapid,  the  piophet 
represents  the  leading  men  of  the  natiou,  on 
whom  io  mooh  di-pcnded  and  (rom  whom  so 


IH.  IV.  1—19.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


107 


much  might  be  expected,  as  becoming  un- 
principled, and  as  being  addicted  to  immo- 
rality or  idolatry,  or  probably  both  (hazneh 
hiznu):  "  whoring  they  have  committed 
whoredom."  (1)  Her  mlers  (margin,  shields) 
with  shame  do  love,  Oive  ye ;  or  rather,  (2) 
her  shields  looe,  love  shame.  Tlie  first  takes 
an  for  on,  as  imperative  of  zrv,  to  give, 
and  should  rather  be,  "  Her  shields  love, 
'Give  ye' — shame,"  as  there  is  no  preposi- 
tion before  the  word  "  shame ;  "  even  thus 
it  is  awkward.  Most  modern  expositors 
take  on  as  a  contraction  of  1 3nK,  and  so  a 
repetition  of  part  of  the  full  verb  preced- 
ing ;  thus  :  ari  uns,  equivalent  to  "  loved, 
loved."  Ewaid,  Delitzsch,  and  Pusoy  un- 
derstand it  so;  the  latter  says  this  "it 
probably  one  of  the  earliest  forms  of  the 
intensive  verb,  repeating  a  part  of  the  verb 
itself  with  its  inflection."  And  Keil  calls 
it  "a  construction  resembling  tlje  pealal 
form."  Among  the  s'birin,  or  conjectural 
readings,  we  find  both  words  united  into 
one ;  thus :  an?™?,  equivalent  to  "  mightily 
love."  The  shields  are  the  princes,  or 
natural  protectors  of  the  state,  as  in  Ps.  xlvii. 
9,  "  The  princes  of  the  people  are  gathered 
together.  .  .  for  the  shields  of  the  earth  be- 
long uuto  God."    The  shame  they  loved  was 


the  sin  which  is  a  shame  to  either  princes  or 
people,  causes  shame,  and  ends  in  shame. 
Isaiah  expounds  the  thought  (in  i.  22), 
a  comparison  of  which  confirms  the  above 
exposition.  (1)  The  wind  hath  bound  her 
np  in  her  wings ;  or,  (2)  she  hath  bound  up 
the  wind  with  her  in  her  skirts.  In  the  one 
case  the  wind  is  the  strong  storm- wind  of 
Divine  wrath  tivat  will  seize  on  Ephraim, 
wrap  her  up  with  its  wings,  and  carry  her 
away.  In  the  otlier,  Ephraim  wraps  up 
the  wind,  that  is,  disappointment,  the  result 
of  her  sin,  in  the  fold  of  her  skirt.  The  (1) 
translation  of  the  first  clause  of  ver.  19  is 
supported  by  Rashi :  "  The  storm  takes  her 
in  its  wings,  as  that  bird  which  the  wind 
does  not  let  rest  until  it  makes  him  go  far 
away ;  so  the  enemies  will  come  upon  tliem 
an<  I  carry  them  into  exile."  Translation  (2) 
is  favoured  by  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi ;  the 
former  says,  "As  the  man  who  binds  the  wind 
in  the  folds  of  his  robe  without  finding  any- 
thing therein."  And  they  shall  be  ashamed 
beoanse  of  their  saoriflces.  Frustrated  in  her 
hopes,  and  disappointed  by  the  idols,  from 
which  she  hoped  so  much  and  got  so  little, 
she  is  ashamed  of  the  sacrifices  she  offered 
them;  not  of  the  altars  (LXX.),  for  the 
preposition  min  is  indispensablo. 


H0MILBTIC3. 

Vers.  1— 6.— 7«ra«P»  tin  and  consequent  suffering.  The  propliet  fc  Jehovah's 
mouth-piece,  and  as  such  he  calls  on  his  fellow-men  to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  he 
thus  speaks  by  commission  and  witli  authority.  Having  thus  claimed  an  attentive 
hearing  in  his  Master's  Name,  he  denounces  Israel's  sins,  and  declares  the  judgments 
that  await  them.  In  this  discharge  of  his  duty  the  prophet  has  a  twofold  object  in 
view.  By  his  timely  and  truthful  warning  he  hopes  to  reclaim  some,  at  least,  of  his 
countrymen,  and  in  any  case  he  means  to  leave  all  without  excuse.  God  by  his 
ambassador  displays  in  this  way  both  his  mercy  and  his  justice.  His  mercy  in  that  he 
speaks  to  them  before  he  strikes  them — he  warns  them  of  their  danger  while  it  is  yet 
impending,  and  before  they  are  actually  involved  in  it ;  his  justice— for  he  condescends 
to  debate  the  matter  with  his  people,  and  convince  them  of  the  reasonableness  of  his 
dealings,  that  they  may  see  that  he  does  not  contend  with  them  without  cause,  and 
that  when  he  is  forced  to  execute  sentence  for  their  sins,  that  sentence  has  been  well 
deserved. 

I.  Kbi.igion  is  the  sure  foundation  op  MOBALlTT.  True  religion  begins  with 
a  saving  knowledge  of  God.  This  is  the  fountain-head;  moral  duties  are  the  salutary 
streams  that  issue  from  it.  Godliness  is  the  source  of  uprightness ;  piety  towards  God 
produces  propriety  of  conduct  in  demeaning  ourselves  and  in  dealing  with  others ; 
where  the  right  knowledge  of  God  is  absent,  we  need  not  expect  truth  or  mercy  amou  g 
men.  On  the  contrary,  a  profession  of  piety  without  the  performance  of  duty  to  our 
fellows  God  will  disown ;  without  truth  and  mercy  religion  is  only  a  pretence,  a 
[lainful  hypocrisy.  Eeligion,  then,  is  the  rich  soil  in  which  virtue  strikes  root  and  its 
growth  is  maintained. 

II.  The  relation  of  the  vibtubs  here  specified.  With  regard  to  mercy  and 
truth,  Kimchi  has  well  remarked  that  "no  truth"  imports  that  there  is  "no  one 
doin;;  the  truth,  and  no  one  speaking  the  truth ;  "  while  on  the  words  "  nor  mercy," 
he  adds  "  How  much  [does  it  follow  thence]  that  there  is  no  mercy,  fur  mercy  is  the 


108  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [(n.  it.  1—19. 

Bupera1)nndance  of  goodness  over  and  above  what  is  meet;  and  m  to  Mm  who  does  not 
maintain  either  truth  or  justice,  how  much  less  will  he  show  mercy  1"  The  com- 
bination of  truth,  mercy,  and  knowledge  of  God  may  be  compared  with  the  triple 
duties  specified  by  Micah,  as  doing  justly,  loving  mercy,  and  walking  humbly  with 
God ;  and  with  the  apostolic  triad  of  living  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this 
present  world.  In  each  of  these  our  duty  to  ourselves,  to  our  neighbour,  and  to  our 
God  is  expressed ;  so,  too,  in  the  verse  before  us.  While  mercy  mainly  respects  the 
duty  we  owe  our  fellow-man,  and  knowledge  of  God  our  relation  to  him,  truth  has  to 
do  with  a  man  himself  as  well  as  with  his  neighbour.  We  are  to  be  true  to  con- 
science, seeking  to  have  it  enlightened,  striving  to  keep  it  clear,  and  having  the  courage 
of  our  convictions.  We  are  to  be  true  to  ourselves,  in  our  strangely  composite  person- 
ality ;  true  to  the  soul  by  seeking  its  salvation,  for  "  what  shall  it  profit  a  man,  should 
he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  true  to  the  body  by  preserving  its 
purity,  maintaining  its  sobriety,  and  securing  its  health,  that  we  may  possess  a  sound 
mind  in  a  sound  body.  Of  course,  truth  has  large  scope  in  our  intercourse  with  others. 
We  are  required  to  be  truthful  in  our  utterances,  true  to  our  promises,  true  in  all  our 
engagements,  true  and  just  in  all  our  dealings.  The  duty  of  mercy,  in  a  world  where 
sin  has  wrought  such  ruin  and  caused  such  misery,  is  obvious.  As  sinful  creatures,  we 
need  the  mercy  of  our  Creator ;  as  suffering,  sorrowful  beings,  we  are  strongly  obligated 
to  the  exercise  of  mercy  towards  each  other. 

"The  quality  of  mercy  is  not  strain 'd ; 
It  droppeth,  as  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven 
Upon  the  place  beneath :  it  is  twice  bless'd ; 
It  blesseth  him  that  gives,  and  him  that  takes : 
Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest ;  .  •  ." 


vhllt 


*In  the  course  of  Jastioe,  non*  of  ns 
Bhonid  see  salvation." 


in.  Ohibbionb  boon  hake  way  fob  commissions.     When  the  daties  of  truth, 

mercy,  and  the  knowledge  of  God  were  omitted,  the  grossest  sins  succeeded  and  took 
their  place.  But  we  must  notice  the  expression,  "  in  the  land ; ''  this  appears  to  mean 
mure  than  the  general  prevalence  of  such  through  all  this  country ;  it  seems  to  hint  at 
Israel's  ingratitude.  God  had  given  them  that  good  land,  where  God  should  have  had 
grateful  worshippers  and  a  holy  people.  Rimchi  makes  the  following  judicious  com- 
ment on  this  suhject :  "  I  have  a  controversy  with  them  (the  inhabitants  of  the  land 
of  Israel),  for  I  gave  them  the  land  conditionally  that  they  should  exercise  justice  and 
judgment;  and  licrein  I  made  a  covenant  with  them,  that  my  eyes  should  be  upon  it 
from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even  to  the  end  ot  the  year.  But  since  they  acted  in 
a  way  contrary  to  this — perjuring,  stealing,  and  committing  adultery — I  also  will  act 
towards  them  in  a  way  contrary  to  what  I  promised,  and  hide  my  face  from  them  ; 
and  the  land  shall  mourn,  and  all  the  dwellers  in  it  shall  languish."  The  sins  com- 
mitted by  Israel  at  this  period  evidence  an  almost  disorganized  state  of  society.  The 
most  important  duties  were  omitted  and  the  most  enormous  sins  committed ;  nor  was 
this  strange,  when  there  was  no  knowledge  of  Gbd  in  the  land ;  and  yet  this  very 
circumstance  was  the  great  aggravation  both  of  their  omissions  and  commissions.  It 
was  the  privilege  of  the  highly  favoured  inhabitants  of  that  land  to  know  God ;  as  we 
read,  "In  Judah  is  God  known :  his  Name  is  great  in  Israel.  In  Salum  also  is  his 
tabernacle,  and  his  dwelling-place  in  Zion."  But  while  both  tables  of  the  Law  were 
transgressed,  and  fearfully  transgressed,  the  violations  of  the  sixth  commandment  were 
something  shocking.  This  black  feature  in  Israel's  iniquity  is  made  prominent  by  the 
prophet,  and  specially  noticed  by  the  Hebrew  expositors.  Bashi  says,  "  They  multiply 
the  shedding  of  bloods  until  the  blood  of  one  slain  man  touches  the  blood  of  his  neigh- 
bour J "  and  Kimchi's  comment  is,  "  The  bloods  of  the  slain  touch  one  another  from 
abundance."  Though  we  may  not  be  able  to  fix  with  certainty  the  period  referred  to, 
it  may  with  considerable  probability  be  conjectured  that  about  this  time  the  numerous 
and  dreadful  regicides  occurred,    ghallum  slaying  Zechariah;  Meaahem  slaying  Shal- 


OH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  109 

lum ;  Pekah  slaying  Pekahiah ;  and  Hoshea  slaying  Pekah ;  so  that  "  tlie  land  was 
polluted  with  blood." 

IV.  Human  sinfulness  dbafes  natueb  in  weeds  of  woe.  We  have  here  at 
once  an  expansion. and  illustration  of  the  sentiment  of  the  psalm  (evil,  33,34),  "He 
turneth ...  a  fruitful  land  into  barrenness,  for  the  wickedness  of  them  that  dwell  therein." 
Man  and  beast,  fish  and  fowl  alike,  are  sufferers  in  consequence  of  human  sin.  The 
whole  creation  groaneth  and  snffereth  together  in  consequence  of  the  creature  having 
been  subjected  to  vanity.  "When,"  says  Jerome,  on  this  verse,  "the  inliabitant  is 
removed,  the  beasts  also,  and  fowls  of  heaven,  and  fishes  of  the  sea  shall  fail ;  and  even 
the  dumb  elements  shall  feel  the  wrath  of  God."  Many  actual  illustiaiions  of  this 
state  of  things,  we  doubt  not,  had  taken  place  in  the  history  of  Israel,  as  in  the  days 
of  Ahab  and  many  a  time  besides.  When  rain  was  long  delayed  and  drought  ensued, 
the  land  mourned  and  its  inhabitants  languished. 

V.  Pebverseness  is  a  pnEPABATiVE  FOB  DBSTEUOTION.  When  people  become  so 
froward  and  perverse  as  to  be  beyond  reproof,  so  that  God  says  of  them,  as  he  does  in 
effect  of  Israel  in  this  passage,  "  Let  them  proceed  and  reproof  cease,"  they  are  on  the  very 
verge  of  a  fearful  precipice.  Israel  had  gone  so  far  towards  that  perilous  position  that 
no  private  person  was  perrnitted  to  warn,  if  so  disposed,  or  reason  with  his  neighbour ; 
not  even  the  priest,  God's  appointed  minister,  in  those  days  dared  venture  to  do  so,  or 
if  he  did  it  was  labour  lost.  They  stumble  and  fall,  teacher  and  taught,  prophet  and 
people  together.  As  also  both  night  and  day  alike;  by  day,  when  danger  was  least  and 
the  disgrace  greatest ;  in  the  night  season,  when  darkness  made  destruction  inevitable. 
Worst  of  all,  no  helper  to  be  hoped  for;  or,  rather,  the  mother — she  that  might  be 
expected  to  hold  up  or  lift  up  her  children — is  herself  doomed.  That  mother,  whether 
Samaria,  the  mother  city,  or  the  commonwealth  itself,  the  mother  of  them  all,  was 
devoted  to  the  silence  of  destruction. 

Vers.  6—10. — Priestly  neglect  and  its  eontequenees.  This  section  deals  with  the  sin 
and  punishment  of  the  priests,  as  the  preceding  one  had  described  the  sin  and  punish- 
ment of  the  people.  The  priests  here  referred  to  were  probably  Levitical  priests  still 
scattered  through  the  northern  kingdom,  since  God  speaks  of  them  as  his  priests ;  while 
those  which  Jeroboam  appointed  out  of  other  tribes  than  that  of  Levi,  and  from  all, 
even  the  lowest,  ranks  of  society,  were  rather  priests  for  the  worship  of  the  calves. 

L  Ministerial  unfaithfulness.  The  ignorance  of  the  people  is  here  attributed 
to  priestly  negligence.  They  disliked  and  despised  the  knowledge  of  God  for  them- 
selves, and  consequently  had  no  heart  for  dispensing  it  to  others.  The  means 
available  for  knowing  God  they  did  not  take  advantage  of,  and  accordingly  their  own 
ignorance  unfitted  them  for  instructing  the  people.  Idleness  combined  with  indifference 
in  the  case  of  these  unfaithful  ministers  of  religion,  so  that  they  .were  neither  rightly 
instructed  themselves  nor  capable  of  instructing  others ;  while  their  carelessness 
increased  their  incapacity.  It  is  incumbent  on  all  public  teachers  to  be  diligent  in 
their  private  studies ;  and  a  fearful  responsibility  is  incurred  by  those  who,  appointed 
to  instruct  others  in  religious  matters,  refuse  to  take  tlie  pains  necessary  to  qualify 
them  for  the  efficient  discharge  of  such  important  duty.  It  is  a  grievous  sin  for 
ministers  of  religion  to  serve  God  with  what  costs  them  nothing;,  and  so  to  feed  God's 
people  with  husks  instead  of  the  finest  of  the  wheat.  How  different  is  the  picture  our 
Lord  gives  us  of  one  who  is  faithful  to  such  an  important  trust  I  "  Therefore,"  he  says, 
"  every  scribe  which  is  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  unto  a  man 
that  is  a  householder,  which  bringeth  forth  out  of  his  treasure  things  new  and  old." 

II.  The  punishment  oobresponds  to  their  bin.  They  had  rejected  Divine 
knowledge ;  God  rejects  their  priestly  services.  They  had  forgotten  the  Law  from 
disuse,  no  doubt  having  previously  forsaken  it ;  God  threatens  to  forget  them,  and,  what 
was  more  galling,  their  children  after  them,  so  that  the  priesthood  would  be  lost  to  them 
for  ever.  Wiinsche  and  some  others  insist  that  it  is  the  people  and  not  the  priesthood 
that  is  here  addressed ;  that  the  whole  nation  is  addressed  as  a  single  person,  and  that 
consequently  the  children  are  the  individual  members  of  the  nation.  Both  priests  and 
people  were  guilty  in  this  matter.  Both  had  shut  their  eyes  upon  the  light,  and  the 
light  was  at  length  withdrawn.  Both  had  said, "  Depart  from  us:  we  desire  not  the  know- 
ledge of  thy  ways; "  and  God  in  turn  had  virtually  said  to  them,  "  Depart  from  me :  I 


110  THE   BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [ch.  iv.  I— la 

know  you  not."  The  priests,  whose  duty  was  to  teach  the  people  knowledge,  had  been 
unable  or  unwilling  to  do  so,  and  the  people  remained  in  ignorance ;  the  people,  who 
should  have  received'  the  Law  from  the  priests'  lips,  are  represented  as  striving  with, 
and  gainsaying,  their  spiritual  instructors.  The  consequence  was  that  they  destroyed 
themselvts,  for  -the  verb  nidmu  has  here  the  proper  reflexive  sense  of  the  Niphal;  nor 
is  it  without  knowledge,  but  because  of  the  want  of  (mibb'lt)  the  necessary  know- 
ledge. The  punishment,  if  it  be  not  a  re-echo,  yet  reminds  us  of  1  Sam.  zr.  26,  where 
Samuel  says  to  Saul,  "  For  thou  hast  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  hath 
rejected  thee  from  being  king  over  Israel."  The  worst  feature  of  the  case  was  their 
gross  and  grievous  ingratitude ;  for  just  in  proportion  as  they  increased  in  numbers  and 
in  wealth  they  multiplied  transgression  ;  just  as  of  old  "  when  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  he 
kicked."  K'mchi,  indeed,  in  mentioning  the  exposition  of  those  who  regarded  the 
increase  as  financial  rather  than  numerical,  says,  "  Some  interpret '  according  to  their 
increase'  as  equivalent  to  ' as  I  increased  them  in  wealth  and  riches  so  they  sinned 
against  me ; '  after  the  manner  of  •  when  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  he  kicked.' "  Their  increase, 
either  in  number  or  riches — ^and  both  we  think,  are  included — ministered  to  the  sins  of 
an  unthankful  people,  and  afforded  occasions  of  trespassing  yet  more  and  more  against 
God.  Justly,  then,  did  God  turn  to  shame  that  which  he  had  given  Israel  for  the 
Divine  glory,  but  which  Israel  used  for  vain-glory.  "  He,"  fiays  Pusey, "  not  only  gives 
them  shame  instead  of  their  glory ;  he  makes  the  glory  itself  the  means  and  occasion 
of  their  shame.  Beauty  becomes  the  occasion  of  degradation ;  pride  is  proverbially  near 
a  fall;  'vaulting  ambition  overleaps  itself  and  falls  on  th'  other  side;'  riches  and 
abundance  of  population  tempt  nations  to  wars  which  become  their  destruction,  or  they 
invite  other  and  stronger  nations  to  prey  upon  them."  Jehoash's  reproof  of  Amaziah 
and  the  result,  as  recorded  in  2  Kings  xiv.  9 — 14,  furnishes  a  good  illustration  of  this 
subject. 

III.  Gain  takes  the  place  op  godliness.  Whichever  interpretation  be  adopted, 
the  general  sense  here  remains  the  same.  The  priests  pandered  to  the  sins  of  the  people, 
and,  lest  they  should  lose  their  influence  with  them,  they  connived  at  and  countenanced 
their  sins  when  they  should  have  sharply  censured  them.  Or  they  encouraged  sin  that 
they  might  share  the  sin  offerings  presented  in  expiation.  What  was  this  in  either 
case  but  to  live  by  and  upon  the  sin  of  a  people  sinful  and  laden  with  iniquity  ?  Calvin, 
who  makes  the  priests  and  people  share  the  sin  in  common,  says,  "  There  is  a  collusion 
between  the  priests  and  the  people.  How  so  ?  Because  the  priests  were  the  associates 
of  robbers,  and  gladly  seized  on  what  was  brousht ;  and  so  they  carried  on  no  war,  as 
they  ought  to  have  done,  with  vices,  but,  on  the  contrary,  urged  only  the  necessity  of 
sacrifices ;  and  it  was  enough  if  men  brought  things  plentifully  to  the  temple.  The 
people  also  themselves  showed  their  contempt  for  God ;  for  they  imagined  that,  provided 
they  made  salisfaction  by  their  ceremonial  performances,  they  would  be  exempt  from 
punishment.  Thus,  then,  there  was  an  ungodly  compact  between  the  priests  and  the 
people  ;  the  Lord  was  mocked  in  the  midst  of  them." 

IV.  What  is  got  bt  sin  gives  no  satisfaction.  "  111  got,  ill  gone,"  is  a  common 
proverb  and  a  very  pithy  one ;  so  with  these  faithless  priests  in  their  ministrations  for 
a  sinful  people.  They  said  in  effect,  "  The  more  sin  the  more  sacrifices,  and  so  the  greater 
our  share  of  profits; "  but  there  was  no  satisfaction  in  such  things  and  no  success  by 
them.  1.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  mostly  sensual ;  they  last  only  for  a  season — a  short 
one ;  and  they  afford  no  real  satisfaction  even  when  they  do  last.  "  What  proit,"  asks 
the  apostle,  "had  ye  then  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashiimed?  for  the  end  of 
those  things  is  death."  2.  The  priests,  instead  of  reproving  sin,  did  practically  recom- 
mend it  by  their  own  godless  conduct ;  and  the  people  were  well  pleased  to  have  it  so. 
Alike  in  sin,  however,  they  shall  be  alike  in  suffering ;  they  helped  each  other  in  sin, 
they  must  have  their  share  in  punishment.  The  priests  abused  their  position  by 
neither  practising  piety  themselves  nor  inculcating  its  practice  on  others ;  the  people,  freed 
from  all  restraint  and  having  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes,  sinned  with  a  liigh  hand. 
Both  ran  to  an  excess  of  riot,  and  both  are  to  be  punished  with  equal  severity ;  neither 
can  reasonably  expect  to  be  spared.  3.  The  root  of  the  evil  was  their  leaving  off  to 
take  heed  to  the  Lord,  The  word  shamar,  here  rendered  "  to  take  heed  to,"  is  very 
expressive ;  it  means  to  have  a  sharp  eye  upon,  then  to  observe  attentively.  Applied 
tu  a  person,  it  signifies  to  have  the  eye  steadily  set  on  his  will,  to  meet  his  widkes,  to 


OH.  IT.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSE  A.  Ill 

obey.  Thus  it  Is  said  of  one  waiting  on  his  master,  as  In  Prov.  xxvH.  18,  "  He  that 
waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be  honoured  ;"  while  in  the  hundred  and  twenty-third 
psalm  we  have  a  good  practical  illustration  of  the  observance  indicated  :  "  Behold, 
as  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto  the  hand  of  their  masters,  and  as  the  eyes  of  a 
maiHen  unto  the  hand  of  her  mistress ;  to  our  eyes  wait  upon  the  Lord  our  God,  until 
that  he  have  mercy  upon  us." 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Faults  in  the  life  breed  errors  in  the  train,  and  errors  in  the  hrain 
produce  in  turn  faults  in  thelife.  Thus  it  was  with  Israel.  Debaucliery  and  drunken- 
ness, and  this  to  an  extreme  degree,  had  darkened  the  understanding,  hardened  the 
heart,  paralyzed  the  will,  and  seared  the  conscience.  In  this  enfeebled  state  of  their 
intellectual  and  moral  po^yers,  tiiey  had  recourse,  in  cases  of  doubt  or  difficulty,  not  to 
the  high  priest,  or  prophets  of  God,  or  Divine  Word,  for  giudance  and  direction,  hut  to 
their  images  of  wood  or  idolatrous  divining  staff. 

I.  Sin  leads  to  bin.  If  sorrows  love  a  train,  sins  like  a  series.  How  often  the 
culprit  endeavours  to  conceal  his  guilt  by  lying,  and  thus  adds  one  sin  to  another ! 
Lewdness  and  intemperance,  as  here  intimated,  frequently  go  hand  in  hand.  Since, 
then,  sins  are  so  linked  to  each  other,  our  safety  as  well  as  our  duty  is  to  resist  the  very 
beginnings  and  buddings  of  evil  in  the  soul.  Every  time  sin  is  in^hiLcil  tlie  power  of 
resistance  is  weakened,  until  men  become  the  prey  of  the  evil  one,  and,  afrer  a  few  weak 
wrestlings  of  the  spirit  against  the  flesh,  the  heart  is  easily  taken  captive.  An  effectual 
way  of  avoiding  vice  or  any  vicious  course  is  to  practise  the  opi/osi(e  virtues.  'I'liis  is 
vastly  more  than  forming  a  theory  of  virtue  in  one's  thoughts ;  for,  a*  I'm  ler  lins  shown, 
"from  our  very  facuUy  of  habits  passive  impressions,  by  being  repeated,  grow  weaker," 
hut  "  practical  habits  are  formed  and  strengthened  by  repeated  acts.'" 

II.  The  folt^t  of  sin.  The  stupidity  of  which  Israel  gave  eviflenco  is  traced  to  a 
spirit  of  whoredoms.  The  ruach,  or  spirit,  in  this  passage  somewhat  resejiiblcs  the 
personification  of  Ate  by  the  Greeks,  which  in  Homer  denotes  the  infatuation  or  spirit 
of  error  that  prompts  to  crime,  then  the  crime  committed,  and  also  the  punishiiieut 
that  overtakes  crime.  In  tlie  allegoric  representation  of  AtS  by  flomer  she  has 
different  and  apparently  contradictory  attributes:  as  infatuation,  taking  [lossessiun  of 
the  mind;  and  blinding  its  faculties  through  passion.  She  has  tender  feet,  docs  not  tread 
on  the  ground,  but  moves  gently  and  noiselessly  over  men's  heads,  surprising  them  in 
their  unguarded  moments,  to  their  unspeakable  injury.  Again,  in  the  ojinuiission  of 
crime  her  gait  is  marked  by  strength  of  body  and  firmness  of  step  and  strong  excile- 
ment,  while  in  the  punishment  of  crime  the  retribution  is  sudden,  powerful,  anil 
certain.  In  these  two  capacities,  that  il  to  say,  the  perpetration  of  crime  and  its 
punishment,  she  is  vigorous  and  firm  of  step.  "To  the  spirit  of  whoredoiu  as  an  evil 
spirit  of  infatuation,  like  this  Greek  AtS,  bewilderingly  misle.i(lin,''men  to  the  per- 
petration of  evil  and  making  them  obnoxious  to  punishment,  the  prophet  traces  Israel's 
stupidity  in  consulting  idols  and  similar  means  of  divination  on  the  one  haiid,  and 
their  sin  in  departing  from  Oroi,  the  loving  Husband  and  rightful  Jlcad  of  his  people, 
on  the  other.  Thus  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  may  be  compared  with  similar  Scriptur* 
expressions,  such  as  a  spirit  of  jealousy,  a  lying  spirit,  an  uncienn  spirit ;  or  it  may 
denote  the  vehement  spirit  with  which  men,  bent  on  idolatry  and  adultery — adultery 
both  in  the  spiritual  and  carnal  sense — were  hurried  along;  while  the  faitlilcssuess  of 
the  adulteress  fitly  represents  the  spiritual  infidelity  of  Israel. 

IIL  Zeal  conteabt  to  knowledob.  The  people  of  Israel  fancied  that  they  were 
worshipping  God  on  the  high  hills  and  under  the  tall  trees ;  but  this  was  i^tnorant  will- 
worship,  or  worse.  God  had  appointed  Jerusalem  as  the  place  of  hi-;  wor.-hip,  ami  had 
commanded  sacrifices  and  incense  to  be  ofiered  there,  and  nowlnTi'  else.  I.  '1  he  mul- 
tiplication of  altars  and  memorials  elsewhere,  however  pra'sewoiihy  I.-r.iel  uiigbt 
imagine  it,  was  really  a  violation  of  the  Divine  command;  and  so  O.ni  regar.le.!  it.  for 
"  behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  o'  raui'^.''  Will- 
worship  may  have  a  show  of  wisdom  in  it,  and  may  he  well  nieauin^  yii  il  is  will- 
worship  all  the  same.  If  we  will  worship  God  acceptably,  then  il  must  Iv  in  the  (.lace 
he  has  appointed  and  in  the  manner  he  has  himself  prescribed.  Jlounlaiii*  have  often 
been  associated  with  sacred  service  and  sacred  scenes.  Thus  the  sacrilice  of  l&iac  was 
to  be  on  a  mountain ;  the  giving  of  the  Law  was  on  a  mountain ;  ihe  tea. pie  was 


118  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  rr.  l—lfi. 


erected  on  a  monntain ;  the  transfignrntinn,  the  crucifixion,  and  the  ascension,  were 
each  on  a  mountain.  But  mountains  became  scenes  of  idolatry  and  sin,  and  therefore 
God,  when  hfe  forbade  such  worship,  forbade  the  scenes  thereof.  2.  Israel's  zeal  was 
worthy  of  a  hetter  cause.  'I'h  't  ze^il  characterized  their  sacrifices,  for  it  is  the  intensive 
form  of  the  verh  that  is  used — yezaVbechu  (Piel),  not  yizbeehu  (Qal) ;  it  distinguished 
their  burning  of  incense,  for  again  it  is  first  yeqatteru,  not  yaqteru.  "  The  words 
express,"  says  Pusey,  "  that  this  which  God  forbade  they  did  diligently;  they  sacrificed 
much  and  diligently;  they  burned  incense  much  and  diligently."  Nor  was  this  all. 
They  performed  with  equal  diligence  both  the  important  parts  of  the  service — the 
sacrifice  and  the  burning  of  incense.  3.  The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  signified  atonement ; 
the  pleasant  smell  of  the  incense  typified  service  acceptably  offered.  "  Incense,  being 
fragrant,  represented  that  which  is  pleasing,  and  which  has  in  it  acceptability ;  and 
when  offered  along  with  prayer,  praise,  or  any  feeling  of  the  soul,  exhibited  a  tyjw  of 
the  merits  of  the  Surety  enveloping  his  people's  services." 

IV.  Men's  own  bins  are  often  made  theib  soouroes.  Never  did  the  great  poet  of 
human  nature  give  expression  to  a  truer  sentiment  than  that— 

"  The  gods  are  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vioei 
Make  instmments  to  soonrge  lu." 

lliis  was  eminently  the  case  with  Israel.  They  had  committed  spiritual  adultery, 
renouncing  their  subjection  to  him  by  violation  of  the  marriage  covenant,  and  thereby 
forfeiting  that  protection  secured  to  them  by  the  conditions  of  that  covenant.  "  They," 
says  an  old  writer, "  who  commit  idolatry,  and  follow  false  religions,  and  so  do  renounce 
subjection  to  God,  and  put  themselves  from  under  his  directions,  do  also  put  themselves 
from  under  his  protection;  for  in  both  these  respects  it  is  true  that  Israel  went 
a-whoring  from  under  their  God."  They  prostituted  themselves  to  idols,  and  withdrew 
from  under  God's  authority,  casting  off  the  obedience  they  owed  him  and  the  reverence 
which  was  his  due.  Nay,  more,  fathers  of  families  and  husbands  at  the  head  of 
households  were  not  only  guilty  of  spiritual  whoredom  or  idolatry;  they  were  guilty  of 
carnal  whoredom  with  those  vile  priestesses  to  abominable  idols  and  prostitutes  to  the 
worshippers — devotee-harlots  who  had  consecrated  themselves  to  a  lifeof  sin,  as  though 
such  ■  shameful  desecration  of  themselves  were  consecration  to  Divine  service.  Now 
they  are  in  turn  disgraced  and  distressed  by  the  whoredom  of  their  daughters  and  the 
adultery  of  their  wives;  nor  are  they  allowed  to  comfort  themselves  by  the  hope  of  a 
sjieedy  cessation  of  such  corruption,  for,  unchecked  by  chastisement,  the  licentiousness 
continues,  prosperity  in  sin  temjuing  to  perseverance.  "So,"  says  Pusey,  "  through 
their  own  disgrace  and  bitter  griefs,  in  iha  fersons  of  those  whose  honour  they  most 
cherished,  they  should  learn  how  ill  they  themselves  had  done,  in  departing  from  him 
who  is  the  Fathfer  and  Husband  of  every  souL  The  sins  of  the  fathers  descend  very 
often  to  the  children,  both  in  the  way  of  nature,  that  the  children  inherit  strong 
temptations  to  their  parents'  sin,  and  by  way  of  example,  that  they  greedily  imitate, 
often  exaggerate  them." 

Vers.  15 — 19. — A  passing  word  of  warning  is  addressed  to  Judah.  The  prophet 
pauses  in  his  dark  catalogue  of  Israel's  sins  and  sorrows,  and,  turning  aside,  speaks  a 
word  of  warning  to  Judah,  that  the  people  of  the  southern  kingdom  might  be  deterred 
from  the  crimes  and  awed  Viy  the  'calamities  of  their  northern  neighbours.  In  the 
'arge  heart  and  catholic  spirit  of  the  prophet  both  Judahite  and  Israelite  found  a  place ; 
he  had  a  message  from  God  for  both. 

I.  Places  perilous  to  piety  should  be  shunned.  Judah  had  hitherto  maintained 
their  superiority  to  Israel  both  in  religious  worship  and  moral  conduct ;  but  their 
proximity  to  such  neighbours  was  fraught  with  peril.  Evil  communications  exercise  a 
tearful  potency  in  corrupting  good  manners ;  sensual  indulgences,  especially  in  the 
guise  and  under  the  name  of  religion,  present  strong  inducements ;  scenes  of  sin  have 
not  unfrequently  a  fatal  glamour  about  them."  If  Judah  would  steer  clear  of  the  rocks 
on  which  the  faith  of  Israel  had  been  wrecked,  they  must  keep  aloof  from  such  places 
of  peril  and  scenes  of  dissipation  as  Gilgal  and  Beth-aven.  Wantonness  and  crime  had 
proved  disastrous  to  Israel,  therefore  let  Judah  beware  and  take  warning  in  time.  If 
men  are  in  earnest  in  their  payers  and  in  their  efforts  to  avoid  temptation,  they  must 


OB.  IT.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  113 

keep  away  from  those  places  and  those  persons  that  would  tend  to  lead  them  into 
temptation.  Hypocritical  profession  with  irrelio^ous  practice  was  both  detrimental  and 
dangerous.  After  this  friendly  warning  to  Judah,  Hosea  resumes  his  complaint  about 
Israel. 

II.  PuNiSHMEKT  IB  OFTEN  A  DARK  EEPLEOTioN  OF  iien'b  SINS.  Isnel  had  refiised 
God's  yoke,  comparatively  easy  as  it  was,  and  started  backward  or  turned  sideward 
instead  of  drawing  forward.  They  declined  God's  service,  and  determined  to  have  full 
liberty  and  licence.  They  got  their  desire,  but  it  was  given  them  in  judgment.  Tlie 
limits  of  the  law  and  its  straitness  provoked  their  resistance;  now  they  will  be  permitted 
to  wander  forth  as  captives  through  the  wide  wilderness  of  the  Bast,  or  as  exiles  with 
all  the  world  before  them.  They  had  been  strong  and  stubborn  as  a  headstrong, 
unmanageable  heifer ;  now  they  are  to  become  solitary  as  a  lamb  shut  out  from  its 
flock  or  separated  from  its  dam,  and  in  a  state  as  helpless  as  that  same  weak  creature 
when  exposed  to  savage  beasts  of  prey,  and  left  alone  amid  the  wasteness  of  a  wilder- 
ness. Ephraim,  turning  away  her  affections  from  her  Maker  as  her  Husband,  got 
attached  to  idols,  and  clave  fast  to  them ;  and  so  they  are  given  up  to  their  own  hearts' 
lusts.  They  don't  wish  to  part  with  their  beloved  idols,  or  to  be  parted  from  them ; 
nor  shall  they.  They  are  incorrigible,  and  God  gives  the  m  up  as  beyond  reproof  and 
without  hope — absolutely  desperate.  They  wished  to  be  loft  to  themselves  and  their 
own  ways,  and  so  they  are ;  not  even  Judah  is  to  interfere  with  them.  They  are  to  be 
let  go  on  without  check  from  conscience,  or  reproof  from  prophet,  or  warning  from  the 
Divine  Word,  or  any  interference  by  Providence.  "  It  is  a  sad  and  sore  judgment  for 
any  man  to  be  let  alone  in  sin  :  for  God  to  say  concerning  a  sinner, '  He  is  joined  to  his 
idols,  the  world  and  the  flesh ;  he  is  incurably  proud,  covetous,  or  profane,  an  incurable 
drunkard  or  adulterer, — let  him  alone;  conscience,  let  him  alone;  minister,  let  him 
alone ;  providences,  let  him  alone.  Let  nothing  awaken  him  till  the  flames  of  hell  do 
it.'  The  father  corrects  not  the  rebellious  son  any  more  when  he  determines  to 
disinherit  him.  Those  that  are  not  disturbed  in  their  sin  will  be  destroyed  for 
their  sin." 

III.  Pebsistbncb  in  evil  provooativb  of  Divine  desertion.  1.  Persistence  in  evil. 
Idolaters  are  so  attached  to  their  idol-gods  that  they  will  not  give  them  up,  however 
iiideous  those  idols  or  however  vile  those  gods  may  be.  (1)  The  people  of  Israel  were 
bound  to  their  idols ;  as  another  prophet  says,  "  They  hold  fast  deceit ; "  they  are  even 
as  loth  to  change  as  to  give  up  their  idols.  "  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods,  which 
are  yet  no  gods  ?  "  The  word  in  the  original  is  the  same  as  that  used  in  Gen.  zir.  of 
the  kings  who  came  together  as  confe/Ierates  unto  the  valley  of  Siddim ;  and  never  was 

'  there  a  more  unholy  alliance  than  that  of  Israel  and  Israel's  idols,  or  that  of  sinners 
and  their  beloved  lusts  in  general.  The  word  is  also  used  oi  fascination,  by  binding 
magical  knots;  and  never  was  magical  knot  tighter  or  fascination  stronger  than  that  of 
an  easily  besetting  sin  over  its  victim.  Men  have  been  found  to  sacrifice  their  best  and 
dearest  interests  for  the  sal^e  of  some  low  lust,  some  evil  propensity,  or  some  sinful 
habit.  (2)  A  great  disproportion.  "  But,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  will  idolaters  thus 
adhere  to  their  idols  ?  will  their  hearts  be  united  to  them  ?  are  they  willing  to  be  one 
spirit  with  them  ?  Oh,  how  much  more  should  we  be  joined  to  the  Lord  our  God,  to 
Jesus  Christ  [the  Saviour,  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Sanctifier — the  glorious  triune 
Jehovah],  to  be  as  one  spirit  with  him  !  That  exhortation  of  Barnabas  (Acts  xi.  23), 
that  with  full '  purpose  of  heart  they  should  cleave  unto  the  Lord,'  is  seasonable  at  all 
times."  2.  Divine  desertion.  This  was  implied  in  the  injunction  to  whomsoever  it 
was  addressed.  (1)  If  addressed  to  Judah,  as  it  seems,  it  enjoins  them  to  withdraw  from 
Israel,  though  their  countrymen  and  brethren — to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  them, 
to  leave  them  to  themselves,  to  let  them  alone.  Few  things  are  worse  to  bear  than 
spiritual  isolation.  When  the  saints  withdraw  from  a  man  because  of  the  stubbornness 
of  his  rebellion  against  God,  and  his  incorrigible  wilfulness  in  the  pursuit  of  sin,  it  is  a 
heavy  judgment  from  God ;  it  is  equal  in  bitterness  to  the  curse  pronounced  on  the 
man  who  loveth  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  whom  it  is  said, "  Let  him  be 
Anathema-Maranatha."  As  if  it  were  said, "  Let  a  curse  rest  on  the  devoted  head  of  such 
a  one;  let  him  be  left  to  himself,  deserted  by  the  saints  and  servants  of  God;  in  a 
woi-d,  let  him  alone  till  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  will  deal  with  him." 
(2)  If  the  injunction  is  addressed  to  the  prophet,  it  means  that  he  is  to  take  no  further 

HOSEA.  * 


114  THE   BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

trouble  with  Ephraim,  and  cast  no  more  pearls  'before  swine ;  that  he  is  to  cease  his 
ministry  in  that  direction,  and  shake  the  very  dust  off  his  feet  as  a  testimony  against 
such  wayward  rebels.  So  when  ministers  have  exhausted  all  their  powers  of  persua- 
sion, and  all  the  varied  resources  of  admonition,  warning,  entreaty,  remonstrance  with 
•  tout-hearted,  refractory  sinners,  a  time  comes  when  they  must  just  let  them  alone, 
leaving  them  to  be  dealt  with  by  the  Master  at  his  coming.  (3)  But,  worst  of  all,  God 
himself  lets  them  alone ;  and  when  he  does  so,  it  is  a  token  of  their  rejection.  A  father 
has  used  all  legitimate  means  to  reclaim  his  profligate,  prodigal,  or  rebellious  son ;  and 
when  all  has  proved  in  vain,  he  is  forced  to  say, "  I  have  done  with  him ;  I  disown  him ; 
1  will  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  him ;  I  will  leave  him  to  himself,  and  let  him 
alone."  So  God  lets  men  alone  when  he  gives  them  over  to  themselves,  leaving  them 
to  their  own  devices,  to  their  lusts,  to  their  evil  ways,  to  their  doings  that  are  not 
good.  "They  would  none  of  me,"  saith  God,  "ao  I  gave  them  up  to  their  own 
counsels."  The  Spirit  of  the  living  God  has  striven  with  that  man  to  turn  him  away 
from  his  injustice,  or  profanity,  or  drunkenness,  or  impurity,  or  hypocrisy ;  but  he  has 
resisted  the  Spirit,  stifled  the  voice  of  conscience,  and  gone  on  in  his  way  of  wickedness, 
till  God,  long-suffering  though  he  be,  and  full  of  infinite  loving-kindness,  says  at 
last,  "  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive.  Let  him  that  is  filthy  be  filthy  still ;  let  him 
that  is  unjust  be  unjust  still."  (4)  Consider  the  dreadful  import  of  this  brief  sentence 
— "  Let  him  alone."  It  is  as  if  God  said,  "  Let  him  alone — he  is  rushing  on  ruin ;  let 
no  barrier  interpose  to  stop  him ;  let  him  take  his  own  way.  Hitherto,  and  for  long, 
he  has  been  checked  by  the  restraints  of  Providence;  now  let  him  alone."  It  is  all  very 
well  when  a  man  is  at  ease,  in  safety,  or  among  his  friends,  to  let  him  alone;  but  when 
he  is  rushing  into  the  sweltering  tide  of  ocean,  or  into  the  blazing  fire  of  a  widespread 
conflagration,  or  in  among  most  deadly  enemies,  to  let  him  alone  is  to  consign  him  to 
destruction.  It  is  not  necessary  that  God  should  send  his  power  to  overwhelm  us,  in 
his  justice  to  condemn  us,  or  his  wrath  to  consume  us ;  he  has  only  to  let  us  alone,  and 
our  destruction  is  inevitable.  When  he  let  Adam  alone,  leaving  him  to  himself,  he 
undid  himself  and  his  posterity ;  when  he  let  Hezekiah  alone,  what  misery  that  good 
king  brought  upon  himself  and  his  subjects!  (5)  Let  the  fear  of  this  terrible  Lord  God 
awe  usl  Beware  of  committing  wilful  sin,  lest  God  should  say,  "Let  him  alone." 
Dread  of  being  thus  let  alone  is  a  sure  sign  that  God  has  not  let  us  alone,  and  safe  way 
of  keeping  us  from  lieing  let  alone.  May  the  good  Lord  preserve  ua  from  such  a 
fearful  fate  I 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.! — 5. — 3^e  Lord!t  lawsuit.  The  introduction  to  the  Book  of  Hosea  consists  of 
a  symbolical  narrative,  contained  in  ch.  L — iii.  The  body  of  the  book  is  occupied  with 
discourses,  which  are  full  of  mingled  reproaches,  threatenings,  and  promises.  Ch.  iv. 
evidently  refiects  the  condition  of  the  nation  during  the  interregnum  which  followed 
the  death  of  Jeroboam  II.  The  key-word  of  the  first  strophe  (vers.  1 — -5)  is  the  word 
"  controversy  "  (ver.  1),  used  in  the  sense  of  a  legal  action — a  suit  at  law.  Jehovali 
represents  himself  as  prosecuting  Israel  for  breacii  of  contract. 

L  The  summons..  (Ver.  1.)  A  solemn  covenant  had  been  concluded  at  Sinai 
between  God  and  the  chosen  nation.  It  had  the  Decalogue  for  its  basis,  and  it  had 
been  ratified  by  sacrifice  (Exod.  xx. — xxiv.).  But  the  people  of  the  ten  tribes  had 
infringed  the  covenant,  and  exposed  themselves  (taking  thu  figure  of  the  passage)  to 
legal  proceedings  for  breach  of  contract.  The  summons,  however,  was  not  served 
without  extreme  provocation.  Fur  the  Lord  is  not  litigious.  He  is  "  merciful  and 
gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in  mercy  "  (Ps.  ciii.  8).  We  shall  see  from  the 
indictment  that  almost  every  obligation  of  the  sacred  compact  had  been  violated. 

XL  The  indictment.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  It  ia  a  tremendous  one.  There  are  two  weighty 
counts  in  it,  and  together  they  show  that  by  this  time  the  very  bonds  of  society  in 
Israel  had  been  dissolved.  1.  Ileligion  was  dead.  (Ver.  1.)  "  No  truth."  "  Truth  " 
may  here  lie  taken  to  cover  the  entire  masculine  side  of  the  religious  character,  and  to 
include  all  such  strong  virtues  as  veracity,  faithfulness,  integrity,  righteousness,  immu- 
tability.   To  love  truth  is  one  of  the  first  duties  of  religion.    "Nor  mercy."    This  word 


CH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  115 

represents  the  feminine  side  of  piety,  and  includes  such  graces  as  pity,  clemency, 
kindness,  sympathy.  Those  fatal  defects  were  due  to  the  lack  of  "  knowledge  of  God 
in  the  land."  Mercy  and  truth  are  glorious  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  their 
existence  as  virtues  of  social  ethics  depends  upon  right  conceptions  regarding  him.  But 
Israel  had  lost  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah.  The  calf-shrines  had  been  her  ruin.  The 
image-worship  had  destroyed  the  spiritual  service  of  (Jod.  And  the  failure  of  the  heart- 
knowledge  led  to  the  failure  of  head-knowledge  also,  and  that  in  turn  to  the  loss  of  all 
virtue.  How  sad  that  there  should  be  "  no  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land  "  I  For  was 
it  not  the  land  of  Iramanuel,  and  were  not  its  citizens  "a  people  near  unto  him"? 
How  dreadful  such  an  indictment  against  the  nation  of  whom  the  psalmist  exultingly 
sings,  "  In  Judah  is  God  known:  his  Name  is  great  in  Israel"  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  1)! 
2.  Immoralify  was  rampant.  (Ver.  2.)  The  sin  of  Jeroboam  I.,  in  setting  up  the 
golden  calves  and  encouraging  the  systematic  violation  of  the  second  commandment, 
had  become  the  fruitful  source  of  disobedience  to  the  whole  moral  Law.  It  had  paved 
the  way  for  the  deeper  apostasy  of  Baalism  (1  Kings  xvi.  31) ;  and,  the  first  two 
commandments  being  overturned,  little  respect  was  any  longer  paid  to  the  others. 
Ver.  2  presents  a  picture  of  the  eleven  years  which  followed  the  death  of  Jeroboam  II., 
when  the  forces  of  revolution  and  anarchy  were  struggling  for  the  upper  hand.  Then 
the  land  was  full  of  perjury  and  violence.  All  kinds  of  evil  broke  forth  like  a  flood. 
The  third  commandment,  the  sixth,  the  seventh,  the  eighth,  the  ninth,  were  alike 
disregarded.  One  deed  of  blood  trod  upon  the  heels  of  another ;  assassination  following 
assassination,  and  slaughter  avenging  slaughter.  The  character  of  the  people,  and  of 
their  prophets  and  priests,  was  hopelessly  bad.  Eeproof  would  be  in  vain  (ver.  4).  The 
men  of  Israel  were  as  contumacious  as  those  who  refused  to  obey  the  priest  when  he 
gave  judgment  in  Jehovah's  Name  (Deut.  xvii.  12).  Indeed,  the  sin  of  the  whole 
kingdom,  which  began  with  the  renunciation  of  the  Aaronical  priesthood,  may  he  sym- 
bolically described  as  that  of  "  striving  with  the  priest."  And  now,  at  last,  even  the 
very  mercy  of  God  had  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  nation. 

III.  The  judgment.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  The  Lord  does  not  cite  and  plead  in  vain.  He 
is  "  justified  when  he  speaks,  and  clear  when  he  judges."  The  punishment  of  Israel's 
sin  is  to  be  universal  and  very  terrible.  The  judgment  is  to  fall  upon :  1.  The  soil. 
(Ver.  3.)  The  threatening  here  is  that  of  a  universal  drought.  The  very  ground  is  to 
be  cursed  because  of  the  people's  guilt.  The  famine  is  to  be  one  of  fearful  severity. 
In  a  sense,  the  soil  of  Palestine  may  be  said  to  be  lying  under  that  visitation  yet. 
Canaan  is  naturally  "a  fruitful  land;"  but  God  has  turned  it  "into  barrenness,  for  the 
wickedness  of  them  that  dwelt  therein."  2.  The  lower  creatures.  Animal  life  is  to 
decline  by  reason  of  the  drought.  The  brute  creation  shall  be  reduced  to  an  extremity 
of  hunger  on  account  of  the  people's  sin.  3.  The  people  themselves.  They  are  to  bo 
punished  with :  (1)  Loss  of  health.  "Every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall  languish  " — 
the  physical  frame  losing  strength  and  tone,  and  "joy  being  withered  away  from  the 
sons  of  men"  (Joel  i.  13).  (2)  Loss  ot/ood,  due  to  the  breaking  of  the  two  staffs  of 
life — the  failure  of  the  harvests  and  the  destruction  of  the  animals,  (3)  Loss  of  grace 
(ver.  4).  Expostulation  with  the  people  would  be  useless.  They  hated  reproof. 
God's  Spirit  had  ceased  to  strive  with  Bphraim;  he  was  "joined  to  idols  "  (ver.  17). 
The  men  of  Israel  were  so  desperately  wicked  that  it  was  "impossible  to  renew 
them  again  unto  repentance."  (4)  Loss  of  life  (ver.  5).  "  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked." 
The  people  of  the  ten  tribes,  with  their  false  prophets,  are  to  perish  in  their  sins. 
The  slaughter  is  to  be  continuous,  neither  day  nor  night  being  free  from  it.  It  is 
also  to  be  indiscriminate,  and  at  last  universal  And  the  loss  of  temporal  life  is 
only  the  shadow  of  deeper  spiritual  loss,  beyond  in  eternity.  4.  The  nation  as 
such.  (Ver.  5.)  "I  will  destroy  thy  mother."  The  Israelitish  state  was  the 
"mother"  of  the  people;  and  already,  by  reason  of  the  family  wickedness,  she  is 
driving  fast  along  the  highway  to  destruction.  These  closing  words,  indeed,  are  her 
funeral  knell. 

CoNCLUsioir.  Two  lessons  of  this  passage  are  specially  prominent,  viz.  (1)  the 
essential  connection  between  religion  and  morality  ;  (2)  the  inevitable  connection 
between  national  sin  and  national  sufferings  Wherever  the  right  knowledge  of  God  is 
wanting,  there  sin  and  Satan  are  sure  to  triumph.  Ancient  Greece  gave  to  Europe  the 
glorious  beginnings  both  of  political  and  intellectual  life,  and  was  herself  resplendent 


He  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [ch.  nr.  1— 19. 

with  the  choicest  triumphs  of  literature  and  art ;  yet  some  of  her  wisest  philosopher* 
couutenanced  the  practice  of  unmentionable  vices.  The  sun  never  shone  upon  a  more 
brilliant  company  of  scholars,  poets,  philosophers,  orators,  jurists,  and  litterateurs,  than 
that  which  adorned  the  court  of  Augustus,  the  first  emperor  of  Borne;  yet  during  the 
Augustan  age  the  Roman  people  were  plunging  into  depths  of  moral  degradation  which 
ultimately  led  to  the  ruin  of  the  empire.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  general 
overthrow  of  the  continental  monarchs  took  place  in  1848,  and  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain  remained  as  stable  as  ever,  M.  Guizot  said  one  day  to  Lord  Shaftesbury, "  I  will 
tell  you  what  saved  your  empire.  It  was  not  your  constable  ;  it  was  not  your  army; 
it  was  not  your  statesmen.  It  was  the  deep,  solemn,  religious  atmosphere  that  still  is 
breathed  over  the  whole  people  of  England."  For  nations,  knowled<je  of  God  and 
acceptance  of  his  salvation  are  necessary,  in  order  to  the  prevalence  of  that  righteous- 
ness which  is  the  source  of  national  stability.  And  for  each  citizen  in  like  manner, 
"This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  he  hath 

8«Dt."— a  J. 

Vers.  6—14. — hraeVt  guilt  and  punishment.  Priests  and  people  were  guilty  alike, 
and  would  be  overtaken  by  one  common  doom. 

I.  The  sin  of  the  priests.  1.  They  rejected  the  knowledge  of  God  (ver.  6).  They 
did  not  engage  in  the  study  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  their  lives  were  a  violation  of  its 
precepts,     2.  They  consequently   failed  to  teach  the  Law  to  the  people  (ver.  6). 

3.  They  connived  at  the  national  idolatry,  on  account  of  the  material  profit  which 
they  obtained  from  it  (ver.  8).  The  calf- worship  brought  them  many  sacrificial  fees; 
so  the  priests,  instead  of  rebuking  the  iniquity,  "set  their  heart"  upon  its 
continuance. 

II.  The  bin  of  the  people.  1.  They  wilfully  forgot  the  Law  of  God  (ver.  6). 
2.  The  more  prosperous  they  became  externally,  the  more  grievously  they  sinned 
(ver.  7).  3.  They  addicted  themselves  to  idolatrous  divination,  using  sometimes 
teraphim,  and  sometimes  divining  rods  (ver.  12).  In  worshipping  wooden  gods,  they 
•huwed  themselves  to  be  at  once  wooden-headed  and  wooden-hearted  (Ps.  cxv.  8). 

4.  They  practised  the  sensual  rites  of  nature-worship  with  the  temple  prostitutes  of 
Ashtaroth,  and  even  were  so  shameless  as  sometimes  to  appear  with  them  at  the  altar 
(vers.  13,  14).    Impurity  in  one's  religion  is  often  joined  with  uncleanness  of  body. 

III.  The  doom  threatened  upon  both.  (Ver.  9.)  1.  The  priests  and  their  sons 
would  be  deprived  of  their  office,  and  the  people  would  lose  their  high  prerogative  of 
being  a  priestly  nation  (ver.  6).  2.  The  glory  of  the  kingdom  would  be  turned  into 
■hame  by  reason  of  the  loss  of  the  numbers,  wealth,  and  power  in  which  they  gloried 
(ver.  7).  3.  Their  sin  would  also  become  its  own  punishment  (vers.  10, 11).  The  Lord 
would  cause  them  to  "  eat  .of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way."  The  result  would  be  surfeit, 
not  satisfaction.  Their  sin  would  be  their  torment.  4.  God  would  "give  them  up  to 
vile  affections ; "  he  would  cease  to  correct  them  for  their  idolatry  and  licentiousness, 
and  thus  visit  them  with  reprobation  (ver.  14). 

Conclusion.  Ver.  11  contains  the  solemn  statement  of  a  great  moral  truth  respecting 
all  sin,  and  which  is  specially  applicable  to  sins  of  sensuality.  Who  can  place  confidence 
in  the  moral  judgments  of  an  adulterer  or  a  fornicator?  How  sad  when  such  uteB 
occupy  positions  of  influence  in  Church  or  state  I 

**  Beware  of  lust;  it  doth  pollute  and  foul 
'Whom  God  in  baptism  washed  with  bis  own  blood ; 
It  blots  thy  lesson  written  in  thy  soul; 
The  holy  lines  cannot  be  understood. 
How  dare  those  eyes  upon  a  Bible  look, 
Uuch  less  towards  God,  whose  lust  is  all  their  book  I " 

(George  Heibett) 

a  J. 

Ver.  9. — "Likt  people,  like  priest."  In  this  passage  the  Lord  charges  the  priests 
of  the  ten  tribes  with  having  grievously  abetted  the  idolatry  and  immorality  which 
were  rampant  in  Israel;  and  in  the  verse  before  us  he  declares  that,  as  people  and 
priest  have  been  one  in  guilt,  they  shall  be  one  also  in   punishment.    When  the 


OH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  IH 


judgment  falls,  there  shall  he  no  "  benefit  of  clergy."  The  four  words  of  the  text  sound 
like  a  proverb  (Isa.  xxlv.  2).  We  may  justly  view  them  as  an  apothegm  respecting 
the  mutual  relation  of  pastor  and  people.  We  read  the  word  "  priest "  liere  "  writ 
large  "  as  "  presbyter."  We  use  it  in  its  widest  sense  as  denoting  a  minister  of  religion 
— one  who  officiates  in  the  sacred  service  of  the  (Ihurch. 

I.  There  is  a  likeness  in  the  nature  of  things.    In  their  relations  to  God  and 
to  their  fellow-men,  it  is  "  like  people,  like  priest."    1.  The  principle  applies  to  matters 
of  personal  life.    The  priest  is  "  taken  from  among  men  "  (Heb.  v.  1—^).    He  is  by 
nature  guilty,  sinful,  polluted,  helpless,  li^e  every  other  member  of  the  congregation. 
If  he  bea  true  believer,  he  has  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  justified  by  the 
grace  of  God,  and  mnde  a  partaker  of  the  Spirit,  like  other  believers.     He  is  exposed 
to  temptations,  and  prone  to  backslidings,  as  they  are.    He  must  "  fight  the  good  fight 
of  faith,"  just  like  others.     2.  2%e  principle  applies  to  social  relations.    A  minister 
does  not  cease  to  be  a  man  when  he  becomes  a  minister.     He  is  to  be  "  one  that  ruleth 
well  his  own  house  "  (I  Tim.  iii.  4).    Like  other  citizens,  he  ought  to  interest  himself 
in  politics.     The  cause  of  liberty  and  righteousness,  the  redress  of  wrongs,  and  the 
elevation  of  the  masses,  should  be  specially  dear  to  him.     He  must  not  allow  himself 
to  seem  an  emasculated  man,  who  either  has  no  opinions  on  public  questions,  or  is 
afraid  to  avow  them.     3.  The  principle  applies  to  business  habits.    The  priest  is  to  eat 
his  bread  "  in  the  sweat  of  his  face,"  like  other  men.     Observation  of  his  habits  ought 
not  to  produce  the  impression  that  he  is  without  any  engrossing  occupation.     No  man 
in  the  con.;regation  should  be  busier.     No  other  work  makes  so  constant  a  demand 
upon  all  the  best  eiierjes  of  human  nature  as  the  work  of  the  Christian  pastor.     4. 
The  principle  applies  to  the  matter  of  his  work  itself.    According  to  the  spirit  of  New 
Testament  teaching,  no  hard-and-fast  line  is  to  be  drawn  between  the  Christian  ministry 
and  other  useful  occupations.     The  pastor  ministers  to  a  higher  part  of  man's  nature 
than  the  merchant  does ;  that  is  all.    "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  (Col.  iii.  17);  that  is  the  Christian  law  of  work  for  all 
godly  men  alike.     The  life  of  the  priesthood  has  no  halo  around  it  which  does  not 
belong  to  the  life  of  the  people.     5.  The  principle  applies  to  spiritual  prioileges.     The 
pastor  enjoys  the  blessings  of  grace  in  common  with  the  people — all  of  them,  and  no 
more.    He  has  the  same  access  to  God  which  other  Christian  men  and  women  have ; 
no  other  access,  and  no  nearer.     He  does  not  belong  to  a  sacerdotal  caste.     He  is  in  no 
respect  a  mediator.    The  special  application  of  the  term  "  priest,"  as  denoting  one  who 
offers  sacrifice,  is  not  for  the  Christian  pastor.     In  that  sense  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  only  Priest  of  the  Church.     The  one  respect  in  which  the  pastor  is  a  "  priest  to 
God"  is  that  in  which,  as  Archbishop  Leighton  has  put  it,  "  all  Christians  are  God's 
clergy."    6.   Tlie  principle  applies  to  the  final  account.    It  shall  be  "  like  people,  like 
priest,"  at  the  day  of  judgment.    His  reward,  like  theirs,  shall  be  in  proportion  to  his 
iiiligence,  efficiency,  and  success.    And,  contrariwise,   the  punishments  inflicted  for 
indolence  shall  be  equally  impartial.     This  is  the  very  point  of  the  text:  "I  will 
punish  them  for  their  ways,  and  reward  them  their  doings."    This  general  principle  is 
so  obvious.  And  so  constantly  enforced  in  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  that  it 
seems  strange  that  it  should  ever  have  been  contravened.     Yet  the  subversion  of  it  has 
been  one  of  the  most  cherished  errors  of  the  Christian  Church.     Is  not  the  denial  of 
this  principle  the  corner-stone  of  the  Papacy  ?    The  Bomish  Church  exalts  one  man, 
and  one  class  of  men,  to  absolute  control  over  the  consciences  of  their  fellows.     And 
does  not  the  ritualism  of  our  time  at  home  involve  the  same  error?    Bitualism  might 
be  harmless  if  it  meant  only  an  ornate  and  beautiful  service ;  but,  meaning  as  it  does 
a  return  to  sacerdotalism,  and  the  fettering  of  the  spiritual  liberty  of  the  Chrislian 
people,  it  is  full  of  deadly  poison.     Many  communions,  also,  which  are  free  from  the 
temptations  to  clericalism  in  its  grosser  forms,  are  often  in  danger  of  separating  those 
responsibilities,  on  the  part  of  minister  and  people,  which  God  has  joined  together. 
JU.y.  do  not  some  minds    harbour   the  notion   that  a  higher  standard  of   piety   is 
apiiropriate  for  the  pulpit  than  what  is  necessary  for  the  pew  ?    And  are  there  not 
some  popular  amusements  which  it  is  thought  quite  lawful  for  other  members  of  the 
Chuich  to  indul^^e  in,  but  which  a  minister  is  expected  to  abstain  from,  under  peril  uf 
being  j'ldged  an  unspiritual  man?    There  is,  however,  no  mention  in  the  Bible  of  a 
liioader  and  a  nai rower  gauge  of  righteousness.    'J  tore,  it  is  "  like  people,  like  priest." 


113  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  iv.  1— la 

II.  Theke  is  a  likeness  produced  by  eecipkooal  isi-LUKNCE.  The  relationship 
lietwc.'U  I'aslor  and  people  is  a  very  sacred  one.  It  is  a  uiiiun  in  which  the  one  party 
does  not  absdib  the  other;  rather,  they  tend  to  become  (ilkd  with  the  same  common 
lifi",  and  to  be  mutually  assimilated  in  views,  sentiments,  aii'i  spiriiiial  tone.  We  need 
not  stay  to  speak  of  the  influence  which  the  priest  lias  up^n  the  pe  i|ile.  For  the  one 
direct  end  of  the  ministry  is  to  move  men  to  live  for  God  and  Christ.  It  is  designed, 
tlnough  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  inBuence  the  hearts  and  habits  of  the  people, 
not  only  upon  the  Lord's  day,  but  during  eveiy  hour  of  their  lives.  In  what  remains 
we  ^llall  j'atlicr  consider  the  iufluence  which  the  people  exercise  upon  the  priest,  to 
iiiuuld  liis  eliiiincter  ad  a  man,  and  to  affect  his  efficiency  as  a  pastor.  The  text  does 
not  read,  "  Like  priest,  like  people,"  although  it  is  frequently  misquoted  so.  It  reads, 
"Like  peo|lo,  l.kepiiest;"  and  thus  it  invites  us  to  view  more  especially  the  influence 
wlieli  tiic  jew  bas  upon  the  pulpit — an  influence  which  is  everywhere  present,  and 
wbicli  is  veiy  subtle  aad  powerful.  The  priest  springs  from  the  people.  He  enters  the 
miii'^tjy  Willi  bis  mind  already  largely  moulded  by  the  intellectual  and  religious 
inlliicnces  wbicb  obtnia  amongst  them.  He  may  be  expected  to  reflect  in  his  own 
character  tlie  iirevali-iit  spirit  in  relation  to  Divine  things  amidst  which  he  has  been 
broLiL^i.t  u|i.  A  loii^  barren  period  of  spiritual  indifference  will  inevitably  give  to  the 
Cbureli  a  race  of  ^nl  less  anti-evaii^elical  ministers ;  but  when,  on  the  other  hand,  there 
is  a  general  levival  of  religion,  many  earnest  young  men  from  among  the  new  converts 
will  be  found  ucvoting  their  lives  to  the  work  of  spreading  the  knowledge  of  salvation. 
Again,  this  influence  is  greatly  promoted  in  connection  with  the  more  democratic 
systems  ot  Church  government.  The  writer  of  this  homily,  as  a  Presbyterian,  may  be 
allowe  I  to  poiut  out  that  in  every  free  Presbyterian  communion  the  sap  of  the  Church's 
iuliueiice  lises  from  the  people  through  sessions  and  presbyteries  to  the  supreme  court; 
and  S",  peculiarly  under  this  system,  it  is, "like  people,  like  priest."  1.  Sometimet 
this  Injiuence  is  for  evil.  Take,  e.g.,  the  sin  of  priestcraft  itself.  It  is  the  corruption  of 
the  ];:euple,  in  the  flrst  instance,  that  makes  this  sin  possible.  Look  at  the  case  of  the 
golden  o.\  at  Horeb  (Exod.  xxxii.  1).  Or  take  that  of  the  golden  calves  at  Bethel  and 
l)an.  Jeroboam  was  trading  with  the  spiritual  degradation  of  the  ten  tribes  when  he 
instituted  bis  fils-'  gods  and  his  false  priests.  The  malign  influence  continued  down  to 
tlie  time  ol  Llosca,  and  by-and-by  involved  the  northern  kingdom  in  destruction. 
Meanwhile,  too,  the  evil  leaven  was  spreading  into  the  yet  surviving  monarchy  of 
Judali  (Jer.  v.  31).  And  thus  is  it  still.  Whenever  the  blood  of  religion  runs  cold, 
and  oj'])ositiou  to  the  doctrines  of  grace  prevails,  the  Church  will  seek  out  teachers 
alter  her  own  degeneiate  heart  (2  Tim.  iv.  3).  At  such  times  the  congregation  desires 
to  have  a  tacit  understanding  with  the  prophet  that  he  is  not  to  "use  great  plainness 
of  sicech  "  (Isa.  xxx.  10).  Every  true  minister  has  sometimes  to  contend  against  the 
temijtaiion  to  suppress  unpalatable  truth.  It  is  little  more  than  a  generation  since 
thousauds  of  pulpits  in  the  United  States  submitted  to  be  muzzled  regarding  the 
wickedness  of  negro  slavery;  and  since  hundreds  of  ministers  in  the  Southern  States 
Wile  labouring  to  prove  that  slavery  was  the  proper  condition  of  the  negro.  In  our 
own  country,  on  the  other  hand,  the  warning  voice  of  the  pulpit  in  relation  to  the  evil 
of  the  drinking  customs  is  still  a  somewhat  muffled  one  compared  with  what  it  has 
long  been  in  Xew  I'aigland.  Finally,  here,  the  priest's  personal  relations  to  his  people 
are -o  iniiniate  that  ibeir  attitude  towards  him  goes  largely  to  afl..ct  even  the  moral 
tone  and  libre  ol  bis  cliaracter.  If  he  submit  to  be  continually  petted,  the  danger  is 
thai  all  manliness  wdl  gradually  ooze  out  of  him,  and  that  ho  will  come  to  expect  on 
all  occasions  dill'ere:it  Ircatrneut  from  other  men.  But  surely  the  Christian  ministry 
ought  t.i  be  the  nianlie.-<t  of  callings.  The  pastor  should  be  one  of  the  hardiest  of  the 
trees  of  grace,  and  nut  a  mere  greenhouse  plant.  He  should  desire  no  allowances  to  be 
made  for  him  which  are  not  made  for  men  of  other  callings.  The  whole  Church  should 
take  care  that  it  is  not  her  fault  if  he  is  not  every  inch  a  man.  2.  But  often  tKt 
influence  of  the  people  u/ion  the  priest  is  good  and  honourable.  A  congregation  whose 
conception  of  the  ministry  is  formed  as  the  result  of  the  devout  study  of  the  New 
Testament,  will  look  and  pray  for  men  in  the  pulpit  who  possess  the  tongue  of  tire,  t.e. 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  not  the  power  to  com|>ose  eloquent  i^aiagraphs  and 
perorations,  hut  power  to  arouse,  convert,  edify — power  under  whic.i  hearts  will  melt, 
imd  lives  will  begin  anew.      When  ooiiversious  occur,  the  pastor  preaches  wiih  an 


CH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  119 


enlarged  Iieart  and  prays  with  redoubled  fervour,  and  his  path  seems  bathed  in  sunshine. 
After  all,  too,  it  is  the  people,  quite  as  much  as  the  priests,  who  guard  the  orthodoxy, 
purity,  liberties,  and  spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  For  it  is  they  who  constitute  the 
body  of  Christ ;  the  pastors  are  only  the  servants  of  the  Church  for  Jesus'  sake. 

Conclusion.  1.  It  is  doubtless  sometimes  the  fact  that  the  priest  and  the  people  never 
become  assimilated  to  each  other  at  all.  It  was  so,  e.g.,  in  the  case  of  Hosea ;  in  that 
of  Jeremiah;  in  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  during  his  earthly  ministry.  But 
what  the  text  expresses  is  simply  an  ordinary  tendency  in  connection  with  this  sacred 
relationship.  2.  Let  our  closing  tliought  be  this,  that  the  obligation  involved  in  the 
pastoral  tie  is  a  mutual  one.  If  his  Church  responsibilities  should  weigh  heavily  upon 
the  minister's  heart,  they  should  also  press  upon  the  conscience  of  each  member.  Both 
are  responsible  for  the  results  of  the  tie.    It  is,  "  like  people,  like  priest."— 0.  J. 

Vers.  15 — 19. — Ephraim  and  Judah.  In  this  passage,  as  in  oh.  L  7,  the  kingdom  of 
Judab  is  presented  in  contrast  with  that  of  IsraeL  Here,  for  the  first  time  in  Hosea, 
we  meet  with  the  name  "  Ephraim."  As  the  United  Kingdom  over  which  Qneen 
Victoria  reigns  is  often  called  simply  "  England,"  so  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes 
sometimes  receives  the  name  of  "  Ephraim,"  that  tribe  being  the  most  powerful  of  the 
ten,  and  having  within  its  bounds  the  seat  of  government. 

I.  Ephraim's  sin.  It  consisted  in  the  subversion  of  the  entire  moral  Law.  1. 
Oeneral  ungodliness.  He  had  broken ;  (1)  The  first  commandment,  by  turning  froiq 
Jehovah  to  serve  the  Baalim.  (2)  The  second  commandment,  by  leaving  the  one 
rightful  altar,  and  bowing  down  to  Jeroboam's  graven  images.  Gilgal  had  once  been  a 
holy  place  to  Jehovah,  but  it  was  now  noted  for  the  idolatries  which  were  practised 
there ;  and  Beth-el,  "  the  house  of  God,"  where  Jacob  had  seen'  the  stairway  and  the 
vision  of  the  Almighty,  is  now  for  the  same  reason  nicknamed  Beth-aven,  "  house  of 
iniquity "  (ver.  15).  (3)  The  third  commandment,  in  swearing  by  Jehovah  while 
worshipping  the  calves  (ver.  15).  2.  Oeneral  licentiousness.  The  worship  of  Baal  and 
Ashtaroth  became  as  impure  and  revolting  as  it  is  possible  to  imagine.  The  groves 
were  the  scenes  of  the  foulest  debaucheries.  Every  bond  of  truth  and  justice  was 
broken.  The  judges  loved  to  say,  "  Give  ye ; "  i.e.  they  gaped  for  bribes,  and  some- 
times sold  their  judicial  decisions  to  the  highest  bidder.  Morally,  Ephraim  was  utterly 
degenerate;  he  had  become  just  like  "turned"  or  "sour"  milk  (ver.  18).  He  was 
constant  in  his  sin :  "  They  have  committed  whoredom  continually  "  (ver.  18).  He 
was  refractory :  in  moral  conduct  he  resembled  a  stubborn  cow  (ver.  16).  And  he  was 
obdurate :  a  fearful  and  unholy  union  subsisted  between  Ephraim  and  the  dead  idols 
which  he  served  (ver.  17). 

II.  Ephraim's  doom.  It  will  fall  upon  him  swiftly.  It  will  come  in  the  form  of: 
1.  Banishment.  Israel  had  felt  the  Lord's  fold  to  be  too  tight,  and  the  life  within  it 
too  slow.  So  the  ten  tribes  are  to  be  driven  into  exile.  They  are  to  be  exposed  to 
danger  like  a  timid  "  lamb  "  (ver.  16)  in  the  wide  wilderness  of  the  world.  A  tempest 
of  judgment  shall  suddenly  seize  them,  lift  them  up,  and  carry  them  away  like  chaS 
(ver.  19).  2.  Shame.  (Ver.  19.)  As  long  as  the  northern  kingdom  seemed  strong  and 
prosperous,  its  citizens  gloried  in  "  their  sacrifices  "  to  idols.  But  now,  in  these  days 
of  conspiracy  and  revolution,  Ephraim  will  be  disappointed  in  his  expectation  of  help 
from  the  Baalim,  and  will  he  covered  with  shame  on  account  of  his  infamous  idolatries. 
We  know  that  one  chief  result  of  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonish  captivities  was  to 
thoroughly  wean  the  Hebrew  nation  from  its  polytheism.  3.  Abandonment.  (Ver. 
17.)  Judah  is  directed  to  "  let  Ephraim  alone."  God's  people  within  the  southern 
kingdom  are  to  send  no  missionary  to  reprove  him,  or  to  attempt  to  convert  him. 
Thev  are  to  leave  him  to  "  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own  way."  This  word  spoken  to 
Judah  is  often  understood  as  if  it  referred  to  tha  desertion  of  incorrigible  sinners  by 
the  Lord  the  Spirit.  Such,  however,  is  at  best  only  a  secondary  and  inferential  meaning. 
It  is  evident  that  in  this  verse  God  himself  pronounces  no  decree  af  final  abandonment, 
for  we  find  him  saying  afterwards  (ch.  xi.  8),  "How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim?" 
The  abandonment  here  denotes  the  loss  of  the  " kindness"  and  "  excellent  oil"  which 
belong  to  the  reproof  of  "  the  righteous." 

Ill  An  admonition  to  Judah.  (Vers.  15, 17.)  The  southern  kingdom  is  cautioned 
to  shun  the  contagion  of  Ephraim's  wicked  ex'imple.     For ;  1.  Judah's  condition  wot 


120  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  IT.  1—19. 

meanwhile  better.  Up  to  the  time  to  which  ch.  iv.  refers,  Judah  was  comparatively 
uncorrupted.  There  had  always  been  a  difference  morally  and  spiritually  between 
Ephraim  and  Judah.  The  southern  Vtingdom  possessed  Jerusalem,  and  the  temple, 
aad  the  Aaronical  priesthood,  and  the  royal  dynasty  of  David.  Many  of  its  monarchs 
had  been  godly  men,  who  "did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  And 
Qt)d's  restraining  grace  towards  Judah  liad  been  so  great,  that  if  he  had  any  saints  just 
now  in  the  world,  these  were  in  Judah.  But :  2.  Judah  was  in  danger  of  contamination. 
The  people  of  Judah  were  near  neii^hbours  to  the  ten  thousands  of  Ephraim.  They  were 
brethren — two  segments  of  the  same  nationality.  They  possessed  the  same  great  history, 
and  inherited  the  same  traditions.  Israel,  moreover,  was  the  larger  state,  and  the  more 
prosperous.  Jehovah,  therefore,  in  his  anxiety  about  Judah,  warns  him  to  keep  away 
from  such  polluting  places  as  Grilgal  and  Bethel  (ver.  15).  The  Divine  counsel  to  him 
is,  "  Let  Ephraim  alone ; "  «.«.  have  no  intercourse  with  him,  lest  he  pollute  thee. 
Stand  off  from  him,  for  "evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  No  eflfbrt  on 
your  part  will  avail  to  cure  him  of  his  idolatry ;  and  perchance  you  may  yourself  become 
a  partaker  of  it.  3.  The  effect  of  this  admonition.  Judah  did  remember  it  for  a  time ; 
at  least,  a  great  theocratic  revival  and  religious  reformation  took  place  during  the  reigns 
of  Hezekiah  and  Josiah.  Afterwards,  however,  a  deep  spiritual  decline  set  in;  and 
Judah,  too,  fell  into  the  fatal  grasp  of  Babylon  only  three  or  four  generations  after  the 
fall  of  Ephraim. 

Lessons.  1.  We  must  refuse  to  partake  of  other  men's  sins,  if  we  would  not  share 
their  punishment.  One  cannot  touch  pitch  without  being  defiled.  2.  We  must 
beware  of  the  "  large  place  "  outside  of  the  Lord's  fold.  The  broad  way  leadeth  to 
destruction.  Men  of  firm  Christian  principle  are  sometimes  called  "  narrow ; "  but  we 
must  dare  to  be  as  narrow  as  the  straight  line  of  God's  righteousness,  and  at  no  time 
depart  from  the  leading  of  the  good  Shepherd.  3.  We  must  cherish  shame  now  for 
our  own  spiritual  idolatries,  and  break  witli  every  idol,  however  dear,  if  we  would  have 
confidence  before  Christ  at  his  coming. — C.  J. 

Ver.  17. — Insensibility  the  result  of  impenitence.  The  people  of  Israel  are  here 
designated  by  the  name  "  Ephraim."  This  tribe  rapidly  rose  to  influence  beneath  the 
shadow  of  Joshua's  greatness.  Under  that  hero,  one  of  its  greatest  sons,  Ephraim 
was  located  in  the  most  fertile  part  of  Palestine,  and  being  less  exposed  than  otiier 
tribes  to  external  attack,  grew  in  numbers  and  afluence.  When  another  Ephrainiite, 
Jeroboam,  led  the  revolt  against  the  house  of  David,  and  became  the  first  king  of  Israel, 
this  tribe,  already  strong,  stood  foremost,  and  its  name  became  henceforth  a  synonym 
for  Israel.  In  this  chapter  Hosea  exhibits  the  sins  of  the  people  in  a  series  of  graphic 
pictures.  He  tacitly  asks  whether  they  had  anything  to  urge  in  stay  of  judgment. 
He  would  prove  to  their  own  consciences  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  decision,  so 
that  they  would  be  left  without  excuse.  There  ever  comes  from  the  throne  of  God 
as  once  there  came  from  Monnt  Sinai,  a  voice  which  appeals  to  human  conscience  to 
confirm  the  Divine  sentence:  "Let  all  the  people  say.  Amen  I  "  Our  text  exhibits  a 
nation  abandoned  by  God — to  whom  all  expostulation  had  proved  useless.  It  suggests 
a  moral  condition  similar  to  the  physical  condition  of  some  patient  on  whom  the  surgeon 
has  operated  again  and  again  ;  who  has  often  pleaded  to  be  left  alone,  and  from  whom  at 
last,  with  heavy  heart,  the  skilful  kindly  friend  turns  away,  saying,  "  It  is  best  that  he 
should  be  left  alone  now,  for  his  disease  is  fatal."  That  Divine  "abandonment  is  possible 
may  be  shown  from  Jer.  vi.  30,  compared  with  Matt.  v.  13.  At  times  God  seems  to 
reply  to  man's  wish  by  an  echo  (compare  Job  xxi.  14  with  Matt.  xxv.  41).  The 
solemnity  of  the  fact  that  insensibility  follows  impenitence. 

I.  The  wickedness  of  idolatry.  "  Joined  to  idols  "  implies  vital  association  with 
them.  Ephraim  would  not  part  with  idols,  and  could  not  be  parted  from  them  without 
death.  Three  forms  of  idolatry  prevailed.  Each  appealed  to  a  distinct  section  of  the 
people,  and  all  alike  drew  their  hearts  from  God.  The  calves  introduced  by  Jeroboam 
from  Egypt  were  deification  of  "  nature,"  and  became  at  Gilgal  and  Bethel  centres  for 
political  and  national  gatlierings.  Baal,  the  sun-god,  was  a  deification  of  "  prweT," 
and  was  worshipped  in  mountains  and  high  places.  Ashtaroth,  the  Astarte  of  tha 
Greeks,  the  Venus  of  the  Romans,  was  worshipped  in  the  groves,  under  the  shadow  of 
which  hideously  licentious  rites  completed  the  degradation  of  the  people.     Each  had 


OH,  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOJi  OF  HOSEA.  121 

its  own  cnltus  and  its  own  worshippers.  We  all  recognize  that  an  idol  may  exist  in 
our  thought  as  well  as  in  our  sight.  The  essence  of  idolatry  is  the  preference  of 
anything  to  Gcid,  so  as  to  allow  it  to  take  the  place  he  should  fill  in  our  thoughts  and 
affections.  The  same  object  does  not  tempt  us  all,  nor  will  the  same  allure  us  in  all 
the  stages  of  our  life.  In  youth  you  may  worship  Astarte ;  in  manhood,  Baal ;  «nd  in 
old  age,  the  golden  calves.  Speak  of  forms  of  idolatry  prevalent  in  England.  1.  Tht 
idolatry  of  wealth.  We  do  not  allude  to  the  gaining  of  money,  which  is  possible  to  a 
man  who  wins  it  by  his  shrewdness  and  skill,  by  his  industry  and  probity  in  business. 
The  Lord  has  given  him  power  to  get  wealth,  which  he  uses  as  a  steward  for  God. 
Describe  one  who  makes  money-getting  the  object  of  life.  He  chooses  a  business, 
without  any  care  about  its  evif  associations.  He  steels  his  heart  to  misery  and  to  the 
claims  of  his  own  kin.  He  ignores  the  standard  of  integrity  which  an  enlightened 
conscience  sets  up.  If  advantage  is  to  be  gained  by  bribe  or  trick,  he  is  not  the  man 
to  lose  it  from  scrupulousness.  He  has  no  time  for  home  duties,  for  Church  work,  etc., 
which  claim  his  efforts.  In  brief,  he  dismisses,  and  feels  that  he  must  dismiss,  God 
from  his  plans;  and  as  the  habit  grows  he  becomes  "joined  to  idols,"  and  in  his 
avaricious  hardness  God  lets  him  alone.  2.  The  idolatry  tf  pleasure  is  not  extinct. 
Picture  a  young  girl  introduced  to  society,  in  whose  gaieties  she  henceforth  finds  herself 
entangled.  Simple  of  heart  as  she  is  fair  of  face,  she  is  insidiously  injured  by  the 
unwholesome  excitement,  the  late  hours,  the  inane  and  profitless  chit-chat  of  such  an 
existence.  Too  tired  to  pray,  too  flattered  to  cgnquer  self,  she  forgets  those  solemn 
realities  to  which  the  present  life  is  only  a  vestibule,  until  in  the  scales  of  Eternal 
Justice  she  is  "weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting."  Slowly  but  surely  her 
early  sensibility  decreases ;  and  she  whose  heart  was  once  easily  touched,  whose  con- 
science was  keenly  sensitive,  becomes  the  hardened,  scheming  woman  of  the  world. 
She  is  joined  to  idols :  let  her  alone.  3.  The  idolatry  of  sensuousness.  The  halls  of 
entertainment  in  which  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  eye  are  pandered  to  are  thronged 
nightly  by  lads  whose  incipient  manliness  becomes  deteriorated.  There,  and  elsewhere, 
drink  exercises  a  fatal  influence.  Short  of  intoxication,  the  will  is  weakened,  the 
memory  obscured,  the  imagination  so  excited  as  to  find  pleasure  where  otherwise  there 
would  be  none ;  and  so  the  first  step  to  ruin  is  often  taken  half  consciously.  Little 
by  little  the  power  of  drink  asserts  itself,  till  self-control  is  gone,  and  its  victim  cannot 
live  without  it ;  and  so  joined  to  idols  is  he  that  God  says,  "  Let  him  alone."  In 
these  as  in  similar  temptations  many  resent  holy  influence  till  they  cannot  feel  it  j 
they  are  "  twice  dead,"  "  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind." 

IL  The  woepulness  of  insensibility.  1.  Its  nature.  "  Let  him  alone,"  is  God's 
command  to  all  who  have  been  speaking  in  his  name,  the  prophet  being  their  repre- 
sentative. A  minister  preaches,  and  many  under  the  influence  of  the  truth  are 
moved  to  thought  and  penitence.  One  hears  as  others  do,  but,  unlike  them,  is  hard 
and  callous.  Often  has  he  said  to  himself,  "  I  wish  I  could  go  to  a  place  of  worship 
without  ferling  uneasy;''  andat  last  God  says,  "You  shall.  Ministers,  let  him  alonel" 
Friends  spoke  faithfully  to  another,  urging  him  to  prayer,  pleading  with  him,  even  with 
tears,  to  turn  from  sin.  Sometimes  he  laughed  at  their  anxiety,  sometimes  he  was 
angry  at  their  interference,  heartily  wishing  that  they  would  interfere  with  him  no  more. 
Now  they  do  not.  One  friend  has  removed  to  a  distance,  the  voice  of  another  is  stilled 
by  death,  and  another  has  given  up  further  effort  in  utter  despair  of  success.  God  has 
said,  "  Let  him  alone."  Solemn  events  once  stirred  to  thought,  but  now  their  influence 
is  gone.  The  voice  within  which  warned  and  entrtated  is  sensibly  weaker  and  less 
frequently  heard.  To  conscience  God  has  said, "  Let  him  alone,"  and  now  it  is  sleeping. 
2.  The  dreadfidness  of  this  condition  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  noblest  part  of  man 
is  gone.  Suppose  your  hand  was  injured  so  that  you  were  in  pain  night  and  day. 
Driven  to  desperation,  you  take  a  red-hot  iron  and  sear  the  flesh,  destroying  nerves 
and  tissue  ruthlessly.  The  sore  heals,  the  pain  is  gone.  Ay,  but  the  hand  is  use- 
less, and  nothing  can  restore  it.  So  may  you  deal  with  conscience.  Eefuaing  to  go 
to  the  good  Physician  when  conscious  of  your  peril,  you  sin  deliberately  against  God, 
and  thus  conscience  may  be  "  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron."  Note,  also,  ih»  ominoumesa 
of  being  left  alone.  We  see  all  the  trees  in  an  orchard  pruned  with  an  unsparing  yet 
skilful  hand,  and  are  told  that  they  will  be  the  more  vigorous  and  fruitful  in  the 
autumn.    One  tree,  however,  has  been  left  untouched  by  the  knife.     Why  ?    Is  it 


122  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

becanse  it  is  a  favourite?  You  see  the  answer  in  the  red  cniss  on  its  trunk,  which 
shows  that  it  is  niarlied  for  cutting  down  as  a  cumberer  of  the  ground.  Take  another 
illustration.  Two  prisoaers  are  convicted  of  oflfenoes  against  the  law.  The  one,  on 
the  ground  of  his  youth  and  possible  reformation,  is  sent  home  for  his  father  to  chastise, 
and  he  goes  weeping.  The  other,  a  hardened  criminal,  is  to  receive  no  stripes,  but 
may  have  anything  his  ajipetite  craves.  Yet  all  look  on  him  with  horror.  The  fact 
that  he  is  to  receive  no  chastisement  is  ominous ;  for  he  is  under  condemnation  of  death. 
That  you  are  so  little  troubled  by  serious  thought  is  no  sign  of  safety ;  it  may  be  the 
indication  that  soon, "  being  past  feeling,"  you  will  be  "  given  over  to  a  reijrobate  mind." 
' '  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts." 

Conclusion.  1.  Address  those  who  fear  they  are  left  alone.  If  the  faint  desire  to 
return  to  God  yet  lingers,  if  the  fear  of  being  forsaken  of  God  makes  you  tremble,  the 
curse  has  not  yet  fallen.  The  Lord,  who  is  very  pitiful  and  of  tender  mercy,  still  says, 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  etc.  2.  Address  those  in,  danger  of  heing 
abandoned.  Illustrate  their  position  by  the  story  of  two  brothers  crossing  a  pass, 
overtaken  by  a  snow-storm.  One  longs  to  sleep.  He  is  dragged  on  for  a  time  by 
physical  force,  is  pleaded  with  earnestly,  but  at  last  is  of  necessity  left.  He  sinks  to 
rest ;  the  snow-flakes  fall  silently  and  swiftly,  and  in  the  depths  he  finds  his  grave,  and 
sleeps  the  sleep  of  death.  You  may  say  to  all  good  influences,  "  Let  me  alone,"  until 
God  puts  his  seal  on  your  choice,  and  says  to  all  that  might  save  you,  "  Let  him 
alone."— A.  E. 

Ver.  1. — "Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  I "  The  Hebrew  proi)hets  were  distinguished 
from  other  politicians  and  moralists  in  tliis  respect,  that  they  did  not  address  the 
people  upon  their  own  authority,  or  convey  to  them  the  counsels  of  their  own  wisdom. 
It  was  their  practice  to  keep  themselves  in  the  background,  and  to  summon  their 
countrymen,  in  the  language  of  the  text,  to  "hear  the  word  of  the  Lord."  This 
language  implies — 

I.  That  God  has  spoken  to  man.  1.  This  is  opposed  to  the  atheistic  doctrine, 
tliat  there  is  no  (rod  to  speak  ;  and  to  the  Epicurean  doctrine,  that  the  gods  care  not 
to  concern  themselves  in  the  affairs  of  mortals.  It  is  also  opposed  to  the  modern  and 
pseudo-scientific  doctrine,  that  the  universe  is  so  bound  in  the  chains  of  physical  law 
that  there  is  no  opportunity  for  the  mind,  if  such  there  be,  that  shapes  and  controls  all 
things  to  communicate  with  the  spiritual  nature  of  man.  2.  Yet  this  belief  harmonizes 
with  the  highest  conception  we  can  form  of  the  Eternal.  We  refuse  to  believe  that  he, 
who  is  present  throughout  his  material  creation,  is  cut  off  from  the  very  nature  which  is 
most  akin  to  his  own.  3.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  revelation  is  a  word  of  God  to  man. 
The  prophets,  evangelists,  and  apostles  were  taken  possession  of  by  a  supernatural  power, 
that  spake  to  them,  in  them,  and  by  them,  to  their  fellow-men.  4.  Christ  himself,  the 
Word  of  God,  sums  up  in  his  person,  ministry,  and  sacrifice  all  that  God  has  of  especial 
interest  and  value  to  impart  to  the  minds  of  men. 

II.  That  man  is  under  an  obligation  to  listen  to  the  word  op  God.  1.  The 
finite  and  fallible  nature  of  man  stands  in  need  of  Divine  instruction,  guidance,  encour- 
agement, and  admonition.  2.  There  is  in  man  a  conscience  which  attests  the  divinity 
of  the  word  to  which  he  listens  when  God  speaks.  3.  Humility  and  reverence  are 
becoming  to  such  aa  thus  come  into  contact  with  the  utterances  of  Eternal  Wisdom.  4. 
To  hear  aright  involves  a  prompt  and  cheerful  obedience.  For  the  Word  of  God  conveys 
not  only  speculative  truth,  but  the  most  valuable  practical  counsels  as  to  conduct.  He 
received  aiight  the  word  of  God  who  exclaimed,  "Speak,  Lord;  for  thy  servant 
hearethi"— T. 

Ver.  1. — A  controversy.  Language  such  as  this  shows  how  readily  the  inspired 
writers  made  use  of  human  relationships  in  order  to  impress  upon  the  mimls  of  the 
people  great  moral  facts  and  lessons.  There  is,  of  course,  great  difference  between  the 
disputes  and  controversies  which  arise  among  men,  and  any  matter  of  estrangement 
between  God  and  men ;  yet  how  vigorously  and  effectively  does  this  language  set  forth 
human  sin  and  Divine  righteousness  I 

I.  The  parties  to  this  controversy.  On  the  one  side  is  a  rightful  Ruler ;  on  the 
other,  rebellious  subjects.    The  Ruler  is  possessed  of  infinite  power;  the  rebels  are 


OH.it.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE  A.  123 

feeble,  and  their  resistance  is  vain.  The  Buler  hag  established,  by  his  grace  and  for- 
bearance, the  strongest  claims  upon  his  subjects'  gratitude  and  loyal  affection;  the 
rebels  have  shown  amazing  insensibility  an'd  obduracy.  This  is  indeed  a  just  picture 
of  the  righteous  and  merciful  God,  and  of  the  disobedient  and  rebellious  children  of  men. 
The  inhabitants  of  the  land,  i.e.  of  Israel,  are  in  this  matter  representative  in  their 
attitude  and  conduct  of  an  ungodly  race. 

II.  The  ground  of  the  coNTnovEBsr.  The  prophet,  speaking  In  the  name  of 
Jehovah,  charges  Israel  with  evil-dding  of  two  kinds.  1.  Immorality/.  The  two  great 
classes  of  human  duty  are  simply  described  by  the  two  terms,  truth  and  mercy.  If 
men  are  just  and  benevolent  in  their  dealing  with  one  another,  they  fulfil  moral  obliga- 
tions; for  tliese  virtues  comprehend  all  excellences  which  may  be  displayed  in  human 
life  and  intercourse.  But  where  faith  is  broken  and  pity  is  withheld,  the  bonds  of 
society  are  loosened,  and  its  dissolution  has  begun.  2.  Impiety.  "  The  knowledge  of 
God  in  the  land"  is  essential  to  the  well-being  of  a  nation.  Where  God  is  unknown, 
where  men  live  "  without  God  in  the  world,"  where  his  knowledge  is  suffered  to  lapse, 
and  the  rising  generation  are  trained  with  no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes — there  vice 
and  crime  will  be  rampant  and  unchecked,  and  there  will  be  no  guarantee  for  social 
order  and  peace. 

III.  The  issue  of  this  oontroverst.  1.  It  cannot  be  in  the  victory  of  the  rebel- 
lious. 2.  It  must  be  in  the  maintenance  of  Divine  authority  and  honour.  3.  It  should 
be  in  the  repenfance  and  submission  of  the  disloyal,  and  in  a  reconciliation  between 
the  penitent  offenders  and  the  righteously  offended  God.  4.  The  gospel  is  especially 
intended  to  bring  this  controversy  to  a  close,  in  a  way  honouring  to  God  and 
advantageous  to  sinful  man.  "  We  beseech  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God.»— 'i\ 

Ver.  6. — Ignorance  and  destruction.  All  classes  in  Israel  were  guilty  of  forsaking 
Jehovah,  and  all  classes  were  reproached  with  the  same  sin.  It  is  usually  the  case 
that  rebellion  against  a  righteous  Lord,  and  neglect  of  sincere  worship  and  devotion, 
are  chargeable,  if  not  equally  so,  upoii  high  and  low,  learned  and  ignorant.  And  when 
none  are  free  from  guilt,  none  are  exempt  from  condemnation.    . 

I.  True  religion  is  based  upon  knowledge.  Idolatry  and  superstition  are  com- 
patible with  ignorance,  and  are  favoured  by  ignorance.  Bat  the  religion  which  is  alone 
proper  to  man  and  acceptable  to  God  is  spiritual,  and  therefore  intelligent.  If  this  was 
the  case  with  the  Mosaic  economy,  how  much  more  so  with  the  Christian  I  In  the  Old 
Testament,  the  "  fear  of  the  Lord"  and  "  wisdom"  were  the  same;  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment we  are  taught  that  life  eternal  consists  in  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  through 
his  Son.  A  religion  of  f  jrmal  assent  or  observance,  a  religion  of  mere  feeling  and 
excitement,  is  vain.  Knowledge  alone  is  insufficient,  but  knowledge  is  nevertheless 
indispensable  to  true  Christianity. 

II.  Those'  specially  qualified  and  appointed  as  ministers  of  religion  are 
bound  to  diffuse  knowledge.  In  Israel  the  priests  and  the  prophets  seem  to 
have  been  both,  if  not  equally,  to  blame  for  the  irreligion  and  defection  of  the  people. 
The  priests  taught  religious- knowle'lge  by  symbol,  the  prophets  by  word  of  mouth. 
Both  orders  were  chargeable  with  negligence  of  these  sacred  and  honourable  duties. 
In  the  new  and  spiritual  kingdom  of  Christ,  there  are  no  officers  exactly  corresponding 
to  either  the  priests  or  the  prophets  of  the  Hebrews.  But  those  whose  ministry  it  is 
especially  to  teach,  and  all  who  by  reason  of  their  own  gifts  and  position  have  the 
o|iportunity  of  imparting  spiritual  knowledge,  are  bound  to  communicate  the  Word 
of  life. 

III.  The  bejeotion  of  knowledge  on  the  part  of  ant  involves  their  own 
BEjECTios  BT  God.  Lack  of  knowledge  is  itself  destruction.  It  is  the  starving!  of  the 
soul  through  defect  of  spiritual  nourishment.  "  They  die  without  wisdom,"  is  the 
mournful  lamentation  of  the  spectator  of  moral  delinquency  and  consequent  destruction. 
Israel  was  rejected  and  punished,  was  sent  into  a  long  captivity,  because  of  religious 
defection  and  hardened  impenitence.  And  it  is  a  law  of  the  Divine  government  that 
wilful  ignorance  should  entail  moral  deterioration.  The  plant  cannot  be  taken  into  the 
darkness  without  suffering ;  its  vitality  is  at  once  enfeebled,  and  gradually  diminishes 
until  it  dies.     It  is  so  with  the  soul ;  it  is  so  with  the  nation.     This  is  asolemn  warnin;; 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

to  those  who  love  moral  darkness  rather  than  light.    It  is  an  admonition  to  those  who 
have  the  light  that  they  walk  therein. 

IV.  The  heaviest  penaltt  falls  upon  those  thbouoh  whose  neglect  the 
PEOPLE  ARE  LEFT  IN  BIN.  Although  a  prophet  himself,  Hosea  upbraided  those  called 
to  the  prophetic  office  who  left  the  people  in  ignorance,  and  those  priests  who  encouraged 
and  led  the  people  in  sacrifices  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  Such  were  threatened  with 
the  Divine  displeasure,  and  assured  that  they  should  no  more  sustain  sacred  offices,  but 
should  be  deprived  of  all  that  made  them  honourable.  It  is  ever  the  case  that  abuse 
of  trust  is  worse  than  neglect  of  privileges,  and  that  those  who  not  only  wander  them- 
selves, but  lead  others  asEray,  as  their  guilt  ia  greater,  shall  experience  a  sorer  con- 
demnation.— T. 

Ver.  9. — "Like  people,  like  priest."  This  and  similar  passages  show  the  justice  and 
impartiality  with  which  the  inspired  prophets  fulfilled  the  office  to  which  they  were 
called.  Neither  the  fear  of  the  priest  nor  the  favour  of  the  people  was  allowed  to  act 
as  a  motive  to  deter  them  from  plain  speech  and  faithful  dealing  with  men's  souls. 

I.  There  is  action  and  reaction  between  the  people  and  their  religious 
LEADERS.  A  spiritual  and  vigorous  ministry  tells  favourably  upon  the  moral  and 
religious  habits  of  the  community,  and  a  formal  and  selfish  ministry  is  a  check  to  moral 
improvement  and  a  hindrance  to  national  purification.  The  importance  is  manifest  of 
securing  for  every  community  clergy  and  teachers  who  shall  raise  the  moral  tone  of 
society.  Yet  it  is  only  here  and  there  that  a  minister  of  religion  will  be  found  truly 
alive  to  God  in  the  midst  of  a  corrupt  and  worldly  society.  For  good  and  for  evil, 
teachers  and  taught,  leaders  and  led,  rise  and  fall  together.    "  Like  people,  like  priest." 

II.  The  people  and  tbeis  religious  leaders  are  alike  amenable  to  the 
kiohteous  rule  of  Gk>D.  If  the  watchman  be  faithful  amidst  general  corruption  and 
defection,  if  he  give  the  people  warning,  he  shall  deliver  his  soul.  But  if  he  neglect  to 
da  this,  and  the  people  perish,  shall  the  slothful  or  unfaithful  watchman  escape,  in  the  day 
of  inquisition  and  of  judgment  ?  No !  when  the  people  are  punished  for  their  ways  and 
rewarded  for  their  doings,  the  pastors  who  have  encouraged  the  sheep  in  their  wanderings, 
and  left  them  to  perish  in  the  wilderness,  shall  be  overtaken  by  the  penalties  attaching 
to  sinful  neglect  and  abuse  of  trust.  Their  official  position,  even  the  formal  fulfilment 
of  their  official  duties,  shall  not  exempt  them  from  the  fate  of  the  faithless.  "Like 
people,  like  priest." 

Application.  1.  Let  people  valae  a  faithful  ministry,  and  give  heed  to  wise  and 
righteous  warnings,  ere  it  be  too  late.  2.  Let  ministers  of  religion  beware  lest  they  fall 
into  negligent  habits,  and  perform  their  services  in  a  perfunctory  and  unspiritual 
manner,  and  thus  encourage  the  people  in  impiety. — ^T. 

Ver.  11. — Sensuality  m  ruin.  Whilst  the  language  of  this  prophet  regarding 
debauchery  is  sometimes  to  be  taken  figuratively,  we  have  no  option  but-to  read  this 
statement  in  its  obvious  and  literal  sense.  Evidently  the  worship  of  foieign  deities  in 
northern  Palestine  was  accompanied  by  licentious  rites  and  debasing  moral  habits.  In 
this  verse  is  set  forth  the  general  law  that  the  indulgence  of  the  auimal  nature  involves 
mental  and  moral  deterioration  and  destruction. 

I.  Sensualitt  affects  the  mind  through  the  body.  Whoredom  and  intoxication 
have  ever  been,  and  are  to-day,  the  two  great  "  sins  of  the  flesh."  Man's  bodily  nature 
is  so  constituted  that  these  practices  derange  the  nervous  system,  and  render  the 
sinner  mentally  incapable  of  many  of  the  serious  duties  of  life.  The  lunatic  asylums 
are  peopled  with  those  who  have  lost  their  mental  powers  through  addictedness  to  wine 
and  to  women.  And  where  the  evil  has  not  gone  to  lengths  so  great,  it  is  nevertheless 
sufficient  to  aflfect  the  powers  of  application,  the  memory,  and  the  judgment, 

II.  Sensuality  injukbs  the  mind  by  constantly  directing  it  to  means  op 
CABNAL  gratification.  The  man  who  is  besotted  with  the  love  of  pleasure,  and  is 
constantly  planning  new  means  of  animal  gratification  and  excitement,  has  little  energy 
to  spare  for  loftier  flights.  Even  his  intellectual  efforts  are  tainted  with  the  poison. 
If  he  be  a  man  of  genius,  the  trail  of  the  serpent  is  over  his  works. 

III.  Sensuality  ourses  the  mind  with  selfishness.  Whatever  makes  a  man 
selfish  takes  away  his  heart.    The  sensual  become  machines  bent  upon  the  vain  task 


CH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OP   HOSEA.  125 


if  gatisrying  the  bodily  appetites.  Those  addicted  to  vice  have  no  room  in  their  souls 
or  generous  impulses,  and  have  no  disposition  to  engage  in  works  of  philanthropy  and 
|)ublic  good. 

IV.  Sensualitt  indisposes  the  mind  to  beceive  the  enlightenino  and  (Juicken- 
[KO  influences  op  religion.  Christianity  is  a  rebuke  to  the  lover  of  pleasure ;  for  it 
Bummons  man  to  a  spiritual  life,  imposes  spiritual  service,  and  proffers  spiritual  joys. 
He  that  liveth  in  pleasure  is  dead  while  he  liveth.  Christ  calls  us  to  mortify  the  deeds 
Df  tlie  body.  His  religion  is,  indeed,  not  ascetic;  at  the  mairiage-feast  at  Cana  he 
fanctioried  wedded  love  and  the  proper  use  of  wine.  But  he  cannot  tolerate  a  sensual 
life,  and  has  declared  plainly  that  the  debauched  and  the  drunken  can  have  no  place 
in  his  kingdom.  For  such  have  permitted  Satan  to  take  away  their  heart,  and  they 
have  none  left  to  give  to  Christ. 

Application.  Let  the  young  be  warned  against  the  insidious  and  seductive  snares 
which  the  world  lays  for  their  downfall,  and  into  which  their  weak  and  sinful  nature 
is  too  apt  to  lead  them.  There  is  safety  only  by  the  cross,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  the 
Holy  Saviour.— T. 

Ver.  17. — Abandonment.  Ephraim  is  in  this  book  taken  as  the  representative  of  the 
northern  tribes,  because  it  was  the  most  numerous  and  powerful,  and  seems  to  have 
been  the  leader  in  the  apostasy  of  Israel.  The  principle  of  this  verse  is  one  which  we 
can  recognize  as  just,  but  one  upon  which  it  would  be  dangerous,  without  authority, 
for  erring  man  to  act. 

I.  The  case  desokibed  is  one  of  EESOLnrE  apostast  and  idolatet.  Ephraim 
is  represented,  as  not  only  idolatrous,  but  confirmed  in  idolatry.  Having  forsaken  the 
Lord,  Israel  has  gone  after  strange  gods,  and  is  joined  unto  them  as  in  an  adulterous 
connection.  There  are  those  who  not  only  fall  into  sin,  but  wallow  in  sin ;  who  are  not 
only  tempted,  but  delight  in  yielding  to  temptation. 

II.  The  human  abandonment  herb  counselled.  "  Let  him  alone."  Thi«  pre- 
sumes that  many  efforts  to  reform  the  sinful  have  been  made.  It  would  not,  indeed,  be 
lawful  for  man  to  give  such  a  direction  as  this ;  but  God  gives  it.  Why  ?  Doubtless 
that  the  sinner  may  be  left  to  his  own  devices,  to  reap  the  consequence  of  his  sinful 
ways.  Expostulations,  entreaties,  threats,  have  all  failed  ;  and  man  can  do  no  more. 
It  is  time  for  Uod  to  work ;  and  he  teaches  by  allowing  the  disobedient  to  eat  the  fruit 
of  their  conduct.  "  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard ; "  and  they  must  walk  therein  in 
order  to  learn  that  this  is  so. 

III.  Those  abandoned  by  men  are  not  abandoned  by  God.  Mercy  dictates  the 
treatment  here  counselled.  Ephraim  is  "  let  alone,"  in  order  that,  learning  by  bitter 
experience  the  evil  of  sin,  Ephraim  may  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  so  seek  and  find 
pardon  and  acceptance.  The  eye  of  God  is  upon  the  abandoned  sinner,  and  the  hand 
of  God  is  ready,  at  the  right  moment,  to  be  stretched  forth  to  deliver  and  to  save. 
For  such  the  mercy  of  the  Sovereign,  the  grace  of  the  Saviour,  may  yet  avail. — T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — A  corrupt  people  and  an  expostulating  Ood.  "  Hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord,  ye  children  of  Israel :  for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants  of 
the  land,  because  there  is  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land.  By 
swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,  and  stealing,  and  committing  adultery,  they' break 
out,  and  blood  toucheth  blood."  In  the  previous  chapters  the  prophet's  language  had 
been  highly  and  somewhat  perplexingly  symbolical.  It  is  so  much  so  in  the  short 
chapter  pieccding  this,  that  we  pass  it  by.  Here  he  begins  to  speak  more  plainly,  and 
in  sententious  utterances.  From  the  first  to  the  nineteenth  verses  of  this  chapter,  ho 
reproves  both  the  people  and  the  priest  for  tlieir  sins  during  the  eleven  years'  interregnum 
that  followed  Jeroboam's  death.  He  makes  no  mention,  therefore,  either  of  the  king 
or  his  family.  The  subject  of  these  two  verses  is — A  corrupt  people  and  an  expostulating 
Ood. 

I.  A  oobrupt  people.  The  people  are  "the  children  of  Israel,"  or  the  ten  tribes 
who  were  living  during  the  terrible  period  of  anarchy  which  followed  on  the  death 
of  Jeroboam  II.  Their  depravity  is  here  represented  both  in  a  negative  and  a  positive 
form.  1.  Negatively.  "  Because  there  is  no  truth,  nor  mercy,  nor  knowledge  of  God 
in  the  land."     These  are  the  great  fontal  virtues  in  the  imiverse ;  and  where  they  are 


12«  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

not,  there  Is  a  moral  abjectness  of  the  most  terrible  description.  "  No  truth  I "  A 
people  without  reality,  not  only  living  in  fictions,  but  their  very  life  a  lie.  "  Nor 
mercy  1"  No  acts  of  beneficence  performed,  and  the  very  spirit  of  kindliness  extinct. 
All  tenderness  and  genial  feeling  burnt  out.  "  Nor  knowledge  of  God  1 "  The 
greatest,  the  holiest,  and  the  most  beneficent  Being  in  the  universe  utterly  ignored. 
2.  Potftivdy.  The  absence  of  these  great  virtues  gives  rise  to  tremendous  crimes. 
(1)  There  is  profanity,  "  By  swearing."  Where  God  is  ignored,  all  reverence  is  gone ; 
the  sentiments  of  sacredness  can  never  exist  in  a  heart  "  without  God."  (2)  There 
ia/alsehood.  "  And  lying."  God  is  the  foundation  of  all  realities ;  and  estrangement 
Trom  him  is  a  universe  of  lies.  (3)  There  is  cruelty.  "  Killing."  What  is  life  to 
a  man  who  has  no  truth,  or  mercy,  or  knowledge  of  God?  It  is  a  cheap  and  worthless 
thing ;  and  the  work  of  the  assassin  and  the  warrior  becomes  natural  to  him.  (4) 
There  is  dishonesty.  "  And  stealing."  Bapine  and  plunder  become  rife :  he  who 
respects  not  the  claims  of  God  will  have  but  little  respect  for  the  claims  of  man. 
(5)  There  IB  incontinence.  "  Committing  adultery."  Domestic  sanctities  invaded  and 
the  Divine  institution  of  marriage  outraged.  (6)  There  is  murder.  "  Blood  toucheth 
blood."  An  expression  that  means  a  profusion  of  slaughter,  as  in  the  case  of  massacres, 
insurrections,  and  national  wars.  "  Blood  toucheth  blood ; "  the  streams  of  crimson 
gore  run  from  the  slain  and  mingle  together.  "  It  was  about  this  time  that  there  was 
so  much  blood  shed  in  grasping  at  the  crown :  Shallum  slew  Zechariah,  and  Menahem 
slew  Sballum ;  Pekah  slew  Pekabiah,  and  Hosbea  slew  Pekah ;  and  the  like  bloody 
work  it  is  likely  there  was  among  other  contenders,  so  that  the  land  was  polluted  with 
blood  (Pb.  cvi.  38) ;  it  was  filled  with  blood  from  one  end  to  the  other  (2  Kings  xv.  16)." 
Such  are  the  corrupt  people  here  portrayed.  Alas,  that  there  should  be  so  much  in 
modem  England  like  unto  this  ghastly  and  revolting  picture  I 

II.  An  exfostulatino  God.  "  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  children  of  Israel :  for 
the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  Of  all  controversies 
this  is  the  most  awful.  A  controversy  between  men  and  men,  between  individuals, 
Churches,  nations,  is  sometimes  very  awful,  but  nothing  approaching  to  this.  1.  It  is 
A  Just  controversy.  Many  of  men's  controversies  are  most  unrighteous,  but  this  is  just. 
Has  not  the  great  Ruler  of  the  universe  a  right  to  contend  against  profanity,  'alsehood, 
cruelty, etc.?  They  are  repugnant  to  his  nature;  they  are  detrimental  to  the  interests 
of  his  creation.  2.  It  is  a  continuous  controversy.  It  began  with  the  first  sin,  has 
continued -through  all  preceding  ages,  and  is  on  now  as  strong  as  ever.  3.  It  is  an 
unequal  controversy.  What  are  all  human  intellects  to  his?  Sparks  to  the  sun. 
The  sinner  has  no  argument  to  put  before  him.  He  cannot  deny  his  sins ;  they  are  too 
palpable  and  patent.  He  cannot  plead  accidents,  for  sin  has  been  the  law  of  his  life. 
He  cannot  plead  compulsion,  for  he  is  free.  He  cannot  plead  some  merit  as  a  set-off, 
for  he  has  none.  No,  in  this  controversy  he  must  be  crushed.  "  Julian  strove  a  great 
while  against  the  Lord,  but  at  length  he  was  forced  to  acknowledge,  with  his  blood 
sast  up  in  the  air, '  Vicisti  QaliloBe,  viciui  I '  '  Thou  hast  conquered,  0  Galilean,  tiiou 
hast  conquered  I*" 

Conclusion.  Is  this  controversy  going  on  with  yon  ?  It  is  held  in  the  court  of 
conscience,  and  you  must  know  of  its  existence  and  character. — D.  T. 

Vers.  3— 5.— .4  Urrible  deprivation.  "  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,  and  every  one 
that  dwelleth  therein  shall  languish,  with  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  with  the  fowls 
of  heaven ;  yea,  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken  away.  Yet  let  no  man  strive, 
nor  reprove  another :  for  thy  people  are  as  they  that  strive  with  the  priest.  Therefore' 
shalt  thou  fall  in  the  day,  and  the  prophet  also  shall  fall  with  thee  in  the  night,  and 
I  will  destroy  thy  mother."  These  words  lead  us  to  consider  a  lamentable  deprivation 
— A  deprivation  that  comes  upon  the  people  in  consequence  of  their  heinous  iniquities. 
Two  remarks  are  suggested  concerning  this  deprivation. 

L  It  is  a  deprivation  both  of  material  and  bpibitual  good.  1.  Of  material  good. 
(1)  A  deprivation  of  healtk,  "  Every  one  that  dwelleth  therein  shall  languish."  The 
physical  frame  loses  its  wonted  elasticity  and  vigour,  and  succumbs  to  decay  and 
depression.  "  Languish  "  like  a  dying  man  on  his  couch.  Sin  is  inimical  to  the  bodily 
health  and  vigour  of  men  and  nations;  it  insidiously  saps  the  constitution.  (2)  A 
deprivation  of  the  meant  </  subsistence.    "  The  beasta  of  the  ficdd,  and  with  the  fowls 


en.  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  127 

of  heaven ;  yea,  the  fishes  of  the  sea  also  shall  be  taken  away.*"  Literallj',  this  refers 
to  one  of  those  droughts  that  occasionally  occur  in  the  East,  and  is  ever  one  of  the 
greatest  calamities.  What  a  dependent  creature  man  is !  The  beasts  of  the  field, 
the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea  can  do  better  without  him,  but  he  cannot 
do  without  them.  How  soon  the  Eternal  can  destroy  these  means  of  his  subsistence ! 
One  hot  blast  of  pestilential  air  could  do  the  whole.  2.  Of  spiritttdl  good.  "  Let  no 
man  strive,  nor  reprove  another :  for  thy  people  are  as  they  that  strive  with  the  priest." 
The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  their  presumptuous  guilt  was  as  great  as  that  of  one  who 
refused  to  obey  the  priest  when  giving  judgment  in  the  Name  of  Jehovahj  and  who, 
according  to  law,  for  that  cause  was  to  be  put  to  death  (Deut.  xvii.  12).  One  of  the 
greatest  spiritual  blessings  of  mankind  is  the  strife  and  reproof  of  godly  men.  The 
expostulations  and  admonitions  of  Christly  friends,  parents,  teachers.  What  on  earth 
is  more  valuable ;  is  so  essential  as  these  ?  Yet  these  are  to  be  taken  away.  "  Let  no 
man  strive,  nor  reprove  another."  The  time  comes  with  the  sinner  when  God  says, 
"  My  Spirit  shall  no  more  strive  with  thee ;  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone." 
Men  have  become  so  dog-like  in  nature  that  holy  things  are  not  to  be  presented  to 
them ;  so  swinish  that  you  are  to  cast  before  them  no  more  pearls  (Matt.  vii.  6). 

II.  It  is  a  deprivation  leading  to  a  tebbible  doom.  1.  The  destruction  of  priests 
and  people.  "  Therefore  shalt  thou  fall  in  the  day,  and  the  prophet  also  shall  &11  with 
thee  in  the  night."  The  meaning  is,  that  no  time,  night  or  day,  shall  be  free  from  the 
slaughter,  both  of  the  people  and  the  priests.  This  was  literally  true  of  the  ten  tribes 
at  this  time.  And  it  is  true  in  a  more  general  and  universal  sense.  God's  law  is,  that 
"  evil  shall  slay  the  wicked ;  "  and  it  is  always  slaying  them,  whether  they  be  priests 
or  people — the  laity  or  the  clergy.  If  they  are  not  true  to  Go  J,  day  and  night,  they 
are  being  slain.  2.  The  destruction  of  the  sooial  state.  "And  I  will  destroy  thy 
mother."  Who  was  the  mother  ?  The  Israelitish  state.  And  it  was  destroyed. 
England  is  our  mother,  and  oar  mother  will  be  destroyed  unless  we  banish  sin  from  our 
midst."— D.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Religious  ignorance.  "  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge : 
because  thou  hast  rejected  knowleilge,  1  will  also  reject  thee,  that  thou  shalt  be  no 
priest  to  me :  seeing  thou  hast  forgotten  the  Law  of  thy  God,  I  wUl  also  forget  thy 
children."    These  words  suggest  three  things  in  relation  to  religious  ignorance. 

I.  It  is  destruotivb.  "  My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Ignorance 
is  not  the  mother  of  devotion,  it  is  the  mother  of  destruction.  1.  What  does  it 
destroy  ?  The  growth  of  the  soul  in  power,  beauty,  and  fruitfulness.  2.  How  does 
it  destroy  ?  How  can  the  lack  of  a  thing  destroy  ?  How  can  nothing  do  mischief  1 
The  lack  of  heat  and  moisture  will  kill  the  vegetable  kingdom ;  the  lack  of  air  will 
cause  the  extinction  of  all  animal  life.  The  soul  without  knowledge  of  God  is  like 
a  plant  without  heat  and  moisture ;  an  animal  without  the  salubrious  breeze. 

II.  It  is  wilful.  "Because  thou  hast  rejected  knowledge."  There  is  no  culpability 
in  a  man  being  ignorant  of  some  things.  He  may  not  have  the  means,  the  time,  or 
the  faculty  for  the  particular  attainment.  Not  so  with  the  knowledge  of  God;  it 
comes  to  him  whether  he  will  or  not.  It  comes  to  him  in  the  objects  of  nature ; 
it  comes  to  him  in  the  necessary  deductions  of  his  reason;  it  comes  to  him  in  the 
intuitions  of  his  moral  nature.  Besidts,  in  some  cases,  as  with  the  Isiaeiites,  it  comes 
to  man  by  special  revelation.  He  rejects  it.  Ignorance  of  God  is  ever  more  a  criminal 
ignorance.  "  For  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  cleai  ly 
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  God 
head ;  so  that  they  are  without  excuse." 

IIL  It  is  God-offending.  "I  wiU  also  reject  thee.''  It  is  not  unnatural  or 
unphilosophic  to  suppose  that  the  condition  of  the  man  ignoring  his  existence  must  bu 
to  the  last  degree  offensive  to  him.  Hence  he  deals  out  retribution.  1.  To  themselves. 
"  I  wiU  also  reject  thee,"  etc.  2.  To  their  children.  "  I  will  also  forget  thy  children." 
It  is  a  Divine  law  springing  from  the  constitution  of  society,  that  the  iniquities  of  the 
fathers  shall  be  visited  on  their  children.  Parents  cannot  do  wrong  without  injurino 
their  offspring. — D.  T. 

Ver.  7. — Secular  prosperity.    "  As  they  were  increased,  so  they  sinned  against  me . 


128  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSE  A.  [«.  iv.  1— 19. 

therefore  will  I  change  their  glory  into  shame."  The  "  increase "  referred  to  in  the 
text  is  in  all  probability  an  increase  in  the  number  of  the  population.  Israel  had 
become  a  numerous  people.  But  it  might  also  refer  to  their  increase  in  wealth ;  this 
is  the  application  that  we  shall  make  of  it,  and  notice  three  points. 

I.  Secular  prosperity  attained  by  the  wicked.  They  were  an  idolatrous  and 
rebellious  people,  yet  they  had  grown  rich.  Tlieir  lands  brought  forth  plentifully,  and 
their  merchandise  was  prosperous.  1.  This  is  a  common  fact.  Wicked  men,  in  all  ages 
from  the  beginning,  have  not  only  been  successful  in  the  accumulation  of  wealth,  but 
as  a  rule  have  been  more  prosperous  than  their  contemporaries.  Two  things  may 
account  for  this  fact.  (1)  Their  secular  earnestness.  Material  good  is  the  one  thing 
that  fills  and  fires  an  unregenerate  soul,  and  for  this  he  labours  with  might  and  main. 
The  more  earnest  a  man  is  in  any  pursuit  (his  aptitudes  beino;  equal),  the  more  success- 
ful. The  mere  worldly  man  is  "  fervent "  in  business.  (2)  Their  moral  unscri^ulous- 
ness.  They  have  no  high  sense  of  honour,  no  inviolable  rules  of  right,  no  swaying 
sense  of  moral  responsibilities.  Hence  they  will  not  reject  the  fraudulent  and  the  false 
if  they  will  serve  them  in  their  course.  Fraud  and  falsehood  are  perhaps  the  chief 
factors  in  fortune-making.  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  wicked  become  rich.  2.  This 
is  a  trying  fact.  Men  of  incorruptible  truth,  honesty,  and  high  devotion  have  in  all 
ages  been  baffled  and  distressed  by  this  fact.  "Wherefore  do  the  wicked  prosper?" 
This  has  been  their  puzzle. 

II.  Seculab  prosperity  abused  bt  the  wicked,  "  As  they  were  increased,  lo  they 
sinned  against  me.'  Wealth  has  a  wonderful  power  either  for  good  or  ill.  With  it 
the  truly  generous  and  holy  can  widen  the  empire  of  spiritual  intelligence  and  advance 
the  cause  of  human  happiness ;  and  by  it  the  wicked  can  increase  the  corruption  and 
swell  the  tide  of  human  depravity.  In  the  hands  of  the  wicked  wealth  can :  1.  Promote 
injustice.  Wealth  gives  a  man  power  to  baffle  the  cause  of  justice,  trample  on  human 
rights,  and  oppress  the  poor  and  the  innocent.  Wealth  fattens  the  despotic  in  human 
nature,  2,  Promote  sensualiti/.  It  provides  means  to  inflame  the  low  passions  of 
human  nature,  and  to  pamper  the  brutal  appetites.  It  tends  to  bury  the  soul  in  the 
warm  and  sparkling  stream  of  animal  passions,  3.  Promote  practical  atheism.  The 
man  who  has  an  abundance  of  the  things  of  this  life,  and  who  has  not  the  fear  of  God 
in  his  heart,  is  sure  to  sink  into  an  utter  forgetrulness  of  the  Author  of  all  good. 
Thus,  then,  "as  they  were  increased,  so  they  sinned  against  me."  A  terrible 
fact  this. 

III.  Secular  prospebitt  ruinous  to  the  wicked.  "  Therefore  will  I  change  their 
glory  into  shame."  I  will  strip  them  of  all  they  now  glory  in,  all  their  worldly  pros- 
jierity,  and  give  them  shame  instead,  I  will  quench  all  the  lights  which  they  have 
Idndled,  and  which  glare  around  them,  and  there  shall  be  dMiki.ess.  I  will  bring  them 
iuto  wretchedness  and  contempt.  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  ol 
thoe."  "  1  have  seen  the  wicked  in  great  power,  and  spreading  himself  like  a  grten 
bay  tree.  Tet  he  passed  away,  and,  lo,  he  was  not :  yea,  I  sought  him,  but  he  could  not 
be  found." 

"  To-day  he  puts  forth 
The  tender  leaves  of  hopes,  to-morrow  blossoms, 
And  bears  his  blushing  honours  thick  upon  him : 
The  third  day  comes  a  frost,  a  killing  frnst : 
And, — when  he  thinks,  p;ood  easy  man,  full  soielj 
His  greatness  is  a-ripeniug, — nips  his  root, 
And  then  be  falls,  as  I  do?* 

(Shskefpeare.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  B.—Feedif^  on  tin.  "  They  eat  up  the  sin  of  my  people,  and  they  set  their 
heart  on  their  iniquity."  Dr,  Henderson  renders  these  words,  "  They  devour  the  sin 
offering  of  my  people.  "  The  priests  greedily  devoured  what  the  people  brought  for 
the  expiation  of  their  sing;  and  instead  of  endeavouring  to  put  a  stop  to  abounding 
iniquity,  only  wished  it  to  inoiease,  in  order  that  they  might  prufit  by  the  multitude  of 
the  victims  presented  for  sacrifice."  The  priests  lived  upon  the  sacrificial  meat  (see 
L^,  vi.  26),  and  the  more  they  had  of  this  the  luore  they  were  pleased.    Bat  ^bis 


OH.  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  129 

increased  with  the  increase  of  the  sins  of  the  people :  the  more  the  people  dnned,  the 
more  sin  offerings ;  and  the  more  sin  offerings,  the  more  priestly  banquets.  So  they 
"  set  their  heart  on  their  iniquity."  That  is,  they  longed  for  its  increase ;  they  had  an 
interest  in  the  growth  of  sin  in  the  country,  so  that  in  truth,  without  figure,  they  feed 
upon  the  sin  of  the  people,  "  The  more  sins,"  says  an  old  expositor, "  the  more  sacrbSce, 
and  therefore  they  cared  not  how  much  sin  people  were  guilty  of.  Instead  of  warning 
the  people  against  sin  from  the  consideration  of  the  sacrifices,  which  showed  them 
what  an  offence  sin  was  to  God,  since  it  added  such  an  expiation,  they  emboldened  and 
encouraged  the  people  to  sin,  since  an  atonement  might  he  made  at  so  small  an  expense. 
Thus  they  glutted  themselves  upon  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  helped  to  keep  up  that 
which  they  should  have  beaten  down."  Are  there  no  men  now  that  feed  and  feast  on 
the  sins  of  the  people?    We  think  such  men  can  be  found. 

L  There  are  such  men  in  the  ecclesiastical  world.  There  is  a  class  of  ecclesi- 
astics who  live  in  palaces,  fare  sumptuously  every  day,  and  roll  in  chariots  of  opulence, 
who  profess  to  be  the  chief  ministers  of  him  who  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  took 
upon  himself  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  who,  when  on  earth,  had  nowhere  to  lay  his 
head.  What  is  it  that  sustains  these  men,  keeps  up  the  huge  imposture  ?  Simply  the 
"  sin  of  the  people."  Their  credulity,  their  ignorance,  their  servility,  their  superstition. 
Let  these  sins  die  out,  and  these  gorgeous  and  plethoric  hierarchs  will  have  to  doff 
their  splendour,  live  on  humble  fare,  and  work  as  honest  men  or  starve.  A  story  is 
related  of  a  prelate  in  Charles  V.'s  time,  who  invited  his  friends  to  his  house,  and  pre- 
pared a  hospitable  banquet  of  which  they  would  not  partake.  "  What!"  said  he,  "  will 
you  not  eat  of  dainties  that  are  bought  at  so  dear  a  rate?  The  meat  that  I  have 
prepared  for  you  is  like  to  cost  me  the  pains  of  hell."  The  prelate  felt  that  he  was 
a  priestly  impostor,  misrepresenting  the  Man  of  sorrows,  and  shamefully  neglecting 
his  duty. 

II.  There  are  bcoh  men  in  the  commercial  world.  There  are  men  who  have 
vested  interest  in  the  sinjof  Mifempcraraee — brewers,  distillers,  and  traffickers  in  alcoholic 
drinks.  They  live  on  the  sin  of  intemperance,  and  raise  themselves  in  hot  antagonism 
against  any  effort  to  weaken  its  power  or  to  limit  its  influence.  There  are  men  who 
have  vested  interest  in  the  sin  of  war.  The  sin  of  war  I  The  phrase  is  infinitely  too 
weak.  War  comprises  all  sins.  It  is  the  totality  of  all  abominations.  Tet  the  manu- 
facturers of  armouries  and  war-ships,  and  traders  in  the  implements  and  equipages  of 
fighting  men,  live  on  this  sin.  They  hail  every  intimation  of  war.  The  first  groan  of 
the  infernal  lion  falls  as  music  on  their  greedy  ears. 

III.  There  are  such  men  in  the  professional  world.  What  would  the  lawyer 
do  without  chicaneries,  breaches  of  contract,  thefts,  violences,  seductions,  and  all  kinds  uf 
social  immoralities  and  crimes  ?  What  would  popular  journalists  do  were  there  no 
scandals,  no  tragedies,  no  crime,  no  fraudulent  advertisements?  What  would  become 
of  the  sensational  novelist  if  there  wag  no  sinful  love  in  the  people  for  the  horrible  and 
the  prurient  ? 

Conclusion.  Alas  I  that  men  are  sinners,  but  alas  I  a  thousand  times  more,  that 
men  should  feed  on  sint  Herein  is  the  great  obstruction  to  moral  reformations. 
Destroy  a  popular  sin,  and  you  destroy  the  livelihood  of  hundreds,  and  the  pomp 
and  splendour  of  many.  How  shall  sin  be  put  away  from  the  world  ?  Who  shall 
destroy  this  work  of  the  devil?    Thank  God,  we  have  the  answer  I — D.  T, 

Ver.  9. — The  reciprocal  influence  of  priesthood  and  people,  "  There  shall  be,  like 
people,  like  priest."  Though  perhaps  the  translation  of  Keil  and  Delitzsch — "  There- 
fore it  will  happen  as  to  the  people,  so  to  the  priest " — may  give  the  literal  idea,  I  take 
the  words  as  they  stand,  which  have  become  a  proverb,  "  Like  people,  like  priest." 
Instead  of  taking  up  the  primary  idea  of  the  words,  viz.  that  the  rank  and  wealth  of 
the  priests  would  not  exempt  them  from  sharing  the  same  fate  as  the  rest  of  the  nation, 
I  would  put  into  prominence  for  a  moment  the  idea  of  the  reciprocal  influence  of  priest- 
hood and  people.     And  I  make  two  general  remarks  on  this  idea. 

I.  There  is  sometimes  a  DisaRAcsFUL  reciprocal  influbnob.  1,  It  is  a  disgrace 
to  a  true  priest  to  become  like  the  people.  A  true  priest — that  is,  a  God-made  priest^ 
is  a  man  above  the  average  in  brain,  heart,  being,  culture,  intelligence,  and  virtue.  He 
who  is  not  above  the  average  is  no  priest;  he  is  out  of  his  pkce.  A  priest  it »  man  to 

H08EA.  K 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  iv.  1—19. 

mould,  not  to  be  mouWed ;  to  control,  not  to  cringe ;  to  lead,  not  to  be  led.  Hia 
thoughts  should  sway  the  thoughts  of  the  peo|ile,  and  his  character  should  command 
their  reverence.  Sometimes,  nay,  too  frequently,  you  see  priests  become  Kite  the 
people — mean,  sordid,  grovelling.  'I'here  are  men  who  call  themselves  priests  that 
are  the  mere  creatures  of  the  people.  The  true  priest  is  the  prince  of  the  people ; 
his  ministry  is  a  "  royal  priesthood."  2.  It  is  a  disgrace  to  a  people  to  becom : 
like  a  bad  priest.  Th-re  are  priests  whose  natures  are  lean,  whose  oapjicities  are 
feeble,  whose  religion  is  sensuous,  whose  sympatliies  are  exclusive,  whose  opinions 
are  stereotyped,  wiiose  spirit  is  intolerant.  Shame  on  the  people  that  allow  them- 
selves to  become  like  such  a  priest!  And  yet  the  transfoimation  is  pretty  general. 
How  often  one  meets  in  a  social  circle  with  those  who  represent  the  miserable  spirit 
of  their  little  priest ! 

II.  Thebe  is  sometimks  an  HONotruABLE  REciPBooAL  INFLUENCE.  1.  It  is  honour- 
able when  people  become  like  a  true  priest.  When  they  catch  his  broad  spirit,  cherish 
his  soul-quickening  thought,  and  grasp  his  lofty  aims,  when  ihey  feel  one  with  him 
in  spiritual  interests  and  Christly  jmrsuits.  2.  It  is  honourable  to  the  true  priest 
when  he  has  succeeded  in  making  the  people  like  him.  He  may  well  feel  a  devout 
exultation  as  he  moves  amongst  them  that  their  moral  hearts  beat  in  unison  with  his, 
that  their  lives  are  set  to  the  same  key-note,  that  they  are  of  one  mind  and  one  heart 
in  relation  to  the  grand  purpose  of  life. 

"  I  venerate  tlie  man  wliose  heart  ia  warm, 
Whose  hands  are  pure,  whose  doctrine  and  whose  life 
Coincident,  exhibit  lucid  proof 
Tliat  he  is  honest  in  the  sacred  cause. 
To  such  I  render  more  than  mere  respect, 
Whose  actions  say  that  they  respect  themgelvei." 

(Oowper.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  n,—An  unholy  alJianee  and  a  righteous  abandonment.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to 
idols :  let  him  alone."  "  Ephraim,"  the  most  powerlul  of  the  ten  tribes,  is  frequently 
used  by  the  prophets  for  Israel.     Notice  briefly  two  things. 

J.  An  unholy  ALLIANCE.  "Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols,"  is  welded  to  them;  his 
heart  is  rooted  iu  them.  What  is  an  idol  ?  Carved  wood,  stone,  or  moulded  metal, 
living  creatures,  flowing  streams,  or  heavenly  orbs?  No.  These  are  mere  representa- 
tions of  idols.  The  idol  of  a  man  is  the  object  supremdy  loved,  whatever  that  object 
may  be.  Gold,  fame,  beauty,  power,  pleasure, — whatever  ihe  lieartis  set  on,  that  is  the 
idol.  Here  in  our  England  we  condemn  pdlyiheism,  but  we  abound  with  polytheists. 
Men  have  as  many  idols  here  as  they  have  objects  of  supreme  love,  and  they  are  many, 
'i'housands  of  Englishmen  are  joined  to  their  idols ;  they  are  chained  to  them  by  the 
ties  of  their  strongest  loves  and  habits. 

II-  A  BiOHTBOUS  ABANDONMENT.  "  Let  him  alone."  It  is  a  hopeless  case.  Waste 
no  more  time  in  argument  and  moral  appliances.  The  times  comes  with  every  sinner 
when  he  is  abandoned,  his  character  is  stereotyped,  and  his  doom  is  settled.  God  says 
to  providence,  "Let  him  alone" — do  not  disturb  him;  to  conscience,  "Let  him 
alone;"  to  the  Spirit,  "  Let  him  alone."  When  God  abandons  the  soul,  all  is  over; 
when  the  fountain  refuses  to  pour  forth  its  waters,  the  stream  dries  up;  when  the 
sun  refuses  to  travel  up  the  horizon,  all  nature  will  die. — D.  T. 

Ver.  19. — Setrihutive justice.  "The  wind  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  wings,  and 
they  shall  be  ashamed  because  of  their  sacrifices."  The  simple  meaning  of  this  is 
Israel  shall  be  borne  away  from  her  land,  suddenly  and  violently,  as  by  the  winds 
of  heaven.  There  is  retributive  justice  in  the  universe.  Men  are  slow  to  discern  it, 
and  it  often  moves  so  sileiitly  and  secretly  as  to  elude  the  dim  vision  of  the  wicked! 
Still  it  is  in  existence,  and  it  works  like  the  thunderstorm ;  it  may  sleep  silently  in 
the  heavens  for  some  time,  but  break  into  tempest  and  fury  it  must,  sooner  or  later. 
The  verse  leads  us  to  notice  two  things  in  relation  to  this  retributive  justice. 

L  Its  embl*!!.     It  ia  her*  compared  to  the  "  wind."     Why  is  it  Uke  "  wind  "  ? 


CH,  IV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  Ul 

1.  In  its  agitation.  Wind  is  •  disturbance  or  an  agitation  of  the  atmosphere.  The 
average  condition  of  the  air  is  silence  and  serenity.  The  normal  condition  of  Dirine 
government  is  quiet.  It  has  no  tempest  where  there  is  not  wickedness.  The  growing 
heat  of  sin  so  disturbs  it  that  it  often  breaks  into  an  all-devastating  fury.  It  is 
like  "wind."  2.  In  its  violence.  There  is  often  a  mighty  power  in  the  wind.  It 
sometimes  "  rends  the  mountains  and  breaks  in  pieces  the  rocks."  It  has  oveitumed 
the  "mountains  by  the  roots;"  it  has  "broken  the  cedars,  even  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon,  and  sliaken  the  wilderness."  Cambyses  being  once  in  the  wilderness  with 
the  soldiers,  a  strong  and  violent  wind  broke  and  buried  thousands  of  them  in  the 
sand.  Who  can  stand  before  retributive  justice  when  it  comes  forth  in  its  power  ? 
"  The  wind  hath  bound  her  up  in  her  wings."  Avenging  justice  binds  its  victim 
up,  and  carries  it  away — whether  it  be  an  individual,  a  nation,  or  a  world — as  tempests 
carry  off  the  chaff. 

II.  Its  effect.  "  And  they  shall  be  ashamed  because  of  their  sacrifices.''  Shame 
— moral  shame,  the  primary  element  in  the  soul's  hell — ever  comes  to  the  victim  of 
retributive  justice.  1.  There  is  the  shame  of  disappointment.  All  plans  broken,  all 
purposes  thwarted,  all  hopes  destroyed.  "  Let  me  not  be  ashamed  of  ray  hope,"  said 
David.  2.  'J  here  is  the  shame  of  exposure.  The  wicked  always  live  in  masquerade ; 
they  always  appear  to  be  what  they  are  not;  they  are  necessarily  hypocrites. 
Betributive  justice  takes  otf  the  mask  and  lays  bare  their  hearts  in  all  their  revolting 
foulness.  3.  There  is  the  shame  of  remorse.  This  is  the  most  burning  shame  of 
all.  It  sends  its  fires  down  into  the  very  centre  of  man's  being,  and  sets  all  the  moral 
nerves  aflame. 

Conclusion.  Take  warning,  ye  wicked  sons  of  men ;  let  not  the  present  stillness  of 
)  our  atmosphere  deceive  you ;  your  sins  are  generating  a  heat  that  must  sooner  or  later 
BO  disturb  the  elements  about  you,  aa  to  bring  on  you  ruin  and  fill  you  with  "  gbam* 
and  confusion  of  face." 

**  A  year  has  ended.    Let  the  good  man  pnuse^ 
And  think,  for  he  can  think,  of  all  its  crime 
And  toil  and  suifering.    Nature  has  her  laws 
That  wUl  not  brook  infringement ;  in  all  time. 
All  circurastances,  all  states,  in  every  cUiuei 
6be  holds  aloft  the  same  avenging  sword ; 

And,  sitting  on  her  boundless  throne  sublime, 
Tlie  vials  of  her  wrath,  with  justice  stored, 
Shall,  in  her  own  good  hour,  on  all  tbaf  s  ill  be  poured.** 

(James  Gates  PerolTal) 

D.T. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  Lord's  controversy.  God  had  a  controversy  with  the  inhabitants 
of  ihe  land.  The  essential  part  of  the  indictment  was  that  they  had  forsaken  him. 
"  There  is  no  knowledge  of  God  in  the  land."    Hence — 

I.  A  FBAEFUii  ovEBFLOWiNa  OF  IMMOBALITY.  1.  With  the  knowledge  of  God  there 
liad  departed  also  "  truth  and  mercy  "  (ver.  1).  "  Truth  "  and  "  mercy,"  or  "  kindness," 
are  root-principles  of  morals.  The  subversion  of  them  is  the  subversion  of  morality  in 
its  foundations.  These  foundation-virtues,  however,  had  been  subverted  in  Israel. 
Morality  lias  never  proved  able  to  sustain  itself  in  divorce  from  religion.  The  bond 
which  binds  man  to  God  is  also  the  bond  wiiich  binds  him  to  the  practice  of  the  moral 
virtues.  To  cut  this  bond  is  to  set  him  adrift.  He  who  ignores  the  primal  obligation— 
that  to  his  Maker — is  not  likely  to  have  much  regard  for  any  other.  2.  The  result  was 
a  fearful  overspreading  of  corruption.  "  By  swearing,  and  lying,  and  killing,"  etc. 
(ver.  2).  Ungodliness  ran  its  course  unchecked.  It  brought  forth  its  natural  fruits  of 
rapine,  dishonesty,  licentiousness,  profanity,  riotousness,  and  murder.  Society  seemed 
dissolving.  Irreligion  is  the  foe,  not  only  of  private  morality,  but  of  social  order.  It 
tends  to  division,  to  anarchy,  to  general  disregard  of  law  and  rights. 

II.  Severe  judgments  on  the  land.  "  Therefore  shall  the  land  mourn,"  etc. 
(ver.  3).  Man's  sin,  in  its  effects,  is  not  confined  to  himself  or  to  his  kind.  It  over- 
flows on  the  animate  and  the  inanimate  creation.  1.  The  ground  was  cursed  at  fiirst 
for  man's  sake  (Gen.  iii.  17).    2.  It  is  degraded  In  being  compelled  to  sustain  the 


132  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  it.  1— 1&. 


sinner,  and  to  serve  as  tlie  instrument  of  his  vices,  3.  It  is  \  isited  on  his  account  with 
plagues,  droughts,  and  famines  (Amos  iv.  6—12).  4.  It  is  despoiled  and  down-trodden, 
and  Buffers  i'rom  his  neglect,  his  misuse,  and  his  ruthless  devastations.  5.  The  animal 
creation  shares  in  these  calamities,  besides  suffering  much  directly  from  man's  cruel 
treatment.  Thus  in  many  ways  the  creature  is  made  subject  to  vanity  (Bom.  viii. 
19 — 22).     The  consideration  should  heighten  our  sense  of  sin's  enormity. 

IIL  Appkoaching  ruin  to  the  nation.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  A  nation  in  the  moral  state 
above  described  cannot  long  escape  punishment.  It  "  is  nigh  unto  cursing  "  (Heb.  vi.  8). 
Its  doom  hastens  on  apace.  "  Wheresoever  the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be 
gathered  together  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  28).  The  judgment  which  would  fall  on  Israel  would 
be  :  1.  Sm-e.  "  Yet  let  no  man  strive,  nor  reprove  another,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  The  thing 
fur  the  people  to  do  was,  not  to  strive  with  one  another,  but  to  cease  to  strive  with 
God.  But  this  was  a  remedy  not  likely  to  be  adopted.  A  headstrong,  presumptuous, 
eontumaoioui  spirit  had  got  possession  of  them  j  they  were  "  as  they  that  strive  with 
the  priest" — a  proverbial  expression  for  the  highest  contumacy  (cf.  Deut.  xvii.  12).  It 
is  useless  for  the  wicked  to  reprove,  rebulse,  or  reproach  one  another  for  the  miseries 
which  are  overtaking  them  while  repentance  toward  God  stands  postponed.  That  is 
the  first  and  great  necessity.  2.  Sudden.  "Therefore  shalt  thou  fell  in  the  day,"  etc. 
(ver.  5).  People  and-  prophet  would  fall  continuously,  night  and  day,  till  all  were 
destroyed.  But  there  seems  allusion  also  to  the  swiftness  with  which  the  calamity 
would  descend.  The  "day  "  of  their  prosperity  (ch.  ii.  11)  would  suddenly  terminate ; 
a  "night"  of  terrible  blackness  would  succeed.  This  night  would  be  a  specially  dark 
one  for  the  "  prophet " — he  who  had  claimed  to  be  a  "  seer."  His  predictions  discredited, 
his  repute  gone,  his  charlatanry  exposed,  his  visions  extinguished  in  blood,  he  and  his 
dupes  would  perish  miserably  together.  "  The  blind  lead  the  blind,"  and  both  at 
last  "  fall  into  the  ditch  "  (Matt.  xv.  14),  3.  Complete.  The  whole  nation  would  be 
destroyed.    "  Thy  mother  "  (ver.  5).— J.  O. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Priests  and  people.  The  prophet  addresses  himself  in  this  section  to 
both  priests  and  people,  but  chiefly  to  the  priests,  whom  he  regards  as  mainly  responsible 
for  the  people's  defection. 

I.   FbIESTS  and  people  alike  IK  THE  BEJEOTION  OF  THE  KNOWLEDOE  Of  GOD.    (Ver.  6.) 

1.  'I'he  lack  of  the  knowledge  of  Qod.  Israel  possessed  this  knowledge  of  God  once.  It 
did  not  possess  it  now.  There  was  little  right  knowledge  of  God's  character,  of  God's 
Law,  and  of  God's  past  gracious  dealings.  Jehovah  was  retarded  practically  as  one  of 
the  Baals.  Destitute  of  right  ideas  of  his  spirituality,  holiness,  and  moral  demands, 
the  people  in  their  sinning  did  not  feel  how  far  they  were  going  astray.  Bight  ideas  on 
these  subjects  could  hardly  penetrate  into  minds  besotted  » ith  wine,  whoredom,  and  the 
unholy  rites  of  Baal  and  Astarte  worship.  In  our  own  land  of  Bibles  and  churches, 
what  dense  ignorance  of  God  and  of  Divine  things  might  be  found  to  prevail,  if  the  matter 
were  inquired  into  1  2.  Causes  of  this  lack  of  knowledge.  The  knowledge  of  God  was 
lost,  not  through  any  fault  on  God's  part  in  not  giving  the  means  of  knowledge,  or  in 
not  sufficiently  inculcating  on  the  people  the  importance  of  using  the  means,  God  had 
given  the  people  a  Law  (ch.  viii.  12) ;  he  had  laid  upon  the  Levites  the  duty  of  teaching 
and  of  promoting  the  knowledge  of  its  requirements  (Deut.  xxxiii.  10 ;  Mai,  iii.  5 — 7)  ; 
ho  had  laid  the  same  duty  on  parents  (Deut.  vi.  6 — 9) ;  he  had  warned  all  of  the 
dangers  of  inattention  and  forgetfulness.  How,  then,  came  the  knowledge  to  be  lost  ? 
(1)  The  priests  failed  in  teaching  (cf.  Mai.  ii.  8).  A  grave  responsibility  rests  on  the 
teachers  of  a  nation.  If  they  are  faithful  in  duty,  the  knowledge  of  God  can  never  be 
absolutely  lost.  If  they  do  not  teach,  it  is  certain  that  a  large  number  will  always 
remain  uninstructed.  Their  example  has  an  influence  on  others.  (2)  The  people  I'aileil 
in  remembering.  The  priests  had  rejected  (or  despised)  knowledge ;  the  people  had 
forgotten  the  Law  of  their  God,  The  unfaithfulness  of  the  professed  teachers  did  not 
wholly  exonerate  those  who  were  neglected.  They  had  other  means  of  knowledge. 
Had  they  been  diligent  in  preserving  the  knowledge  they  had,  and  in  handing  it  down 
by  careful  parental  instruction  (Ps,  Ixxviii.  4),  this,  aided  by  the  study  of  the  Law 
itself,  would  have  kept  alive  true  knowledge,  and  have  saved  the  nation.  We  are 
reiponsible  for  the  use  we  make  even  of  scant  opportuuites,  (3)  The  cause  of  &ilure 
in  both  cases  was  a  moral  one.     Neither  priests  nor  people  owed  to  retain  Qod  iu  theit 


ofi.  w.l— 19,]  THJB  BOOS  OJ"  HOSfiA.  l33 


knowledge.  This  was  how  they  allowed  the  knowledge  of  him  to  he  lost  (cf.  Rom.  i. 
21,  28).  The  departure  of  the  heart  from  God  comes  first.  There  is  then  the  indis- 
position to  hear  ahout  him  or  learn  about  him.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  him  is  lost. 
Such  ignorance  is  culpable.  3.  The  fatal  effects  of  thii  lack  of  knowledge.  (1)  The  people 
were  destroyed.  "My  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge."  They  had  destroyed 
themselves.  How  many  are  thus  destroyed  who,  had  they  been  rightly  taught  in 
youth,  might  now  have  been  foremost  in  God's  service!  Parents,  teacher?,  ministers, 
cannot  too  seriously  reflect  on  the  measure  of  their  responsibility  (cf.  Ezek.  iii.  17 — 21 ; 
xxxiii.).  We  must  teach  men  the  way  of  salvation,  if  we  expect  them  to  find  it  or  to 
walk  in  it  (Acts  x.  6,  33  ;  xvi.  17,  31).  (2)  God  rejected  those  who  had  rejected  him. 
"  I  will  reject  thee,  that  thou  sbalt  be  no  priest  to  be."  Place,  office,  honour,  oppor- 
tunities of  usefulness,  will  be  taken  from  us  if  we  misuse  them  (Rev.  ii.  5, 16).  (3)  The 
children  were  lost  through  the  unfaithfulness  of  tlie  parents.  "I  will  forget  thy 
children." 

IL  Fbiests  and  people  alike  in  sin.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  The  sins  alluded  to  are  pride 
and  covetousness.  1.  Pride  was  the  sin  of  the  people.  "  As  they  were  increased,  so 
they  sinned  against  me."  This  is  the  danger  of  prosperity.  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat, 
and  kicked"  0eut.  xxxiL  15).  The  heart  grows  haughty,  and  rebels  at  the  restraints 
of  the  Divine  Law.  Moses  foretold  the  danger,  and  warned  against  it  (Deut.  viii.  10 — 20). 
Retribution  would  correspond  in  character  to  the  sin.  "  I  will  turn  their  glory  into 
shame."  2.  Covetousness  was  peculiarly  the  sin  of  the  priests.  "  They  eat  up  the  sin 
of  my  people,"  etc.  The  reference  is  to  the  flesh  of  the  sin  offerings,  or,  more  generally, 
to  revenues  derived  from  transgressions  (atonement  money,  etc.).  Tlie  priests  prosti- 
tuted their  sacred  office  for  gain.  They  were  glad  at  the  iniquity  of  the  people,  if  it 
brought  them  more  income  (cf.  the  Romish  sale  of  pardons,  etc.).  It  is  shameful, 
under  any  circumstances,  to  seek  gain  by  conniving  at  sin. 

III.  Pbibbts  and  people  alike  in  the  punishment  of  sin.  (Vers.  9 — 11.)  "  Like 
people,  like  priest."  It  is  difficult  to  say  which  lias  the  greater  influence  on  the  other, 
priest  or  people.  The  people  are  readily  corrupted  by  their  leaders.  The  leaders,  on 
the  other  band,  are  too  apt  to  take  their  tone  from  the  community.  They  act  and 
react,  and  tend  to  a  moral  level.  Alike  in  sin,  priests  and  people  are  made  alike  in 
punishment.  "  I  will  punish  them,"  etc.  The  punishment  would  be :  1.  Congruous  with 
the  nature  of  the  sin.  "  They  shall  eat,  and  not  have  enough,"  etc.  For  plenty  there 
would  be  substituted  scarcity ;  greed  would  find  its  recompense  in  not  having  enough 
to  satisfy ;  the  nation  that  boasted  of  its  increase  would  be  made  few  in  number.  This 
is  the  general  character  of  Qod'g  punishments.  2.  In  part  wrought  out  by  the  sins  them- 
selves. Sin  strikes  round  to  be  its  own  avenger.  Luxury  and  waste  lead  to  poverty. 
The  greed  of  the  priest  overreaches  itself,  and  leads  to  the  altar  being  deserted,  and  the 
ofBce  held  in  contempt  (Judg.  xvii.  9, 10 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  36).  Pampered  appetite  becomes 
a  tyrant  and  tormentor.  Licentiousness  diminishes  population.  3.  Prepared  for  hy 
infatuation.  "  Whoredom  and  wine  and  new  wine  take  away  the  heart."  "  Whom  the 
gods  wish  to  destroy,  they  first  madden."    Infatuation  precedes  doom.— J.  0. 

Yere.  12 — 14, — Sin's  fatuity.  The  people  had  parted  irith  the  knowledge  of  the  true 
God,  and  had  become  possessed  of  a  spirit  of  whoredoms.    See  the  effects. 

L  Tbet  went  afteb  senseless  follies.  "  My  people  ask  counsel  at  their  stocks, 
and  their  staff'  declareth  unto  them  "  (ver.  12).  The  spirit  of  sin  is  a  spirit  of  "  error."  It 
robs  men  of  their  better  judgment.  No  limit  can  be  put  to  the  wanderings  of  the  mind 
under  its  influence.  The  worship  of  a  "  stock  "  is  absurd  enough,  even  when  the  devotee 
knows  no  better.  But  that  Israel,  who  had  "  been  once  enlightened,"  and  had  known 
the  true  God,  should  go  back  to  "  stocks "  and  "  staffs,"  was  a  singular  instance  of 
fatuity.  When  the  soul  has  abandoned  God,  there  is  no  anticipating  what  crazes  it 
will  adopt,  what  "  will-o'-the-wisps "  it  will  follow  after  (the  follies  of  society,  the 
credulity  of  scepticism,  etc.). 

IL  Thbt  fell  vicitims  to  superstition.  "They  sacrifice  upon  the  tops  of  the 
mountains,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  They  attached  a  superstitious  importance  to  mountains, 
hills,  trees,  groves,  etc.,  in  connection  with  their  worship.  The  mountains  lifted  them 
nearer  to  heaven  (Numb.  xxii.  41 ;  xxiii.  14,  28) ;  the  shade  of  the  trees  filled  them 
with  owe.    True  religion  delivers  from  superstition.    Irreligiop  leaves  men  a  prey  to 


134  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  it.  1—19. 

it.  Feelings  of  •  superstitious  nature  become  with  many  a  substitute  for  religion. 
They  seek,  in  the  materialistic  accompaniments  of  worship,  a  satisfaction  which  the 
worship  itself  would  not  afford  them  (altars,  ritual,  architectural  gloom,  vestments,  etc.). 

III.  They  were  beguiled  into  gboss  immorality.  "Therefore  your  daughters 
shall  commit  whoredom,  and  your  spouses  [daughters-in-law]  shall  commit  adultery  " 
(ver.  13).  The  seductions  of  the  place,  the  character  of  the  worship,  and  the  exciting, 
behaviour  indulged  in  at  the  altar,  paved  the  way  for  lewd  practices.  These  were 
incorporated  as  a  part  of  most  heathen  worship.  The  heart  which  has  cast  off  the  fear 
uf  God  is  only  too  eagerly  prepared  for  licentious  conduct.  Lust  is  one  of  the  commonest 
forms  of  sin. 

IV.  They  bet  an  evil  example  to  thees  jitniobb.  "I  will  not  punish  your 
daughters,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  The  unblushing  conduct  of  the  parents  in  going  to  the 
public  altars  with  immoral  women  made  it  impossible  to  blame  too  severely  the  younger 
generation,  who  sim|)ly  followed  the  example  set  them  by  their  elders.  Thus  cor- 
ruption was  propagated,  and  the  most  shameless  deeds  were  flaunted  in  the  light  of 
open  day. 

V.  They  brought  down  on  themsblteb  the  vengeance  of  God.  "  Therefore  the 
oeople  that  doth  not  understand  shall  fall "  (ver.  14).  The  origin  of  all  was  the  not 
mderstanding.    They  are  destroyed  for  lack  of  knowledge  (ver.  6). — J.  0. 

Vers.  15 — ^19. — Warning  to  Jttdah.  Judah  had  not  yet  sunk  so  low  as  IsraeL  She 
was,  however,  far  from  guiltless.  Her  princes  were  like  them  that  remove  the  bound 
(ch.  V,  10).  She  is  included  with  Israel  in  the  threatenings  that  follow  (ch.  v.  5, 10, 14 ; 
vi.  4, 11).  "  The  people  did  yet  corruptly,"  is  the  testimony  of  the  history  (2  Chron. 
xxvii.  2).  Still  her  case  was  not  so  hopeless  but  that  judgment  might  bo  averted  by 
timely  repentance.  There  was  still  "some  good  thing"  in  Judah  to  work  upon; 
something  to  appeal  to.  The  prophet  bids  her  take  warning  from  the  sister  kingdom, 
"  Come  not  ye  unto  Gilgal,  neither  go  ye  up  to  Beth-aven  [Bethel],"  etc.  (ver.  15). 
Judah  should  be  warned — 

I.  By  Israel's  inteaotablbnbss.  (Ver.  16.)  "Israel  is  intractable  as  an  intractable 
heifer."  The  nation,  that  is,  had  proved  unruly,  obstinate,  refractory,  backsliding, 
unteachable.  Nothing  that  God  could  do  would  induce  it  to  walk  quietly  in  his  ways. 
This  is  a  picture  of  the  natural,  unrenewed  temper.  "  It  is  not  subject  to  the  Law  of 
God,  neither  indeed  can  be  "  (Rom.  viii.  7).  In  Judah,  also,  this  temper  was  beginning 
to  show  itself.  Let  it  be  warned.  Israel  would  soon  have  liberty  enough,  and  more 
than  it  cared  for.  "  Now  the  Lord  will  feed  them  as  a  lamb  in  a  large  place."  Intrac- 
lableness  springs  from  a  false  desire  of  freedom.  It  counts  the  yoke  of  God  a  bondage. 
The  punishment  would  correspond.  God  would  relieve  the  people  of  his  yoke,  but 
would  relieve  ttiem  at  the  same  time  of  the  care  and  protection  they  had  enjoyed  as  his 
nation.  Left,  in  a  condition  of  dispersion,  to  realize  their  helplessness,  they  would 
learn  to  long  for  the  yoke  they  had  once  despised. 

II.  By  Israel's  obduracy.  (Ver.  17.)  Obduracy  is  defined  as  that  state  which 
implies  "a  total  disregard  of  Divine  calls  and  warnings,  and  an  insensibility  to  their 
importance  "  (Miiller).  This  is  the  state  to  which  intractableness  tends.  In  Israel  it 
had  been  already  reached.  "Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone."  1.  The 
soul  has  its  idols — its  earthly  objects,  which  it  puts  in  the  place  of  God.  2.  There 
comes  in  time  to  be  such  a  welding  of  the  soul  to  the  objects  of  its  sinful  pursuit,  that 
further  remonstrance  is  useless.  3.  When  this  stage  is  reached,  God  "lets  it  alone." 
He  ceases  remonstrating.  He  abandons  it  to  its  sinful  courses.  Conscience  is  silent. 
The  Spirit  ceases  to  strive.  These  awful  words,  "  Let  it  alone,"  are  the  soul's  death- 
knell.  Alter  this  there  is  no  recovery.  How  solemn  the  warning  to  Judah — and 
to  us  I 

ill.  By  Ibbael'b  mobal  degenbbaoy.  (Ver.  18.)  Everything  in  the  kingdom  had 
become  spoiled,  degenerate,  corrupt — like  wine  turned  sour.  The  Hebrew  word  means 
literally,  "to  turn  aside."  Life,  when  turned  aside  from  its  right  ends,  speedily 
degenerates.  So  do  gifts  and  blessings.  The  land  is  badly  tilled;  its  fruits  are  wasted 
in  gluttony  and  debauchery;  health  degenerates  through  the  waste  of  the  powers  of 
life  in  profligacy  ;  feasting  sinks  to  mere  animalism,  etc.  This  was  the  state  into  which 
Israel  had  come.    "  Her  rulers  f  shields]  have  loved,  hmve  loved,  shama."    They  loved 


OH.  V.  1— 15.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  llOSEA. 


135 


Bhame,  and  the  print  of  shame  was  on  them.     The  spectacle  should  deter  Judah  from 
followins  in  their  steps. 

IV.  By  Israel's  experience  op  the  futility  op  trust  in  idols.  (Ver.  19.) 
Destruction  was  about  to  descend  on  the  nation.  The  tempest  would  carry  them  away 
on  its  win^s.  A  fate  (1)  swift;  (2)  violent;  (3)  resistless;  (4)  dispersive.  Then  it 
would-be  manifest  how  helpless  their  idols  were  to  aid  them.  They  would  be  ashamed 
of  the  sacrifices  they  had  offered  to  them.  The  wicked  will  one  day  be  driven  out  of 
their  false  confidences. — J.  0. 

Ver.  15.— Offending.  1.  We  offend  when  we  frequent  places  notorious  for  wicked- 
ness. This  was  the  character  of  Gilgal  and  Bethel.  2.  We  offend  when  we  lend 
countenance  to  impieties  practised  in  the  name  of  religion.  One  of  Jeroboam's  calves 
was  at  Bethel.  Its  presence  changed  Beth-el,  the  "  house  of  God,"  into  "  Beth-aven  " 
"  house  of  vanity."  3.  We  offend  when  we  are  partners  to  any  profanation  of  the  Name 
of  God.  "  Nor  swear.  The  Lord  liveth."  An  oath  is  so  solemn  a  thing  that  it  ought 
not  to  be  taken  except  on  the  most  solemn  occasions.  The  light  use  of  Gud's  Name  iu 
any  connectit)n— especially  in  connection  with  circumstances  otherwise  dishonouring 
to  him — is  a  heinous  transgression,— J.  0.  ° 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  V, 


Ver.  1. — ^Hear  ye  this,  0  priests;  and 
hearken,  ye  house  of  Israel ;  and  give  ye  ear, 
0  house  of  the  king.  The  persons  here 
addressed  comprise  all  the  estates  of  the 
renlm— priests,  people,  and  princes.  The 
house  of  Israel  is  the  northern  kingdom ; 
and  the  house  of  the  kjng  is  the  members  of 
the  king's  family,  of  his  court  and  of  his 
government.  Thus  the  rulers  and  the 
ruled,  the  spiritual  teachers  and  the  taught, 
are  cumpreheuded  in  this  address.  Neither 
priestly  ofBoe,  nor  popular  power,  nor 
princely  dignity  was  to  be  exempted.  But, 
though  all  are  summoned  to  give  audience, 
the  beads  of  the  people,  the  men  of  light  and 
leading,  are  iirst  arraigned.  For  judgment 
is  toward  yon,  as  the  clause  is  correctly 
rendered ;  not,  "  it  devolves  on  you  to  main- 
tain judgment,"  as  some  understand  it.  It 
had,  indeed,  been  the  province  of  the  priest 
to  teach,  and  of  the  king  to  execute  the 
judgments  of  God  in  Israel;  but  now  they 
are  themselves  the  subjects  of  judgment. 
Judgment  was  now  to  begin  at  the  house  of 
the  king  and  of  the  priest ;  God  was  about 
to  execute  judgment  upou  them — the  judg- 
ment fiom  that  judgment-seat  where  justice 
nevir  miscarries,  and  where  no  mistake  is 
ever  made.  The  cause  of  this  is  assigned. 
Because  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Uizpah,  and 
a  net  spread  upon  Tabor.  Instead  of  being 
safeguards  of  the  people,  they  had  been  a 
snare  to  them ;  instead  of  being  true  leaders, 
as  God  had  intended  them,  they  had  misled 
them ;  instead  of  contributing  to  their  se- 
curity, they  had  seduced  them  to  sin  and  so 
helped  to  prepare  them  for  destruction ;  they 
had  been  a  snare  to  entrap  and  a  net  to 


entangle.  East  as  well  as  west  of  the 
Jordan  their  evil  influence  had  wrought 
ruin.  Mizpah,  now  es-Salt,  was  on  the  east 
of  the  river  among  the  hills  of  Gilead,  where 
Jacob  and  Laban  entered  into  covenant; 
Tabor,  like  a  solitary  cone  or  sugar-loaf, 
rises  up  from  the  plain  of  Jezreel,  or  Bsdrae- 
lon,  on  the  west  of  the  river,  On  the  wooded 
slopes  of  Tabor  and  the  beacon-hill  of 
Mizpah  game,  no  doubt,  abounded  and  found 
covert,  and  hence  the  origin  of  the  figure 
here  used;  but  they  had  probably  become 
scenes  of  idolatry  or  wickedness. 

Ver.  2. — And  the  revolters  are  profound  to 
make  slaughter  (or,  profuse  in  murders  or  in 
laerifices,  or  in  dealing  corruptly),  though  I 
have  been  a  rebuker  of  them  all  (rather,  hut 
1  am  {ient  itpon]  chastisement  for  them  all). 
The  literal  rendering  of  the  first  clause  is, 
slaughtering  they  have  made  deep,  which  is 
an  idiom  analogous  to  "they  have  deeply 
revolted ;  "  literally,  "  they  have  made  re- 
volting deep  "  (Isa.  xxxi.  6).  The  slaughter- 
ing, though  understood  by  Wiinsohe  of 
sacrifices,  is  rather  meant  of  the  destruction 
and  carnage  which  the  revolters  caused  to 
the  people.  Bashi  explains  it  literally  in 
this  way :  "  I  said.  Every  one  that  goes  not 
up  to  the  stated  feasts  transgresses  a  posi- 
tive precept;  but  they  decree  that  every  one 
who  goes  up  to  the  stated  feasts  shall  be 
slain."  This  seems  to  imply  that  liers-in- 
wait  were  set  probably  on  Mizpah  and 
Tabor,  the  places  mentioned  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  to  slay  the  Isreielites  that  were 
found  going  up  to  the  feasts  at  Jerusalem. 
Aben  Ezra,  taking  this  second  verse  as  con- 
tinuing the  sentiment  of  the  first,  interprets 
as  follows  :  "  Ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mix- 
pah  that  ye  might  not  allow  them  to  go  up 


136 


TilE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


LcH.  V.  1—15 


to  the  feasts  to  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  and 
to  slay  (victims)  in  the  usurI  way."  The 
revolters  or  apostates  he  takes  to  be  the 
worshippers  of  Baal.  "They  made  deep," 
he  adds  in  his  exposition,  "  the  snares,  those 
that  aie  mentioned,  that  passers-by  might 
not  see  them ;  but  I  will  chastise  all  of  them 
for  this  evil  which  they  have  done,  since  it 
is  not  hidden  from  me  why  they  have  hid 
(made)  it  so  deep."  The  slaughtering  is 
thus  understood  by  Aben  Ezra  of  slaying 
the  sacrificial  victims.  Similarly  Kimohi 
interprets  thus :  "  He  says  that  the  revolters 
who  are  the  worshippers  of  idols,  who  depart 
from  the  ways  of  God — blessed  be  he  I — and 
from  his  service,  like  a  woman  who  is  a 
revolter  from  under  her  husband,  have  made 
deep  their  revolt,  slaying  and  sacrificing  to 
idols."  He  would  understand  the  slaughter- 
ing neither  of  victims  with  Kimchi  and 
Aben  Ezra;  nor  of  literally  slaying  Israelites 
to  prevent  persons  going  up  to  Jerusalem, 
the  proper  seat  of  Jehovah's  worship;  but  of 
the  destructive  consequences  which  the  con- 
duct of  these  apostates  brought  on  the  people. 
The  work  of  chastisement  God  now  takes  in 
hand  in  good  earnest.  Droppings  of  the 
coming  shower  there  had  been ;  but  now 
the  full  fioorl  is  to  descend,  for  God  presents 
himself  to  misleaders  and  misled  alike  under 
the  sole  aspect  of  rebuke.  "I,"  he  says, 
"  am  chastisement "  (give  myself  to  it).  A 
like  form  of  expression  occurs  in  Fs.  cix.  4, 
"  I  am  prayer ; "  that  is,  am  a  man  of  prayer, 
or  give  myself  to  prayer.  Thus  Kimchi 
explains  the  idiom :  "  The  prophet  says.  Say 
not  that  no  man  shall  correct  and  reprove 
them,  therefore  they  sin ;  for  I  am  the  person 
who  reproves  them  all,  and  day  by  day  I 
reprove  them,  but  they  will  not  hearken  to 
me.  But  raani  moser  wants  the  word  ish, 
man,  as  (in  Fs.  cix.  4)  raani  tephilah,  which 
we  have  explained  raani  ieh  tephilah." 

Ver.  3. — I  know  Ephraim,  and  Israel  is  not 
hid  from  me.  All  attempts  at  concealment 
are  vain,  though  sinners  try  ever  so  much 
to  hide  their  sins  from  the  Divine  Majesty. 
However  deep  they  dig  downward,  God  will 
bring  their  evil  doings  up  and  out  to  the 
light  of  day  and  punish  them.  For  now,  0 
£phraim,  thou  oommittest  whoredom,  and 
Israel  is  delUed.  Israel  is  the  northern 
kingdom,  and  Ephraim,  being  the  most 
powerful  tribe,is  often  identified  with  Israel; 
here,  however,  they  are  distinguished — Israel 
is  the  kingdom  as  a  whole,  and  Ephraim  is 
its  leading  tribe.  This  powerful  tribe,  ever 
envious  of  Judah,  was  the  ringleader  in  the 
oalf  worship  of  Jeroboam  and  other  idola- 
tries; and  through  Ephraim's  evil  influence 
the  other  tribes,  and  so  all  Israel,  were 
defiled. 

Ver.  4. — In  this  verse,  their  evil  doings 
are  traced  to  an  evil  spirit  of  whoredoms. 


that  is,  of  idolatries,  which  impels  them 
blindly  and  resistlessly  to  evil,  while  at  the 
same  time  it  expels  the  knowledge  of  God. 
The  first  clause  is  differently  rendered. 
The  textual  rendering  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  viz.  they  will  not  frame  (literally, 
give,  direct)  their  doings  to  torn  nnto  their 
God,  denotes  their  total  and  absolute  refusal 
to  repent  or  to  bring  forth  fruits  meet  for 
repentance.  The  actions  are  an  index  of 
the  state  of  the  heart,  but  neither  the 
thoughts  of  Israel  at  this  time,  nor  their 
deeds  which  indicated  those  thoughts,  were 
in  the  direction  of  repentance.  In  heart  and 
life  they  were  impenitent.  This  rendering 
is  supported  by  most  of  the  Hebrew  com- 
mentators. Bashi  says,  '■  They  forsake  not 
their  evil  way ; "  Aben  Ezra, "  They  perform 
not  works  so  as  to  turn."  Kimohi  also  gives 
an  alternative  sense :  "  Or  the  sense  of  the 
words  is  thus :  They  cling  so  closely  to 
their  evil  works,  that  even  should  they  for 
once  conceive  in  their  heart  the  idea  of 
turning,  they  immediately  repent  them  of 
it."  The  marginal  rendering  also  yields  a 
good  sense;  it  is.  Their  doijigaviillnot  suffer 
(allow)  [them}  to  turn  unto  their  God.  The 
pronominal  su£Sx  for  "them"  is  wanting, 
yet  it  may  be  dispensed  with,  as  the  append- 
ing of  it  to  "doings"  and  ",God"  makes  the 
sense  suffloiently  explicit.  It  is  favoured  by 
Ewald,  Keil,  the  Targum,  and  Kimohi,  who 
explains:  "Their  evU  works  do  not  allow 
them  to  return  to  their  God,  as  if  he  said. 
To  such  extent  have  they  multiplied  trans- 
gression that  there  is  no  way  left  them  to 
return,  until  they  receive  their  punishment." 
Such  and  so  great  was  the  power  of  their 
evil  habits  that  they  could  not  break  them 
off  or  break  away  from  them  by  repentance ; 
or  so  intimately  connected  is  a  change  of 
heart  with  a  change  of  life  that,  in  the 
absence  of  the  latter,  the  former  is  impos- 
sible. According  to  either  rendering,  the 
reason  assigned  is  contained  in  the  next 
clause :  For  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in 
the  midst  of  them,  and  they  have  not  known 
the  Lord.  So  overmastered  were  they,  as 
though  by  some  fiendish  spirit  that  held 
them  in  check  and  exercised  despotic  power 
over  them,  that  they  rushed  headlong  down 
the  steep  incline,  like  the  Gadarene  herd 
of  swine,  which,  when  the  unclean  spirits 
entered  into  them,  ran  violently  down  a 
steep  place  into  the  sea.  Neither  was  there 
any  counteracting  force  to  turn  them  back 
or  reverse  their  course.  Such  a  force  might 
have  been  found  in  the  knowledge  of  God, 
of  his  covenant,  mercy,  of  his  power,  love, 
grace,  and  goodness.  But  this  was  wanting, 
end  the  absence  of  this  knowledge  at  onoa 
increased  their  impenitence  and  aggravated 
their  guilt.  It  was  Israel's  privilege  and 
Israel's  duty  to  know  the  Lord;  for  he  lutd 


OB.  V.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


137 


revealed  himself  to  them  oa  to  no  other 
nation ;  he  had  given  them  his  Law,  he  had 
made  them  depositaries  of  his  truth  and  the 
conservators  of'  his  living  oraclea;  their 
Ignornnce,  therefore,  was  altogether  inex- 
cusable, while  it  evinced  greatest  ingratitude 
to  Jehovah,  who  had  taken  them  into  cove- 
nant with  himself,  and  declared  himself  to 
be  their  God. 

Ver.  5.— And  the  pride  of  Israel  doth- 
testify  to  his  face.  This  may  be  understood 
(1)  of  Jehovah,  who  was  Israel's  glory,  as  we 
read  in  Amos  vii.  7  of  "  the  excellency  of 
Israel."  This  explanation  suits  at  once  the 
sense  and  the  context.  They  knew  not 
God,  notwithstanding  the  special  advantages 
they  enjoyed  for  that  knowledge ;  they  had 
no  liking  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  they  did 
not  concern  themselves  about  it;  and  now 
Jehovah,  who  should  have  been  their  excel- 
lency and  glory,  but  who  had  been  thus 
slighted  by  them,  will  testify  against  them 
and  bear  witness  to  their  face  by  judgments. 
But  (2)  another  interpretation  recommends 
itself  as  equally  or  more  suitable.  This 
interpretation  understands  "pride"  more 
simply  to  mean  the  prosperous  state  and 
flourishing  condition  of  which  Israel  was 
proud,  or  rather,  perhaps,  the  haughtiness  of 
Israel,  owing  to  those  very  oircumbtances  of 
worldly  wealth  and  greatness.  This  vain 
pride  and  self-exaltation  was  the  great 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  their  turning  to  the 
Lord.  If  this  sense  of  the  word  be  accepted, 
the  verb  had  better  be  rendered  "  humbled," 
a  meaning  which  it  often  has;  thus,  "humbled 
shall  be  the  pride  of  Israel  to  his  face  "  (that 
is,  in  his  own  sight).  Such  is  the  translation 
of  the  LXX. :  Taxf  ivuWjircTai,  ii  SPpts  roS 
'IffpaiiK  eis  itp6<nmov  avrav,  "  The  pride  of 
Israel  shall  be  brought  low  before  his  face ; " 
while  the  Chaldee  translates  similarly, "  The 
glory  of  Israel  shall  be  humbled  while  they 
see  it ; "  the  Byriac  has, "  The  pride  of  Israel 
shall  be  humbled  in  his  presence,"  or  before 
his  eyes.  Aben  Ezra  also  takes  the  idea 
of  the  verb  to  be  humiliation  or  depression ; 
while  Kimchi  takes  goon  not  so  much  in 
the  sense  of  the  inward  feeling,  as  of  tliose 
outward  circumatanoes  that  promoted  it — 
their  greatness  and  grandeur  and  glory; 
and,  alluding  to  the  words  of  the  Chaldee 
rendering, "  in  their  sight,"  he  says, "  While 
they  are  still  in  their  land  before  their  cap- 
tivity, they  shall  perceive  their  humiliation 
and  degradation,  instead  of  the  glory  which 
they  had  at  the  beginning."  Kimchi,  how- 
ever,  as  well  as  most  other  commentators, 
seems  to  have  understood  the  verb  in  the 
sense  of  "  testify ; "  thus, "  Israel's  pride  will 
testify  to  his  face,  when  he  shall  take  upon 
him  its  punishment."  Therefore  shaU 
Israel  and  Xphraim  fall  in  their  iniquity ; 
fadah   alio  shall  fall  with  them,     Priile 


nsnally  goes  before  destruction,  and  a 
haughty  spirit  before  a  fall.  The  conse- 
quence of  Israel's  pride  was  the  fall  here 
mentioned.  The  ten  tribes  composing  ti^e 
northern  kingdom  fell  into  gross  and  grievous 
sin,  and  therefore  also  into  long  suffering 
and  sore  sorrow.  Even  Ephraim,  that  tribe 
pre-eminent  for  power  as  for  pride,  and  the 
perpetual  rival  of  Judah,  shall  fall  as  well 
as  and  with  the  rest.  Judah  also,  that  ia, 
Judah  proper,  and  Benjamin,  participating 
in  the  same  evil  course,  fell  like  Israel  into 
sin,  and,  though  more  than  a  century  later, 
into  ruin. 

In  vers.  6 — 10  the  prophet  details  the  un- 
availing and  ineffectual  efforts  of  Israel  to 
avert,  or  at  least  escape  from,  the  threatened 
judgments. 

Ver.  6. — They  shall  go  with  their  flooks 
and  with  their  herds  to  seek  the  Lord.  In 
this  way  they  attempt  to  break,  if  not  pre- 
vent, their  fall.  With  numerous  and  costly 
sacrifices  they  endeavour  to  propitiate  Je- 
hovah. With  sheep  and  goats  out  of  their 
flocks,  and  with  bullocks  and  heifers  out  of 
their  herd,  they  try  to  make  reparation  for 
the  past  or  to  secure  present  and  future 
favour.  But  in  vain.  Israel  might  go  to 
Bethel  and  Judah  to  Jerusalem ;  but  to  no 
purpose.  They  shall  not  find  him ;  he  hath 
withdrawn  himself.  Their  repentance  came 
too  late;  or  when  it  did  come  it  wanted 
sincerity ;  or  it  was  a  wrong  motive  which 
prompted  it — fear  of  approaching  calamity 
and  not  love  to  their  Creator ;  or  their  sins 
ran  parallel  with  their  sacrifice.  Forgetting 
that  obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice,  they 
cherished  a  disobedient  spirit  or  continued 
in  their  course  of  disobedience  notwithstand- 
ing their  outward  sacrificial  service.  For 
one  cause  or  other  they  fail  in  their  efforts 
to  find  him  ;  for,  instead  of  being  a  present 
help  in  time  of  trouble,  he  has  withdrawn 
beyond  their  reach ;  he  has  removed  the 
Shechinah-glory  of  his  presence  from  among 
them ;  or  he  has  loosed  himself  from  all 
those  ties  that  once  bound  him  in  mercy  to 
them,  just  as  a  husband  frees  himself  from 
all  responsibilities  and  disarms  all  liabilities 
on  behalf  of  a  faithless  partner  whom  he  has 
been  forced  to  divorce.  And  such  is  the 
specific  reason  assigned  in  the  next  verse. 

Ver.  7.— They  have  dealt  treacherously 
against  the  Lord:  for  they  have  begotten 
strange  children.  This  msiy  refer  to  inter- 
marriages with  idolaters,  when  the  offspring 
of  such  forbidden  unions  departed  still 
further  from  the  worship  of  Jehovah;  or  ths 
children  of  godless  Jewish  parents  reflected 
yet  more  the  wicked  works  and  ways  of 
suoh  parents.  In  consequence  of  the  infi- 
delity of  the  wife,  the  children  were  not  the 
offspring  of  lawful  wedlock  or  conjugal 
union;  in  other  words,  they  were  children 


138 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  t.  1 — 16. 


•f  whoredom — an  adulterous  generation. 
Israel's  infidelity  to  the  holy  covenant  had 
as  its  result  a  graceless,  godless  race — 
children  strange  and  supposititious  in  the 
spiritual  sense.  Now  shaU  a  month  devour 
them  with  their  portions.  If  (1)  '*  month  "  be 
the  right  rendering,  it  is  a  note  of  time  like 
"  the  day  of  the  Lord ;"  and  the  sense  is  that 
a  short  time  shall  see  the  end  of  them — not 
only  of  their  persons,  but  their  properties, 
that  is,  their  hereditary  portions  in  Pales- 
tine. But  (2)  if  "  new  moon  "  be  the  correct 
translation,  the  new  moon,  or  sacri&cial 
feasts  celebrated  at  that  season,  will  only 
ruin,  not  relieve,  them.  Their  sinful  sacri- 
fices and  vain  oblations,  on  which  they  now 
placed  their  reliance,  will  procure,  not  their 
salvation,  but  perdition. 

Vers.  8,  9. — ^Blow  ye  the  eomet  in  Gibeah, 
and  the  trumpet  in  Samah,  Intimation  had 
been  given  in  the  preceding  verse  that  the 
period  of  their  fast-approaching  destruction 
was  at  hand  ;  that,  as  Kimohi  expresses  it, 
the  new  moon  would  soon  come  at  which 
their  enemies  would  destroy  them.  Now  he 
pictures  them  as  already  on  the  march,  and 
just  advancing  to  fcxecute  the  work  of  de- 
struction ;  while  the  terror  and  alarm  conse- 
quent thereon  are  here  presented  with  great 
vividness,  but  at  the  same  time  with  much 
brevity.  A  similar  scene  is  depicted  at  full 
length  by  Isaiah  in  z.  28—32,  where  the 
line  of  the  Assyrians'  march  seems  to  be 
indicated,  if,  indeed,  it  be  not  a  poetio 
representation  of  it,  which  the  prophet 
gives.  Thus  from  Aiath  (el-Tell)  to  the 
pass  of  Michmash,  now  Mukmas,  where  he 
lays  up  his  baggage;  forward  to  Geba, 
where  they  quarter  for  tlie  night;  tlien  on 
to  Nob,  where  he  halts  in  sight  of  the  holy 
city,  and  scarce  an  hour's  march  distant. 
The  alarm  was  to  be  sounded  with  the 
har,  or  far-sounding  cornet,  made  of 


curved  horii,  and  the  ehstsots^rdh,  or  straight 
trumpet,  made  of  brass  or  silver,  used  in  war 
or  at  festivals.  This  signal  of  hostile  in- 
vasion was  to  be  sounded  in  Gibeah,  now 
Tuleil-el-Ful,  some  four  miles  north  of 
Jerusalem,  and  in  Kamah,  now  er-Bam,  two 
miles  further  distant.  Both  these  towns, 
situated  on  eminences,  as  the  names  denote, 
belong  to  the  northern  boundary  of  Ben- 
jamin. The  overthrow  of  the  northern 
kingdom  is  thus  presented  as  an  already 
aei^omplished  fact ;  while  the  invading  host 
has  already  reached  the  frontier  of  the 
southern  kingdom.  Cry  aloud  at  Beth-aveu, 
after  thee,  0  Benjamin.  This  cry  is  the 
sound  of  the  war-signals  already  mentioned, 
and  the  repetition  intensities  the  nature  of 
the  alarm  and  the  urgency  of  the  case. 
Beth-aven  was  either  Bethel,  now  Beitin,  on 
I  lie  border  of  Benjamin,  or  a  town  nearer 
Michmash,  belonging  tu  Benjamin.    The 


meaning  of  the  somewhat  obscure  words  in 
the  concluding  clause  can  give  little  trouble, 
when  read  in  the  light  of  the  context.  The 
gonnding  of  the  alarm  of  war  indicates  with 
tolerable  plainness  what  was  coming  behind 
Benjamin ;  nor  is  there  need  to  supply  the 
words,  "  the  enemy  rises  behind  thee,"  with 
some,  or  "  the  sword  rages  behind  thee,"  with 
others.  The  signals  announce  the  foe  as 
arrived  at  the  frontier  of  Judali.  The  enemy 
is  close  behind  thee,  Benjamin,  in  close 
pursuit  after  thee,  upon  thy  very  heels. 
Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of 
rebuke.  The  day  of  rebuke  is  the  season 
when  God  rebukes  sin  by  punishment;  the 
punishment  in  this  case  is  no  slight  rebuke 
or  temporary  chastisement.  On  the  con- 
trary, it  is  extreme  in  severity  and  final  in 
duration.  Famine,  or  pestilence,  or  war 
might  lay  a  country  desolate  for  a  time,  and 
yet  relief  might  soon  ensue  and  recuperative 
power  be  vigorously  developed.  Not  so 
here.  Ephraim  is  made  more  than  desolate 
partially  and  for  a  short  period  ;  it  becomes 
a  desolation — "  an  entire  desolation,"  as  the 
words  literally  mean.  In  this  desolation 
the  other  tribes  would  be  involved.  Nor 
was  the  menace  lightly  to  be  regarded  or 
treated  as  meaningless;  it  was  firm — well 
grounded  as  the  word  of  the  Eternal,  and 
irreversible  as  his  decree. 

Yer.  10. — The  princes  of  Jndah  were  like 
them  that  remove  the  bound.  The  indi- 
vidual who  had  the  temerity  to  remove  his 
neighbour's  landmark  was  not  only  guilty  of 
a  great  sin,  but  obnoxious  to  a  grievous 
curse.  Thus  Deut.  xix.  14,  "  Thou  shalt  not 
remove  thy  neighbour's  landmark,  which 
they  of  old  time  have  set  in  thine  inheri- 
tance;" and  again  xxvii.  17,  "Cursed  be 
he  that  removeth  his  neighbour's  landmark. 
And  all  the  people  shall  say.  Amen."  The 
removal  of  the  landmark  characterizes  the 
conduct  of  men  entirely  regardless  of 
the  rights  of  others — utterly  reckless.  The 
Jewish  nobles,  the  king's  ministers  and  high 
officers  of  state,  are  compared  to  those  who 
remove  the  landmark,  disregarding  alike 
what  was  due  to  their  fellow-men  and  to 
their  God.  The  Jewish  commentators  differ 
in  their  exposition  between  fact  and  figure 
— some  of  them  taking  the  removal  of  the 
boundary  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  caph  being 
for  confirmation;  thus  D.  Kimohi;  while 
I.  Kimchi  explains  it  of  the  rejection  of  the 
appeal  for  justice  against  removers  of  land- 
marks ;  others  understanding  it  figuratively, 
end  the  whole  as  expressing  general  lawless- 
ness, thus  Bashi:  "Like  a  man  who  re- 
moves his  neighbour's  landmark,  just  so  they 
hasten  to  hold  fast  the  ways  of  Israel  their 
neighbours  .  .  .  according  to  the  literal 
sense.  They  grasped  at  the  fields;  but  this, 
in   my  opinion,   ii    harsh,    for   then    the 


CH.  V.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


139 


prophet  must  haye  written  merely  'J'dd,  and 
not  'I'DDJ."  Similarly  Aben  Ezra :  "  They 
exercise  violence  towards  those  \rho  are  in 
their  power,  whilst  they  are  like  those  who 
secretly  remove  the  landmark."  The  people 
of  Judah  had  also  sinned,  and,  like  Israel  in 
gin,  they  resemble  them  in  suffering.  There- 
tore  I  will  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them 
like  water.  The  word  "  wrath  "  here  is  from 
a  root  which  signifies  "  to  overflow ; "  it  is  thus 
the  overflowing  of  Divine  indignation ;  while 
the  outpouring  thereof  denntes  the  full  flood 
of  wrath  that  will  overwhelm  those  lawless 
leaders  of  a  misguided  aad  misgoverned 
people.  The  execution  of  the  threatening 
was  reserved  for  the  Assyrians,  who,  under 
Tiglath-pilcser  and  Sennacherib,  invaded  and 
laid  waste  the  land.  Amt  yet  those  judg- 
ments, though  so  severe  and  plentiful,  were 
not  to  end  in  total  and  lasting  devastation 
as  in  the  case  of  Israel.  The  following  vers. 
11 — 15  teach  tlie  inevitable  nature  of  the 
judgments  that  were  coming  upon  both  Israel 
and  Judah,  and  from  wliioh  no  earthly  power 
could  deliver  them.  The  only  relief  pos- 
sible depended  on  their  seeking  Ood  in  the 
day  of  their  distress. 

Ver.  II. — ^Ephraimis  oppressed  and  broken 
in  judgment.  The  expression  r'teuts  mishpat 
is  (1)  by  some  explained,  "crushed  by  the 
judgment,''  that  is,  of  God,  according  to 
which  mishpat  would  be  the  genitive  of  the 
agent  as  muhlceh  Elohim.  But  "  crushed  of 
judgment"  or  in  judgment  is  justly  pre- 
ferred by  others,  the  genitive  taking  the 
place  of  the  accusative.  Again,  though  the 
.  combination  of  'ashiiq  with  rutsuts  is  fre- 
quent, occurring  as  early  as  Deut.  xxviii.  33, 
the  latter  is  the  stronger  term.  The  op- 
pression is  (2)  not  that  which  their  own 
kings  and  princes  practised  upon  their  sub- 
jects, according  to  Aben  Ezra, ''  Their  kings 
oppressed  and  cheated  them ; "  nor  the  in- 
justice practised  by  the  people  of  Ephraim 
among  themselves,  as  implied  by  the  LXX., 
"  Ephraim  altogether  prevailed  against  his 
adversary,  he  trod  judgment  underfoot." 
The  reference  (3)  is  rather  to  Ephraim  being 
oppressed  and  crushed  in  judgment  by  th^ 
heathen  nations  around;  thus  Easlii  ex- 
plains, "  Oppressed  is  Ephraim  ever  by  the 
hand  of  the  heathen — chastised  with  chas- 
tisements ; "  80  also  Kimohi,  "  By  the  haud 
of  the  heathen  who  oppressed  and  crushed 
tliem  through  hard  judgments."  The  con- 
struction is  asyndetons,  like  Cant.  ii.  II, 
"The  rain  is  over,  is  gone."  Because  he 
willingly  walked  after  the  oommaudment. 
This  clause  assigns  the  reason  of  Ephraim's 
oppression.  They  evinced  ready  willing- 
hood  in  following  (1)  the  oommandments  of 
men  instead  of  the  commandments  of  God. 
Tsav  i»  thus  understood  by  Aben  Ezra,  and 
~in  like  manner  Ewald  explains  it  to  mean 


sn  arbitrary  or  self-imposed  precept.  The 
LXX.  (2j  seem  to  have  read  la',  equivalent 
to  NIB',  Vitnity,  translating,  "  for  he  began  to 
go  after  vanities  (tSv  fiaraiaii') ; "  which  the 
Chaldee  and  Syriac  follow.  But  (3)  it  is 
rather  the  commandment  of  Jeroboam  alrout 
the  worship  of  the  calves  which  lay  at  the 
root  of  the  nation's  sin.  It  is  well  explained 
by  Kirachi :  "  Although  the  word  'Jeroboam ' 
is  wanting,  so  that  he  makes  no  mention  of 
it  after  tmv,  such  is  the  scriptural  usage  in 
certain  places,  i.e.  to  omit  a  word  where  the 
sense  is  plain.  For  it  was  a  well-known  fact 
that  in  that  generation  they  walked  not 
after  the  commandment,  but  after  that  of 
Jeroboam;  therefore  he  has  abbreviated  the 
word  to  indicate  the  worthlessness,  and  used 
Isav  instead  of  mitsvah."  Perhaps  it  may 
have  the  concrete  sense  of  the  object  of 
idnliitious  worshifi. 

Ver.  12. — Therefore  will  I  bu  unto  Ephraim 
as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  as 
rottenness.  This  verse  is  well  explained  by 
C.ilvin  as  follows :  "  The  meaning  of  the 
prophet  is  by  no  means  obscure,  and  that  is, 
that  the  Lord  would  by  a  slow  corrosion 
consume  both  the  people ;  and  that,  though 
lie  would  not  by  one  onset  destroy  them,  yet 
they  would  pine  away  until  they  became 
wholly  rotten."  The  two  agents  of  destruc- 
tion here  named — the  moth  which  eats  away 
clothes,  and  the  woodworm  which  gnaws 
away  wood — figuratively  represent  slow  but 
sure  destruction.  They  are  found  together 
in  Job  xiii.  28.  Kimchi  explains  the  sense 
in  like  manner :  "  Like  the  moth  which  eats 
away  garments,  and  like  the  woodworm 
which  consumes  bones  and  wood,  so  shall  I 
consume  you."  The  pronoun  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  verse  is  emphatic:  "  Jyour  Gfld, 
who  would  have  been  your  protector  and 
preserver,  whom  you  have  sinfully  forsaken, 
and  whose  commandments  you  have  arbi- 
trarily set  aside — even  I  am  to  you  as  the 
source  of  rottenness,  and  of  slow  but  sure 
ruin." 

Ver.  13. — Then  went  Ephraim  to  the  As- 
syrian, and  sent  to  King  Jareb.  Both  king- 
doms became  conscious  of  ttieir  disease  and 
decline ;  Ephraim  felt  its  sickness  or  internal 
consumption,  Judah  its  wound  or  external 
corruption  (mazor,  a  festering  wound,  from 
zur,  to  squeeze  out) :  they  were  both  con- 
scious of  rottenness  in  their  comlitiou.  That 
diseased  condition  was  rather  spiritual  apos- 
tesy than  political  adversity,  though  these 
were  connCL-ted  as  cause  and  effect.  But,  in- 
8t(  ad  of  applying  to  Jehovah,  Ephraim  had 
recourse  to  Assyria  and  its  king  for  health 
and  help,  but  in  vain ;  for  no  earthly  power 
could  avert  the  Divine  judgments.  The 
punishment  threatened  in  the  twelfth  verse 
prompts  the  efforts  to  obtain  succour  men- 
tioned in  this.    The  general  lense  of  tl/a 


140 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  t.  1—15. 


verasis  givenbyKimchiaBfollowi:  "When 
Ephiaim  and  Judah  saw  that  the  enemies 
were  constantly  invading  and  plundering 
them,  they  seek  help  from  the  King  of  As- 
syria; hut  turn  not  hack  to  me,  nor  seek 
help  from  me,  hut  from  flesh  and  blood, 
which,  however,  cannot  help  them  when  it 
is  not  my  pleasure."  (1)  Some,  as  the  Jewish 
interpreters,  refer  the  first  clause  as  a  matter 
of  course  to  Ephraim,  but  the  second  to 
Judah ;  thus,  Jerome  in  like  manner  under- 
stands Ephraim's  visit  of  that  to  Pul,  re- 
corded in  2  Kings  xv.,  and  the  message  of 
Jmlah  to  Tiglath-pileser  (2  Kings  xvl.); 
but  an  interval  of  thirty  years  lay  between 
the  two  events  thus  describedas  synchronous. 
Eashi  explains  the  former  clause  of  Hoshea's 
visit  to  fehalmaneser  the  King  of  Assyria, 
and  the  second  of  Ahaz's  to  Tiglath-pileser ; 
Kimchi,  again,  refers  the  former  to  Menahem 
visiting  Pul,  and  the  second  of  Ahaz  to 
Tiglath-pileser  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  21), 
But  (2)  Ephraim  is  the  subject  in  both 
clauses,  so  that  there  is  no  need  of  a  sup- 
posed reference  to  Judah  in  the  secoud. 
Calvin  correctly  restricts  them  both  to 
Ephraim,  and  accounts  for  the  restriction  as 
follows:  "Why,  then,  does  he  name  only 
Ephraim?  Even  because  the  beginning  of 
this  evil  commenced  in  the  kingdom  of 
Israel ;  for  they  were  the  first  who  went  to 
the  King  of  Assur,  that  they  might,  by  his 
help,  resist  their  neighbours,  the  Syrians; 
the  jews  afterwards  followed  their  example. 
Since,  then,  the  Israelites  afforded  a  prece- 
dent to  the  .Tews  to  send  for  aids  of  this  kind, 
the  prophet  expressly  confines  his  discourse 
to  them."  He  admits,  however,  that  the 
accusation  had  respect  to  both  in  common ; 
or  Ephraim  may  have  applied  on  behalf  of 
Judah  as  well  as  for  herself.  Tliere  is  much 
diversity  of  opinion  with  regard  to  the  word 
"  Jareb."  Some  take  it  (1)  for  a  proper  name, 
either  of  an  Assyrian  king  or  of  some  place 
or  city  in  the  country  of  Assyria,  as  the 
LXX.,  Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi;  but  the 
absence  of  the  article  is  opposed  to  this, 
neither  is  Jer.  xxzvii.  1,  "  and  Zechariah 
reigned  as  king"  (vayyimloeh  melenh),  a 
proper  parallel.  Others  (2)  more  correctly 
explain  as  a  qualifying  epithet  to  "  king," 
that  is,  "  pleader,"  "  striver,"  or  "  warrior," 
in  other  words,  a  warlike  or  champion  king, 
like  the  epithet  of  aaniip  among  the  Greeks. 
The  indefinitenesB  in  this  case  gives  the  idea 
of  majesty  or  might,  as  in  Arabic ;  thus,  "  a 
champion  king,  and  such  a  king  I "  Yet  could 
he  not  (j/e<  ehaU  he  not  be  able  to)  heal  you 
(plurul,  and  so  Ephraim  and  Judah),  nor 
cure  you  of  your  wound.  Whatever  the 
distress  wis,  whetlier  arising  from  hostile 
invasion  oj  domestic  troubles,  those  degene- 
rate kings  had  recourse  to  foreigners  fojr 


aid.    With  the  profitlessnesB  bb  well  as  the 

sinfulness  of  such  attempts  they  are  here 
sharply  rebuked.  Tbns  Calvin :  "  Here  God 
declares  that  whatever  the  Israelites  might 
seek  would  be  in  vain.  '  Ye  think,'  he  says, 
'that  yon  can  escape  my  hand  by  these 
remedies;  but  your  folly  will  at  length  betray 
itself,  for  he  will  avail  yon  nothing;  that  is. 
King  Jareb  will  not  htal  you.' " 

Vers.  14, 15. — These  verses  assign  a  reason 
for  the  powerlessness  even  of  the  mighty 
Assjrrian  monarch  to  help ;  and  that  reason 
is  the  Divine  interposition.  The  irresistible 
Jehovah  himself  (the  addition  of  the  pro- 
noun intensifies,  yet  more  its  repetition) 
now  interferes  for  the  destruction  of  the 
apostate  and  rebellious  people.  For  I  am 
unto  Ephraim  as  a  lion,  and  as  a  young  lion 
to  the  house  of  Judah.  As  we  are  taught  in 
these  words,  Jehovah's  mode  ot  procedure 
is  now  changed.  Before  it  had  been  slow 
and  silent,  though  sure  destruction,  as 
signified  by  the  moth  and  woodworm ;  but 
now  it  will  be  public  and  patent  to  the  eyes 
of  all,  as  well  as  decisive  and  powerful,  as 
intimated  by  the  comparison  of  a  lion  and 
young  lion.  Nor  is  that  all :  lion-like,  he 
will  rend  before  removing  the  prey — a  tear- 
ing in  pieces  and  then  a  carrying  away. 
This  well-known  habit  of  the  lion  finds  its 
counterpart  in  the  subsequent  facts  of 
Hebrew  history.  The  northern  kingdom 
was  first  rent  or  broken  up  by  Shalmaneser ; 
subsequently  the  population  were  carried 
away  into  captivity;  in  like  manner  the 
southern  kingdom  s'uifered  at  the  hands  of 
Kebuchadnezzar.  I  will  go  and  return  to 
my  place.  The  figurative  comparison  with 
a  lion  is  continued  in  the  first  clause  of  ver. 
15  also.  The  lion  tears  his  victim  and 
cairies  it  away,  then  he  retires  into  his  cave 
or  den ;  so  Jehovah,  after  bringing  calamity 
upon  Israel,  withdraws  from ,  the  scene 
and  retires  to  his  own  place  in  heaven, 
though  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  con- 
tain him.  There,  in  that  unapproachable 
ether,  he  is  inaccessible  to  and  beyond  the 
reach  of  the  guilty  nation  that  knew  not 
nor  valued  the  former  times  of  merciful 
visitation.  One  remedy,  and  only  one,  is 
left,  and  that  is  found  in  penitence  and 
prayer.  Once  they  find  out  their  guiltiness 
and  humble  themselves  in  repentance,  they 
may  hopefully  seek  his  face  and  favour. 
Turning  away  from  human  help,  and  sup- 
plicating the  gracious  help  of  the  Divine 
presence,  they  are  encouraged  by  the  pro- 
spect of  relief  and  revival ;  while  the  means 
to  that  end  are,  no  doubt,  painful,  yet  profit- 
able. In  the  school  of  affliction  they  learnt 
penitence  and  were  brought  to  their  kuoca 
in  prayer. 


CH.  T.  I— 15.]  THE  BOOK  Of  HOSBA.  Ml 

HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  l—t.—Ood  here  arraigns  the  sins  of  princes,  priests,  and  people.  Their 
ilegeneracy  had  been  very  great  and  their  sins  very  grievous.  Though  there  is  no 
formal  catalogue  given  of  those  sins,  yet  they  are  incidentally  exhibited  in  the  reproofs 
and  rebukes  which  follow. 

L  All  classes  abe  addbessed  bt  the  Divine  Wobd.  It  is  directed  to  the  high 
and  to  the  low  alike ;  to  the  rich  and  to  the  poor ;  it  speaks  to  every  grade  in  society 
and  every  rank  in  life ;  there  is  none  so  high  as  to  be  above  its  teaching,  and  none  su 
lowly  as  to  be  beneath  its  notice.  To  sovereigns  as  to  the  meanest  subjects  of  their 
realm;  to  magistrates  and  men  in  authority,  as  well  as  to  those  under  their  jurisdiction, 
the  warnings  and  admonitions  of  Scripture  reach.  To  all,  of  every  class  and  condition, 
of  every  caste  and  clime,  the  Divine  Word  is  offered  as  a  light  to  thiir  fe^t  and  a  lamp 
to  their  path. 

II.  All  classes  abe  amenable  to  the  Divine  judgments.  The  judgments  of  God 
are  denounced  against  all  workers  of  iniquity — from  the  poorest  and  meanest  of  the 
people  to  the  priests  who  should  be  their  instructors  and  examples,  and  to  the  princes  and 
principal  men,  who  should  not  only  rule  and  guide,  but  protect  and  preserve  them  to  the 
utmost  of  their  power.  And  yet  there  is  a  distinction ;  ior  those  who,  through  their 
exalted  position  or  extensive  influence,  seduce  others  to  sin,  expose  themselves  to  sorer 
condemnation.  But,  while  those  who  entrap  others  into  sin  are  doubly  guilty,  the  per- 
sons entrapped  are  not  on  that  account  guiltless.  Subjects  .sometimes  suffer  through  the 
mistakes  of  their  sovereigns ;  but  when  subjects  and  sovereigns  are  both  involved  in 
guilt,  they  must  expect  to  have  their  respective  share  in  punishment.  When  God  has 
a  controversy  with  a  people,  and  his  judgments  are  approaching,. it  is  a  time  for  serious 
consideration  and  solemn  reflection.  Hence  we  have  a  triple  call  to  attention  in  this 
first  verse :  "  Hear  ye  this,  henrken  ye,  give  ye  ear."  It  was  an  earnest  time  and  an 
emphatic  call;  for  God  "will  at  last  force  audience  and  attention  from  the  most 
stulibom." 

III.  All  classes  had  pbbvbeted  theib  way.  The  revolters  seem  to  have  belonged 
to  all  ranks  and  to  have  comprehended  all  classes.  If  the  "  slaughter "  which  they 
made  refers  to  the  slaying  of  sacrifices,  it  is  spoken  of  with  contempt,  because  those 
sacrifices,  whether  from  defects  in  their  own  nature,  or  imperfection  in  the  manner 
in  which  they  were  offered,  or  the  wrongness  of  the  motive  with  which  they  were 

.  presented,  were  unacceptable  to  God.  Accordingly  he  speaks  of  them  disparagingly  ; 
•for  "  though  the  prophet  spake  of  sacrifices,  he  no  doubt  called  sacrificing  in  contempt 
killing ;  as  though  we  should  call  the  temple  the  shambles,  and  the  killing  of  victims 
slaughtering."  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  slaughter  referred  to  be  understood  literally 
of  actual  murder,  the  criminality  is  still  greater,  and  they  bear  the  brand  of  red-handed 
assassins.  In  either  case,  the  idiom  employed  is  a  very  energetic  mode  of  expression. 
«  The  slaughter  they  have  made  deep,"  or, "  they  have  gone  deep  in  slaughtering,"  conveys 
the  Idea  of  the  great  length  to  which  they  had  gone,  either  in  sacrifices  to  idols  and 
contrary  to  legal  appointment,  or  in  murderously  shedding  blood,  or  even  in  the  more 
modified  sense  of  causing  destruction.  They  had  gone  to  an  extreme  in  the  direction 
indicated,  whichever  sense  is  assigned  to  slaughtering.  It  is  not  so  much  that  they  hid 
their  doings  deep,  as  that  they  went  deeply  into  their  works,  or  sunk  deeply  in  their 
sin.  Further,  the  aggravation  of  their  sin  consisted  in  its  being  without  excuse.  They 
could  not  plead  ignorance,  for  they  had  had  line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept. 
They  could  not  say  that  they  had  been  left  to  themselves  without  let  or  hindrance,  for 
had  they  not  enjoyed  the  instructions  and  admonitions  of  those  prophets  of  God  whose 
sphere  of  labour  lay  in  the  northern  kingdom  ?  Warnings  they  had  had  from  Ahijah, 
Elijah,  Elisha,  and  others;  corrections  moderate  in  measure  and  salutary  in  design  they 
had  no  doubt,  been  favoured  with.  Yet  all  had  been  to  no  purpose;  they  sunk  deeper 
and'deeper  in  the  slough  of  sin,  so  that  their  sin  had  become  exceeding  smful. 

IV.  All  DIS0UI8B8  of  sinkebs  abe  tbansparent  to  the  eye  of  Omnisoienoe. 
Many  are  the  pretences  men  mtvke  to  cover  their  sins,  and  artful  the  pretexts  by  which 
they  seek  to  hide  them.  But  however  men  may  strive  to  conceal  their  sins  from  their 
fellow-men,  however  they  may  glogs  them  over  so  as  to  deceive  thgir  own  souls,  »nd 


142  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  t.  1—16. 

however  they  may  cloak  them,  as  though  it  were  possible  to  cheat  the  Almighty ;  jet 
all  such  artifices,  by  which  they  try  to  deceive  their  neighbours,  or  blind  themselves,  or 
even  escape  the  eye  of  Omnisnience,  will  prove  miserable  evasions,  leaving  them  at  last 
— even  the  inmost  thoughts  and  intents  of  their  hearts — open  and  naked  before  the  eyes  oi 
him  with  whom  they  have  to  do.  "  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth :  for  man  looketh  on 
'  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart."  The  sin  of  Ephraim,  the 
premier  tribe  of  Israel,  was  known  to  God,  and  he  pronounced  it  whoredom,  spiritual 
whoredom,  that  is,  idolatry.  The  effect  of  that  sin,  which,  originating  with  Ephraim, 
infected  all  the  other  tribes  of  Israel,  was  not  hid,  and  could  not  be  hid,  from  the 
omniscient  One,  and  he  denounced  it  as  defilement — pollution  loathsome  as  sinful.  Many 
a  specious  excuse  had  been  offered,  we  cannot  doubt,  for  the  worship  of  the  calves. 
Did  it  not  originate  with  Jeroboam,  that  patriot  king  who  came  to  the  rescue  of  the 
people,  and  delivered  them  from  unjust  and  grinding  taxation?  Was  not  Jerusalem 
too  far  distant  from  the  centre  of  the  country  to  be  the  gathering-place  of  the  tribes  ? 
Was  not  Bethel  a  consecrated  place — a  holy  spot  from  that  early  time  when  Jacob  had 
bis  wondrous  vision  of  the  ladder  connecting  earth  with  heaven?  Was  not  Dan  con- 
veniently situated  for  the  northern  and  remoter  tribes  ?  These,  and  such  arguments 
as  these,  might  serve  to  palliate  the  will-worship  of  Ephraim  and  the  idolatry  of  IsraeL 
But  no ;  the  eye  of  QoA  saw  through  it  all ;  for  now,  whatever  excuse  might  be  alleged ; 
now,  whatever  plausibilities  might  be  employed  ;  now,  whatever  veil  might  be  thrown 
over  their  procedure ; — ^it  stood  out  in  its  true  colours,  and  in  the  sight  of  Heaven, 
idolatry,  defilement-— sin  in  inception  and  sin  in  execution,  sin  in  act  and  sin  in  effect. 
Thus  Omniscience  is  proof  against  all  the  plausible  pretexta  with  which  men  surround 
their  sins  by  way  of  excuse,  apology,  or  palliation. 

V.  Sins,  like  sokbows,  love  a  tbain.  How  often  one  sin  leads  to  another,  and  that, 
again,  to  many  more  1  Sins  not  nnfrequently  are  linked  together.  Israel  by  this  time 
was  bound  by  the  chain  of  their  own  sins ;  and  the  links  of  that  chain  were  many. 
Beginning  our  enumeration  with  idolatry,  we  find  in  its  wake  impenitence,  ignorance, 
insolence,  and  iniquity  in  genersl.  1.  It  is  bad  enough  when  men  fall  into  sin,  but 
worse  when  they  persist  in  it ;  nor  is  there  any  real  repentance  unless  there  are  fruits 
meet  for  repentance.  But  when  men  will  not  have  recourse  to  any  of  those  outward  means 
that  might  tend  toward  repentance,  the  obduracy  of  their  heart  is  extreme  and  their 
condition  desperate.  Thus  was  it  with  Israel  when  they  would  not "  frame  their  doings 
to  turn  unto  their  God."  2,  The  alternative  rendering  of  these  words  shows  us  the 
slavery  of  sin.  Never  was  there  a  more  cruel  bondage  than  that  of  iniquity.  "  Their 
doings  will  not  suffer  them  to  turn ; "  they  have  put  the  yoke  on  their  neck,  and  having 
worn  it  long  they  are  loth  to  part  with  it ;  and  if  they  would  they  could  not.  "  Can  the 
Ethiopian  change  his  skip,  or  the  leopard  his  spots?  then  may  ye  also  do  good,  that 
are  accustomed  to  do  evil."  So  in  Peter  we  read  of  persons  "  having  eyes  full  of 
adultery,  and  that  cannot  cease  from  sin."  3.  When  men  continue  long  in  a  course  of 
sin,  hardening  themselves  against  remonstrance  and  reproof,  and  holding  out  against  all 
inducements  and  invitations  to  repent,  God  may,  and  sometimes  does,  give  them  up  to 
judicial  blindness  of  one  kind  or  other.  An  evil  spirit  of  idolatry  or  impunity,  or  both, 
had  taken  possession  of  the  people's  heart  at  this  period.  "  A  strong  man  armed  keepeth 
his  palace — his  goods  are  in  peace ; "  so  the  infatuation  of  a  particular  course  of  sin,  like 
a  Satanic  spirit  and  with  Satanic  power,  completely  overmastered  and  dominated  them. 
4.  Profession  without  practice  is  both  hypocritical  and  vain.  The  Israelites  at  this  time 
had  a  profession  of  religion,  for  God  is  called  "  their  God,"  which  could  only  be  by  their 
profession,  or  owing  to  the  original  covenant  engagement,  the  conditions  of  which  they 
had  fallen  away  from,  or  by  reason  of  his  long-suffering  mercy  wuting  for  their  return. 
It  is,  rather,  the  first  of  these  that  justified  the  use  of  the  possessive  in  this  case.  And 
that  being  so,  they  claimed  to  possess  knowledge  of  God ;  but  "  as  they  did  not  like 
to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave  them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind  "  or  as 
the  margin  has  it,  "  to  a  mind  void  of  judgment."  Continuance  in  sin  proves  men's 
ignorance  of  the  true  character  of  God,  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  of  the  hatefulness  of 
sin,  and  of  the  dreadful  consequences  of  backsliding.  The  custom  of  sinning  deprives 
men  of  whatever  knowledge  of  such  things  they  had  or  seemed  to  have,  so  "that  "  he 
that  hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  even  that  which  he  hath."  6.  This  ignorance 
was  evidence  of  their  ingratitude.    "  The  prophet,"  says  Calvin,  "  extenuates  not  the 


en.  V.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  143 

sin  of  the  people,  but,  on  the  contrary,  amplifies  their  ingratitude,  because  they  had 
forgotten  their  God  who  had  so  indulgently  treated  them.  Ab  they  had  been  redeemeil 
by  God's  hand,  a»  the  teaching  of  the  Law  had  continued  among  them,  as  they  had 
been  preserved  to  that  day  through  Gods  constant  kindness,  it  was  truly  an  evidence 
of  monstrous  ignorance  that  they  could  in  an  instant  adopt  ungodly  forms  of  worship, 
and  embrace  those  corruptions  which  they  knew  were  condemned  in  the  Law." 

VI.  Proofs  and  causes  op  Israel's  pride.  Ephraim's  pride  and  envy  of  Judah 
produced  the  disruption  and  perpetuated  it.  Two  privileges  of  the  birthright  forfeited 
by  Jacob's  firstborn  had  been  shared  by  these  tribes.  Joseph  got  the  double  por- 
tion in  connection  with  Ephraim  and  Manasseh;  and  Judah  gained  the  pre-eminence. 
Though  Judah  was  superior  both  numerically  and  by  largeness  of  territory  in  the  land 
of  promise,  Ephraim  enjoyed  countervailing  advantages.  All  along  from  the  blessing 
of  Jacob  Ephraim  was  inspired  with  the  hope  of  great  things'  for  himself  and  tribe. 
The  Ephraimites  had  the  choicest  of  the  land,  and  a  central  position  contributing  to 
their  influence  over  the  other  tribes.  Joshua,  the  chosen  chief  who  had  led  the  people 
into  the  land  of  promise  and  settled  them  in  it,  sprang  from  Ephraim;  Samuel,  the 
last  of  the  judges,  was  a  native  of  Mount  Ephraim ;  for  three  centuries  and  a  half  the 
national  sanctuary  remained  at  Shiloh,  within  the  confines  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  ; 
the  men  of  that  tribe  had  highly  distinguished  themselves  in  the  war  with  Midian, 
securing  the  fords  of  Jordan  and  beheading  the  two  Midianite  princes,  Oreb  and  Zeeb,  who 
had  escaped  at  the  head  of  fifteen  thousand  men.  Nor  were  they  slow  to  assert  their 
claims ;  such  was  their  pride,  that  they  could  not  brook  a  subordinate  position,  but  insisted 
on  pre-eminence.  Their  self-assertion  and  even  unreasonable  petulance  were  severely 
chastised  by  Jephthah.  For  a  time  the  superiority  inclined  or  actually  belonged  to 
Ephraim ;  but  the  preponderance  given  to  Judah  by  the  elevation  of  David,  and  Solomon 
his  son,  completely  turned  the  scale.  Moreover,  the  transference  to  Jerusalem,  both  of 
the  seat  of  ecclesiastical  authority  from  Shiloh  and  of  the  civil  capital  from  Shechem, 
deeply  wounded  the  pride  of  Ephraim,  and  greatly  increased  the  rivalry  with  Judah.  To 
the  slight  thus  put  upon  Ephraim  there  is  a  distinct  reference  in  several  verses  of  the 
seventy-eighth  psalm ;  thus,  "  God  was  wroth,  and  greatly  abhorred  Israel :  so  that  he 
forsook  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,  the  tent  which  he  placed  among  men ; "  and  again, 
"  He  refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  :  but  chose 
the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  Mount  Zion  which  he  loved."  For  seven  years  they  held  out 
against  David ;  they  were  the  strength  of  the  Absalomio  rebellion ;  they  abetted  the 
usurpation  of  Jeroboam,  and  accepted  the  idolatrous  worship  which,  for  political 
purposes,  he  commended  to  them ;  and  all  from  their  pride  and  overweening  estimate 
of  themselves,  and  envy  towards  their  brethren  of  Judah. 

VII.  The  humiliation  op  pride,  or  its  testimony.  1.  This  overbearing  spirit  of 
Israel  as  a  nation,  and  of  Ephraim  its  kingly  tribe,  was  sorely  crushed,  and  the  pride 
of  both  sadly  humhled,  when,  as  had  been  foretold,  they  first  went  into  captivity.  2. 
The  other  rendering  of  testify  is  well  explained  by  the  following  observations  of  Pusey : 
"They  could  not  give  up  this  sin  of  Jeroboam  without  endangering  their  separate 
existence  as  Israel,  and  owning  the  superiority  of  Judah.  From  this  complete  self- 
surrender  to  God  their  pride  shrank  and  held  them  back.  The  pride  which  Israel  thus 
showed  in  refusing  to  turn  to  God,  and  in  preferring  their  sin  to  their  God,  itself, 
he  says,  witnessed  against  them,  and  condemned  them."  3.  It  must  have  been  an 
addition  to  Israel's  calamity  that  they  had  been  a  snare  to  Judah,  and  helped  to  drag 
tbem  down  into  the  same  slough  of  sin,  and  eventually  into  the  same  catastrophe  with 
themselves.  4.  But  how  are  we  to  account  for  the  seeming  contradiction  between  the 
safety  previously  promised  Judah  and  the  calamity  now  denounced  ?  Calvin's  reply 
to  a  similar  inquiry  is  pertinent  and  plain.  '•  The  prophet,"  he  says,  "  speaks  here  not 
of  those  Jews  who  continued  in  true  and  pure  religion,  but  of  those  who  had  with  the 
Israelites  alienated  themselves  from  the  only  true  God  and  joined  in  their  superstitions. 
He  thus  refers  here  to  the  degenerate,  and  not  to  the  faithful  Jews ;  for  to  all  who 
worshipped  God  aright  salvation  had  been  already  promised." 

Vers.  6 10. — No  place  found  for  repentance.    They  would  seek  the  Lord  with 

sacrifices  from  the  flock  and  from  the  herd,  but  they  would  not  find  him;  they 
multiplied  sacrifices,  but  the  Lord  had  withdrawn  himself.    Thus  in  the  New  Testament 


144  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  v.  1—15. 

we  read  that  Esau  "  found  no  place  of  repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with 
tears ; "  or,  according  to  the  Revised  Version,  "  even  when  he  afterward  desired  to 
inherit  the  blessing,  he  was  rejected  (for  he  found  no  place  of  repentance),  though  he 
sousht  it  diligently  with  tears."  In  one  of  our  Lord's  parables—the  _  parable  of  the 
ten  virgins — we  read  that  after  those  who  were  ready  had  gone  in  with  him  to  the 
marriage,  "  the  door  was  shut."  This  brief  sentence  is  in  one  aspect  of  it  among  the 
most  impressive  and  solemn  in  the  whole  Word  of  God.  The  sentiment  conveyed  by 
it  is  somewhat,  indeed  much,  akin  to  that  of  the  statement  of  the  prophet  in  reference 
to  Israel. 

I.  It  is  important  to  eealize  thk  katubb  of  such  withdrawal.  The  loss  of 
earthly  friends  or  their  estrangement  from  us  is  much  to  be  deplored ;  how  much  sadder 
it  is  when  we  forfeit  the  favour  of  Heaven,  and  God  withdraws  himself!  On  earth 
friends  may,  from  misconduct  on  our  part,  or  misconception  on  their  part,  or  misrepre- 
sentation on  the  part  of  some  intermeddler,  or  misapprehension  of  one  kind  or  other, 
shut  the  door  against  us,  or  we  may  shut  the  door  against  ourselves.  But  however 
such  an  event  is  to  be  regretted,  still  a  proper  understanding  may  reopen  the  once 
friendly  door,  or  time  may  unbar  it,  or  the  kindly  interposition  of  mutual  friends  may 
again  open  it ;  or,  failing  all  this,  another  door  may  be  opened  in  its  stead,  and  other 
friends  replace  those  whose  friendship  has  been  lost,  or  even  better  friends  may  be 
raised  up  in  their  room.  But  when  the  Lord  shuts  to  the  door  and  withdraws  himself, 
no  interposition  shall  unbar  it,  no  time  reopen  it,  no  explanation  ever  fling  or  force  it 
back ;  nothing  shall  ever  be  able  to  remove  the  bar  that  closes  it.  Once  shut,  it  is 
shut  for  ever;  once  closed,  it  never  opens;  once  locked,  no  key  can  enter  its  wards; 
once  bolted,  that  bolt  remains  an  everlasting  fixture. 

II.  It  is  well  to  eeflect  on  the  time  when  God  withdraws  himself  and  is  no 
L0N6BR  TO  BE  FOUND.  There  may  be  some  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  precise  times 
when  God  withdraws  himself  and  is  no  longer  found.  1.  One  thing,  however,  is 
abundantly  certain,  that  in  the  case  of  sinners  who  live  and  die  in  sin,  impenitent  and 
unpardoned,  this  withdrawal  takes  place  at  death ;  for  there  is  neither  knowledge  nor 
device  in  the  grave.  Then  the  day  of  grace  is  concluded,  then  the  time  of  probation 
ends,  then  the  means  of  salvation  terminate,  then  the  space  for  repentance  is  past,  and 
God  has  for  ever  withdrawn  himself.  Death  seals  the  sinner's  doom  irreversibly ;  the 
last  opportunity  is  gone,  and  for  ever ;  prayer  is  then  powerless  and  penitence  hopeless. 
There  remains  only  the  dooming,  damning  sentence, "  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are," 
Hollow-hearted  hypocrites  ye  must  have  been,  workers  of  iniquity,  and  nothing  more 
and  nothing  better,  false  professors,  fruitless  fig  trees,  cumbering  and  cursing  the  rich 
vineyard  soil.  Children  of  God  ye  never  were ;  I  never  owned  you  as  such ;  I 
cannot  do  so  now.  And  thus  he  withdraws,  leaving  them  to  their  fate.  2.  But  even 
before  death  this  withdrawal  may  take  place,  at  least  in  a  certain  sense.  We  are 
warned  in  Scripture  that  the  Spirit  will  not  always  strive.  To  the  Israelites  of  old  he 
Bwore  that  they  would  never  enter  into  his  rest,  and  so  a  whole  generation  of  them  was 
excluded  from  the  land  of  promise ;  in  reference  to  which  the  inspired  penman  utters 
the  solemn  warning,  "  Let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter  into  that  rest,  lest  any  man  fall 
after  the  same  example  of  tmbelief"  ("disobedience,"  Kevised  Version  and  margin). 
In  this  very  book  God's  abandonment  of  Ephraim  and  consequent  withdrawal  are 
affirmed.    "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone."    Let  us,  then,  beware  of 

E revoking  God  to  withhold  or  withdraw  the  gracious  influences  of  his  Spirit,  and  thus 
laye  us  to  judicial  blindness.  Let  us  beware  of  sinning  away  our  day  of  grace,  and 
in  this  respect  outliving  it.  3.  We  would  not  venture  to  limit  the  meroy  of  God,  or 
set  bounds  to  bis  sovereign  grace. 

"While  the  lamp  holds  out  to  bum 
The  vilest  sinner  may  return." 

But  Ck)d  at  any  moment  may  withdraw  the  breath  of  his  Spirit,  or  withhold  the  oil 
of  his  grace,  and  the  lamp  go  out  in  everlasting  darkness!  Pusey  makes  a  very 
interesting  distinction,  as  follows:  "The  general  rule  of  his  dealings  is  this:  that 
when  the  time  of  each  judgment  is  actually  come,  then  as  to  that  judgment  it  la  too 
late  to  pray.  It  is  not  too  late  for  other  mercy,  or  for  final  forgiveness,  80  long  as 
man's  state  of  probation  lasts ;  but  it  is  too  late  as  to  this  one." 


«H.T.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  145 

in.  It  is  of  MOMEiKT  TO  ASSIGN  SOME  SEASONS  WHY  GoD  WITHDRAWS  HIMSELF,     This 

frequently  takes  place,  we  doubt  not,  in  consequence  of  men  silencing  conscience  and 
stiffing  convictions.  Conscience  may  become  callous  or  seared,  and  convictions  may 
wear  gradually  weak,  nay,  at  length  cease  altogether.  The  same  result  may  be  brought 
about  by  allowing  any  sin  to  have  the  mastery,  and  in  consequence  of  not  seeking 
grace  to  resist  it,  or  not  summoning  up  resolution  to  break  its  yoke.  1.  The  people  par- 
ticularly referred  to  by  the  prophet  had  not  sought  the  Lord  in  time.  It  was  only 
when  ruin  stared  them  in  the  face  that  tiiey  bethought  themselves  of  seeking  God;  it 
was  fear  drove  them  to  his  service.  2.  They  were  only  half-hearted  in  his  service,  and 
it  was  a  divided  allegiance  they  rendered ;  but  God  claims  the  whole  heart  of  bis 
worshippers,  otherwise  he  will  not  be  found  of  them,  3,  Their  repentance  was  not 
genuine;  it  appears  to  have  been  outward  sacrifice,  not  inward  service.  They  brought 
their  herds,  not  their  hearts ;  their  flocks,  not  the  feelings  of  their  souls.  4.  Their  faith- 
lessness had  a  prospective  as  well  as  present  evil  influence.  Their  children,  instead  of 
being  trained  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  inured  to  idolatry  and  irre- 
ligion  both  by  the  precept  and  example  of  their  parents,  would,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
prove  as  faithless  and  godless,  or  more  so  than  they.  5.  No  wonder  God  set  a  time  to 
ease  him  of  his  adversaries  and  avenge  him  of  his  enemies.  That  time,  a  month,  was 
certain,  short,  and  sudden. 

IV.  God  speaks  before  he  strikes.  God  suffereth  long  with  the  provocations  of 
sinners.  He  warns  them  of  the  evil  of  their  ways ;  he  apprises  them  of  the  ruinous 
consequences  of -their  sinful  courses.  1.  He  threatens  before  he  inflicts  the  blow;  he 
gives  notice  of  his  judgments  before  they  arrive.  Dark  clouds  precede  the  coming 
storm.  Milder  judgments  are  sent  as  precursors  of  more  severe  visitations.  It  is  of 
God's  mercy  that  men  are  not  only  informed  of  their  duty,  but  apprised  of  their  danger. 
Ministers  of  the  gospel  are  to  sound  the  alarm,  that  men  may  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come.  2.  When  God's  judgments  are  near  at  hand,  their  approach  has  a  startling 
effect.  Those  who  made  light  of  them,  or  thought  them  far  off,  are  confounded  and 
amazed ;  while  this  confusion  may  be  reflected  in  the  very  abruptness  of  the  expression, 
"  After  thee,  0  Benjamin ; "  at  thy  back  comes  the  enemy — disaster,  destruction,  desola- 
tion, 3.  The  judgments  of  God,  thus  announced  as  near,  at  the  very  door,  are  represented 
as  sure.  They  are  no  mere  menaces  or  make-believes ;  they  are  not  meant  merely  to 
alarm ;  they  are  dread  realities,  which  impenitent  sinners  can  by  no  means.escape  or  evade. 
"  Among  the  tribes  of  Israel  have  I  made  known  that  which  shall  surely  be."  To  all 
notice  had  been  given,  so  that  no  one  could  urge  the  plea  of  ignorance  on  his  own  part, 
nor  charge  precipitancy  on  the  part  of  God.  In  his  mercy  he  had  made  it  known  to  all 
without  exception,  in  his  truth  he  will  make  it  sure.  They  had  been  warned,  ealled  to 
repentance,  chastened  paternally ;  but  they  had  despised  all  this.  And  the  day  of 
mercy  is  now  past;  the  time  of  judgment  is  come;  the  final  doom,  fixed  and  irreversible, 
is  denounced.  When  princes,  making  their  will  law,  trample  on  the  privileges  of  their 
people,  or  infringe  the  Law  of  God,  or  in  any  way  set  aside  sacred  and  solemn  obliga- 
tions, they  incur  a  fearful  responsibility.  When,  not  only  by  their  edicts  but  by  their 
example,  they  set  aside  the  enactments  of  Heaven,  and  encourage  their  subjects  to  do 
likewise,  they  open  upon  themselves  the  flood-gntes  of  Divine  wrath  which  God  pours 
out  upon  them,  like  the  waters  of  the  deluge  on  the  guilty  antediluvians.  Pusey  sup- 
poses that  the  reference  to  the  princes  of  Judah  being  "  like  them  that  remove  the 
bound,"  contains  some  such  allusion  as  the  following :  "  Since  the  prophet  had  just 
pronounced  the  desolation  of  Israel,  perhaps  that  sin  was  that,  instead  of  taking  warning 
from  the  threatened  destruction  and  turning  to  God,  they  thought  only  how  the 
removal  of  Bphraim  would  benefit  them  by  the  enlargement  of  their  borders.  They 
mi^rht  hope  also  to  increase  their  private  estates  out  of  the  desolate  lands  of  Ephraim 
their  brother." 

Vers.  11 15. — Qod^s  judgments  differ  both  in  degree  and  kind.  Ephraim  had  obeyed 

man  rather  than  God,  and  God  gives  them  over  to  man  for  punishment.  The  men  who 
oppressed  Ephraim  acted  unjustly,  but  God,  in  permitting  that  unjust  oppression,  was 
exercising  his  prerogative  of  justice.  Neither  could  Bphraim  palliate  their  sin  by 
alleging  compulsion  on  the  part  of  their  rulers,  nor  throw  the  blame  entirely  on  the 
ungodly  commandment  of  an  ungodly  king,  or  those  who  might  enforce  it  by  pains  an  i 
bobea.  ^ 


14«  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE  A.  [oh.  v.  1—15. 

penalties.  Tkey  obeyed  it,  not  by  constraint,  but  willingly ;  not  through  oompulBion, 
but  of  a  ready  mind. 

I.  The  desiqn  and  natube  of  umon  and  milder  judombnts.  The  moth  and 
woodworm  may  symbolize  lesser  judgments.  Such  visitations  frequently  have  for  their 
object  the  repentance  and  reformation  of  the  people  or  persons  so  visited.  God's  design 
in  sending  them  is  gracious ;  his  purpose  is  merciful.  The  process,  notwithstanding,  is 
painful  and  the  affliction  grievous.  It  goes  on  silently,  so  that  little  alarm  is  made ; 
noiselessly,  so  that  little  apprehension  is  felt ;  hence  it  is  that  grace  is  needed  for  men 
to  know  the  time  of  such  visitation.  It  proceeds  slowly,  so  that  time  is  allowed  men 
to  mend  their  ways,  and  space  given  them  for  repentance.  The  judgments  here  spoken 
of  proceed  gradually,  and  are  designed  to  prevent  greater.  Thus  mercy  is  mingled  with 
judgment ;  for  judgment  is  Grod's  strange  work,  while  mercy  is  his  darling  attribute. 

n.  The  imfotenot  of  mere  human  helpers.  They  felt  their  sickness,  they  suffered 
from  their  painful  wound,  and  became  conscious  of  rottenness  in  their  state.  They  did 
not  discern  with  equal  clear-sightedness  the  cause  of  that  sickness,  nor  perceive  the 
source  whence  that  rottenness  proceeded.  They  were  equally  blind  to  the  right  way  of 
relief.  Had  they  seen  their  sin  in  their  suffering,  Gcd's  hand  in  their  stroke,  and  his 
justice  in  its  infliction,  they  would  have  been  nearer  the  right  way  to  the  remedy. 
They  sought  helpfrom  the  creature,  not  from  the  Creator;  from  the  monarch  of  Assyria, 
not  from  tlie  King  of  kings,  and  yet  he  only  distressed  them  and  helped  them  not. 
So  with  men  too  often  in  time  of  their  distress.  They  put  confidence  in  human 
means,  but  find  at  last  that  they  are  leaning  on  broken  reeds ;  they  hew  out  for  them- 
selves cisterns,  but  find  too  late  that  they  are  broken  cisterns,  that  can  hold  no  water. 
Not  only  so,  by  such  sinful  expedients  they  are  in  no  way  bettered,  but  rather  get 
worse,  and  increase  thereby  at  once  their  sin  and  their  sorrow. 

III.  Why  the  sorer  and  severer  judgments  are  resorted  to.  The  lion  and  the 
young  lion  are  emblematical  of  the  severer  judgments.  God  threatens  to  deal  with  the 
people  of  Israel  and  Judah  more  rigorously  than  heretofore.  "  I  will  not  be  any  longer 
like  a  moth  and  a  worm ;  1  shall  come  like  a  lion  to  you,  with  an  upen  mouth  to  devour 
you. ...  I  will  rage  against  you  as  a  fierce  wild  beast :  }our  grievance  shall  not  now  be 
from  moths  and  worms;  but  you  shall  have  an  open  and  dreadful  contest  with  the  lion 
and  the  young  lion.  .  .  .  Men,  when  they  attempt  to  oppose  vain  helps  to  the  wrath  of 
Grod,  gain  only  this,  that  they  more  and  more  provoke  and  inflame  his  wrath  against 
themselves.  After  God  has  first  gnawed,  he  will  at  length  devour ;  after  he  has  pricked, 
he  will  deeply  wound ;  after  he  has  struck,  he  will  wholly  destroy."  But  why  are  these 
severer  visitations  had  recourse  to?  The  answer  is  very  well  given  by  Cyril  as  follows : 
*  As  in  human  bodies  such  affections  as  are  violent  and  do  not  yield  to  gentle  remedies 
are  frequently  overcome  by  fire  and  sword,  in  like  way  and  manner  nfl'ections  occurring 
in  human  souls,  if  they  do  not  give  way  to  mild  words,  and  are  overcome  by  prudent 
reasoning,  are  expelled  by  labour  and  chastisement  and  severe  calamities." 

IV.  A  RESPITE  RESULTING  IN  REPENTANCE.  The  infliction  of  punishment  is  repre- 
sented as  executed  in  lion-like  fashion :  he  is  not  forced  to  retreat,  nor  is  there  any 
possibiUty  of  rescue,  nor  does  he  retire  stealthily  and  with  fox-like  secrecy  and  cunning, 
but  openly,  powerfully,  and  victoriously.  When  God  visits  with  judgments,  he  comes 
forth  out  of  his  place  and  men  are  forced  to  feel  his  presence ;  when  his  corrections  are 
completed,  he  returns  to  his  place,  and  there,  though  he  seems  to  take  no  notice  of,  and 
to  be  far  removed  from,  his  people,  he  has  taken  his  place  on  tLie  mercy-seat  and  is 
waiting  to  be  gracious.  God  here  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men ;  "  for  he  neither  so 
hides  himself  in  heaven  that  he  neglects  human  affairs,  nor  withdraws  his  hand  but 
that  he  sustains  the  world  by  the  continued  exercise  of  his  power,  nor  even  takes  his 
Spirit  from  men,  especially  when  he  would  lead  them  to  repentance ;  for  men  never  of 
their  own  accord  turn  themselves  to  God,  but  by  his  hidden  influence."  Thus,  when 
God  had  punished  both  Israel  and  Judah  by  exile,  he  seemed  to  hide  his  face  from  them, 
as  though  unmindful  of  them,  and  having  neither  care  nor  regard  for  them.  This  hidino 
of  his  face  allowed  time  for  repentance.  His  purpose  was  to  induce  them  to  repent  and 
return  to  him.     This  was  the  true  and  only  remedy. 

V.  Men  RETURN  to  God  by  repentance  and  faith.  The  first  step  men  take  as 
they  return  to  God  is  confession  of  sin — "  they  acknowledge  their  offence  ; "  the  first  part 
in  the  process  of  healing  is  the  correct  diagnosis  of  the  disease  and  discovery  of  its 


OH.  V.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA-  147 

cause.  The  Beoond  thing  required  for  reconciliation  with  God  is  to  "  seek  hi*  foce." 
Thus  repentance  and  faith  go  hand  in  hand;  liot  that  either  of  them  is  the  meritorious 
cause  of  pardon.  The  one  is  a  condition — a  suitable  condition  or  proper  qualification 
for  pardon;  the  other  is  the  cordial  aocnptance  of  pardon,  or  rather  of  that  righteousness 
which  is  the  true  ground  of  pardon.  The  mercy  of  God  is  trans|jarent  throughout  the 
entire  process,  while  a  practical  realization  of  persans  acknowledging  their  offence  and 
seeking  the  l»ce  of  God  is  found  in  the  case  of  Daniel,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  perusal  of 
the  ninth  chapter  of  the  book  of  that  prophet. 

VI.  Affliction  serves  as  a  spiritual  restorative.  During  the  long  and  dreary 
period  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Dab}  Ion  the  captives  had  a  convenient  season  to 
repent  of  their  sins  and  return  to  the  Lord;  nor  did  they  ever  after  backslide  into  idolatry. 
During  the  present  prolonged  dispersion  of  that  wonderful  people,  many  of  them  will 
repent  of  their  national  rejection  of  Messiah  and  return  to  God,  looking  unto  him  whom 
their  forefathers  pierced  with  tearful  eyes;  and  at  the  olo.ie  of  the  peiiod  in  question, 
though  "  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be 
come  in,  all  Israel  shall  be  s.ived." 

Application.  "  When,"  says  a  godly  Puritan  expositor,  "  we  are  under  the  con- 
victions of  sin  and  the  corrections  of  the  rod,  our  business  is  to  seek  God's  face.  .  .  . 
And  it  may  reasonably  be  expected  that  affliction  will  bring  those  to  God  that  had  long 
gone  astray  from  him,  and  kept  at  a  distance.  Therefore  God  for  a  time  turns  away 
from  us,  that  he  may  turn  us  to  himself  and  then  return  to  us." 


HOMILIES   BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES. 

Ver*.  1 10. — National  sin  and  prniishmfnt.     The  general  strain  of  this  chapter  is 

similar  to  that  of  the  preceding.  "  TAe  judgment "  (ver.  1)  which  has  already  beei. 
pronounced  there  is  still  continued.  In  ch.  iv.,  however,  Judah  was  addressed  as 
occupying  a  difterent  position,  morally  and  religiously,  from  Israel;  whereas  here  the 
southern  kingdom  is  represented  as  sharing  in  Israel's  guilt  and  condemnation.  It 
would  appear,  therefore,  that  when  the  warning  of  ch.  iv.  15  was  uttered,  Judah's 
defection  was  already  beginning. 

I.  The  natube  of  sin.  It  is  a  "dealing  treacherously  agamst  Jehovah  (ver.  7),  the 
riglitful  Spouse  of  the  soul,  who  expects  Irom  his  people  that  faithfulness  which  a  wife 
owes  to  her  husband.  It  is  also  "  whoredom  "  (ver.  3) ;  for  infidelity  to  the  marriage 
covenant  leads  to  the  cherishing  of  many  objects  of  sinful  desire.  It  is  also  "  pride  " 
(ver.  5)— that  deeply  rooted  self-will  which  is  the  secret  spring  of  idolatry.  Sin  in  all 
these  forms  dishonours  God  and  grossly  defiles  the  soul. 

II.  The  root  of  sin.  Sin  is  not  merely  an  outward  work.  It  is  not  confined  to  acts 
of  the  will.  The  root  of  it  is  "  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  "  (ver.  4).  This  spirit  has  its 
seat  at  the  very  centre  of  man's  being.  The  Apostle  Paul  calls  it  "  the  law  of  sin  " 
(Rom.  vii.  23,  25).  It  is  the  controlling  principle  of  the  unregenerate  life,  and  it  often 
leads  the  believer  captive  even  in  spite  of  his  renewed  nature.  "The  spirit  of 
whoredoms"  dominates  the  soul  like  a  demon,  and  the  sinner  serves  it  as  its  slave. 
Satan  lays  hold  upon  this  spirit  as  his  helper  in  his  constant  assaults  upon  the  minds 
of  men.     And  only  the  Holy  Sjiirit  can  impart  adequate  strength  to  prevail  against  it. 

Ill  The  contagiousness  of  sin.  The  condition  of  Israel  at  the  time  to  which  the 
prophet  here  refers  graphically  illustrates  this.  Hosea  saw  that  the  national  life  was 
leavened  with  iniquity.  The  pyramid  of  the  commonwealth,  from  apex  to  base,  was 
honeycombed  with  idolatry  and  impurity.  The  national  sin  was  shared  by:  1.  The 
vriests  Instead  of  being  the  spiritual  guardians  of  the  people,  they  were  as  snares  and 
nets  to  entrap  them.  Ministers  of  religion  become  such :  (1)  By  neglecting  teaching, 
as  the  priests  of  the  ten  tribes  had  done  (ch.  iv.  1).  (2)  By  preaching  unsound  doc- 
trine. So  in  •  The  Pilgrim's  Progress,'  the  Flatterer,  "  a  black  man  clothed  in  white, 
led  Christian  and  Hopeful  into  his  net.  (3)  By  living  inconsistent  lives.  So  the 
"wickedness  of  Eli's  sons  made  many  unbelievers.  2.  J^e  courts  The  prmces,  too 
were  men-trappers—"  sportsmen  rather  than  watehmen"  (Jerome).  Jeroboam  I.  had 
been  such  He  "  drave  Israel  from  following  the  Lord,  and  made  them  sm  a  great  sin 
(2  Kings  xvii.  21).    Ahab  had  been  such,  in  introducing  the  wwrship  of  Baal  anci 


148  THE  BOOK  01"  HOSBA.  [oh.  v.  1—16. 

Ashtaroth  (1  Kings  xvi.  30 — 33).  Menahem  was  such,  fir  his  reign  was  steeped  in 
cruelty,  and  he  laid  his  help  upon  King  Pul  of  Assyria  rather  than  upon  the  God  of 
Israel  (2  Kings  xv.  19).  Even  the  princes  of  Juciah  were  becomitijr  such ;  they  were 
removing  the  landmarks  hetween  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  idolatry  (ver.  10).  Our 
rulers  in  like  manner  entrap  the  British  nation  into  sin,  when  they  promote  immoral 
legislation  upon  pleas  of  expediency  or  state  policy  (e.gr.  the  attempted  slate  regulation  oi 
vice  in  the  array,  and  the  patronage  of  the  opium  trade  between  India  and  China).  3. 
The  entire  Hebrew  nation.  The  people  of  both  kingdoms  foolishly  fell  into  the  snares 
and  nets  which  were  spread  for  them.  They  were  fuU  of  "  pride "  (ver.  5)  and  vain 
confidence.  'J'hey  despised  prophetic  instruction,  and  became  contumacioug  and 
refractory  in  their  sin. 

IV.  The  heredity  of  sin.  Had  Israel  continued  faithful  to  the  national  covenant 
with  Jehovah,  he  would  have'  begotten  children  to  God,  instead  of  "strange  children  " 
(ver.  7),  who  did  not  belong  to  the  home,  and  did  not  spring  from  the  marriage  union. 
But  a  godless  nation  is  composed  of  godless  parents,  who  bring  up  godless  children. 
Infants  who  have  done  no  evil  yet  inherit  evil,  and  may  bring  with  tliem  into  life 
terrific  predispositions  towards  it.  The  iniquity  of  the  fathers  is  visited  upon  the 
children.  It  is  comforting,  however,  to  remember  that  good  traits  descend  by  inheri- 
tance as  well  as  bad  ones.  God's  way  of  regenerating  the  world  is  to  maintain  his 
Church  in  it,  and  to  cultivate  thereby  the  heredity  ot  holiness.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  grace  does  run  in  the  blood  (Exod.  xx.  6  ;  Ps.  cxii.  2 ;  2  Tim.  L  5).  The  children 
of  Christian  parents  are  not  "children  of  wrath"  (1  Cor.  vii.  14;  Acts  xvi.  31). 

V.  The  P0KISHMENT  OF  snf.  Ephraim's  "  whoredom  "  was  detected  (ver.  3).  It  lay 
exposed  every  moment  to  the  eye  of  God.  He  penetrated  all  the  fair  excuses  which  the 
people  made  to  themselves  for  it.  "  The  pride  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face  "  (ver. 
5),  i.e.  he  shall  be  openly  convicted  of  it,  and  condemned  for  it.  The  punishment  is  to 
he :  1.  Immediate.  (Ver.  7.)  "A  month  shall  devour  them."  Destruction  shall  overtake 
them  as  swiftly,  so  to  speak,  as  the  moon  shall  wane.  Already  the  sword  of  vengeance 
is  hanging  over  their  heads  by  a  single  hair.  2.  Sudden.  (Ver.  8.)  The  invasion  of  the 
Assyrian  power  as  the  rod  of  the  Divine  anger  is  announced  with  an  injunction  to 
sound  horn  and  trumpet.  For  the  prophet  already  sees  the  drawn  sword  of  Jehovah 
in  the  conqueror's  hand.  3.  Certain.  (Ver.  9.)  The  punishment  "  shall  surely  be." 
God  is  as  true  to  his  threatenings  as  to  his  promises.  4.  Terrible.  "Israel  and 
Ephraim  shaW  fall  (ver.  5).  "  A  month  shall  devour  them ''  (ver.  7).  "  Ephraim  shall 
he  desolate  "  (ver.  9).  "  I  will  pour  out  my  wrath  upon  iiiem  like  water  "  (ver.  10). 
The  whole  nation  became  wasted  with  misery,  and  was  plunged  headlong  into 
destruction.  The  story  of  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  Hebrew  monarchies  illustrates 
very  vividly  the  doom  of  sin. 

VI.  How  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  BIN  HAT  BE  AVERTED.  Eveu  this  dark  passage  is  not 
altogether  without  some  hopeful  suggestion.  1.  A  false  expedient.  (Ver.  6.)  The 
festivals  and  worship  of  the  Mosaic  Law  were  still  observed  at  the  idol-shrines  of 
Bethel  and  Dan.  So  Ephraim,  when  his  doom  began  to  overtake  him,  endeavoured  to 
pacify  the  Divine  anger  by  bringing  costly  sacrifices  of  flocks  and  herds.  But,  although 
the  people  sought  the  Lord  thus,  they  did  "  not  find  him  ; "  for  they  came  in  a  spirit  of 
slavish  fear,  and  did  not  bring;  the  sacrifice  of  a  contrite  heart  and  an  obedient  will,  2. 
The  right  way.  (Ver.  4.)  God  ig  waiting  to  be  gracious ;  but  he  requires  of  sinners  a 
willingness  to  "frame  their  doings  to  turn  unto  their  God."  We  must  gladly  allow  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  regenerate  and  purify  our  souls.  The  only  use  of  the  external  sacrifices 
of  the  Law  was  to  typify  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  true  Sacrifice  for  sin ;  and  to 
symbolize  the  "  living  sacrifices  "  which  men  offer  to  God  when  they  yield  themselves 
wholly  to  his  iervice.— C.  J, 

Ver.  10. — Landmark-removers.  The  Jews  were  not  a  mercantile  nor  a  manufactur- 
ing people,  but  a  nation  of  agriculturists.  Each  citizen  had  his  own  piece  of  ground 
allotted  to  him  as  the  family  inheritance;  and  great  pains  were  taken  that  his 
descendants  should  be  secured  in  it  for  ever.  A  man  might  pledge  his  portion  until 
the  year  of  jubilee,  but  it  was  not  lawful  absolutely  to  sell  it  (Numb,  xxxvi.  7).  Hence 
the  sacredness  of  landmarks,  as  a  means  of  preserving  accurately  the  boundaries  oi 
family  possessions.    One  of  the  curses  spoken  from  Ebal  was  directed  against  the  man 


es..v.  1—15.]  THE  Book  oJ"  hosEa.  i49 

who  should  remove  them  (Deut  xxvii.  17).  Elijah  pronounced  doom  upon  Ahab,  not 
for  the  murder  of  Naboth  alone,  but  also  for  "  removing  the  bound "  of  his  vineyard 
(1  Kings  xxi.  19).  Our  text,  however,  invites  us  to  consider  rather  the  spiritual  truth 
which  this  offence  suggests.  "  The  princes  of  Judah  "  were  guilty  of  stUI  deeper  sin 
than  the  removal  of  boundary-stones.  They  had  broken  down  moral  and  religious 
barriers.    And  this  form  of  evil  is  a  crying  one  in  the  world  still. 

I.  Some  "  remove  the  bound  "  op  the  inspibed  Word.  The  Bible  closes  with  a 
curso  upon  such  (Rev.  xxii.  18, 19).  Yet  the  Jews  committed  this  sin  in  relation  to 
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  by  venerating  the  traditional  law,  as  written  in  the 
Talmud,  more  than  "  the  commandment  of  God  "  itself  (Matt.  xv.  6).  The  Church  of 
Borne  errs  in  the  same  way,  by  giving  the  Apocrypha  a  place  alongside  of  the  canonical 
Books,  and  by  insisting  upon  apostolical  and  ecclesiastical  tradition  as  the  complement 
of  Scripture — equally  inspired  with  it,  and  equally  authoritative  as  a  rule  of  faith.  And 
those  Protestants  also  "  remove  the  bound  "  who  deny  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the 
Bible,  and  adopt  the  theory  of  partial  inspiration  in  any  of  its  forms. 

IL  Some  "  kemove  the  bound  "  between  Chuboh  and  state.  Both  of  these  are 
Divine  institutions — the  one  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  the  other  secular.  The  spheres 
of  the  two  are  distinct ;  and  each  within  its  own  sphere  is  independent  of  the  other. 
But  how  hard  have  men  found  it  to  let  the  landmarks  between  Church  and  state 
remain  where  God  set  thera !  In  one  country  the  Church  invades  the  domain  of  the 
state,  directing  and  controlling  it — ^a  usurpation  which,  in  its  fully  developed  form,  is 
Vaticanism.  In  another  country  the  state  encroaches  upon  the  domain  of  the 
Church,  and  exercises  rule  in  sacred  things — which  is  Erastianism.  "  Bender  therefore 
unto  C»sar,"  etc.  (Matt.  xxii.  21). 

III.  Some  "  bemove  the  bound  "  ab  bbgabds  puritv  op  wobship.  "  The  princes  of 
Judah  "  had  shifted  the  landmarks  between  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  idolatry.  And 
this  offence  is  committed  still  by  all  who  introduce  modes  of  worship  which  are  not  in 
accordance  with  the  Word  of  God.  An  elaborate  sensuous  ceremonial,  and  any  form 
of  service  which  assumes  that  ministers  belong  to  a  distinct  sacerdotal  order,  are  a 
removing  of  the  boiind.  The  secularization  of  the  sabbath  belongs  to  the  same  class 
of  sins.  Those  who  teach  that  now  every  day  is  alike  sacred  to  the  Christian  are 
doing  their  best,  although  without  intending  it,  to  undermine  one  of  the  foundations 
of  morality.  For  the  sabbath  law  is  imbedded  in  the  Decalogue.  Not  only  so,  but 
"  Christ  hath  took  in  this  piece  of  ground  "  (George  Herbert).  So  it  is  at  our  peril  if 
we  remove  the  boundary-stones  which  separate  the  Lord's  day  from  the  other  days  of 
the  week. 

IV.  Some  "  remove  the  bound  "  between  science  and  religion.  The  conflict 
between  the  two  is  concerned  very  much  about  the  landmarks  of  their  respective  provinces. 
In  old  times  it  was  the  theologian  who  was  generally  the  chief  offender.  It  was  the 
Church  that  forced  Galileo  to  abjure  the  sublime  truths  of  his  scientific  creed,  and  that 
condemned  the  three  laws  of  Kepler  as  heretical.  At  present,  however,  the  chief 
"  remover  of  the  bound  "  is  the  scientist.  The  student  of  physical  nature,  unless  he  be 
decidedly  a  Christian,  is  prone  to  lack  ability  to  appreciate  moral  evidence.  Thus 
some  of  our  most  eminent  scientific  investigators  in  these  times  would  have  us  give  up 
our  faith  in  moral  freedom,  in  personal  immortality,  and  in  the  existence  of  God 
himself.  But  the  domain  of  physical  science  is  one  province  of  truth,  while  that  of 
religion  is  another.  Scientific  questions  are  to  be  settled  on  scientific  grounds,  and  by 
men  who  have  had  a  scimtific  training.  The  theologian,  on  the  other  hand,  must  keep 
within  his  own  frontier,  and  resolutely  defend  those  moral  facts  and  relictious  truths 
with  which  it  belongs  to  him  to  deal.  It  is  his  function  to  assert  the  reality  of  moral 
freedom,  the  supremacy  of  conscience,  the  intuition  of  immortality,  and  those  deep 
experiences  of  guilt  and  soul-hunger  to  which  only  the  gospel  of  Christ  can  respond. 
A  curse  shall  fall  upon  those  who  remove  these  landmarks. 

V.  Some  "bemove  the  bound"  op  evangelical  doctbinb.  Orthodoxy  has  ita 
landmarks  which  separate  the  apostolic  doctrine  from  "  another  gospel."  What  are  the 
"reat  historical  creeds  and  confessions,  but  so  many  bounds  which  the  Church  hag 
erected  in  order  to  discriminate  truth  from  error?  And  is  not  every  article  in  one  of 
ihese  creeds,  as  it  were,  a  boundary-stone  ?  Experience  has  shown  Christendom  that 
the  most  effectual  way  of  exposing  heresies  is  to  translate  the  doctrinal  teachmg  of 


150  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  v.  1— X5, 

Scripture  into  the  philosophical  language  of  a  confession.  Yet  there  have  always 
been  "  removers  of  the  hound "  of  "  sound  doctrine."  The  Broad  Churchman  and 
the  rationalist  object  to  the  evangelical  boundaries;  and  they  have  never  done  so 
more  loudly  than  at  the  present  day.  Even  in  some  orthodox  Churches,  doctrines 
contained  in  the  standards  are  from  some  of  the  pulpits  unblushingly  contravened. 
We  m\ist  "  hold  fast  the  form  of  sound  words."  It  is  at  our  peril  if  we  "  remove 
the  bound." 

VI.  Some  "remove  the  bound"  as  regakds  nonconformity  to  the  world.  The 
evil  one  labours  to  obliterate  as  much  as  possible  all  distinct  boundary-lines  between 
the  Church  and  the  world.  He  tempts  ministers  always  to  preach  "  smooth  things." 
He  tempts  the  rulers  of  the  Church  to  neglect  the  administration  of  discipline.  He 
tempts  the  members  of  our  congregations  to  imbibe  the  spirit  of  the  world,  and  to  try 
to  serve  both  God  and  mammon.  The  ten  commandments  are  so  many  boundary- 
stones  which  mark  the  track  of  the  narrow  way ;  but  we  often  regard  the  path  as  too 
strait,  and  would  fnin  remove  the  stones  back  a  little.  We  ask  concerning  certain 
worldly  pleasures, — "  What  harm  is  there  in  them  ?  "  instead  of  inquiring  what  good 
there  is.  The  tendency  of  the  Church  in  these  times  is  by  no  means  towards  asceticism 
or  Puritanism.  Few  Christian  people  are  too  strait-laced;  the  danger  is  rather  that  we 
become  spiritually  lax,  and  that  we  "  remove  the  bound." — 0.  J. 

Vers.  11 — 15. — The  Divine  judgments.  In  this  strophe  the  Lord  denounces  as 
useless  and  foolish  the  policy  which  Israel  had  adopted  of  seeking  to  strengthen 
himself  by  alliances  with  Assyria.  In  doing  this  the  nation  was  only  adding  to  its 
guilt,  and  precipitating  its  doom, 

I.  The  nature  of  the  judgments.  We  gather  from  the  passage  that  these  are  of 
three  orders,  each  being  more  severe  than  the  preceding.  1.  Slow  consumption.  (Ver. 
12.)  The  "moth"  and  the  "worm"  ("  rottenness ".  should  be,  as  in  the  margin,  "a 
worm  ")  suggest  silent,  stealthy,  secret  destruction.  So  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes 
is  as  a  garment  eaten  by  a.  moth,  while  the  kingdom  of  Judah  is  as  a  tree  slowly 
destroyed  by  a  worm.  The  worm  makes  way  much  more  slowly  than  the  moth  does  ; 
and  we  find,  accordingly,  that  the  "  moth  "  ate  up  Israel  in  two  generations  from  the  time 
of  this  prediction,  while  the  "  worm  "  did  not  accomplish  its  work  in  Judah  until  after 
the  lapse  of  a  century  and  a  half.  Now,  Grod's  judgments  still,  both  upon  nations  and 
individuals,  are  often  like  the  moth  and  the  worm.  Many  an  ungodly  commonwealth 
has  the  heart  eaten  out  of  it  by  a  process  of  imperceptible  moral  deterioration.  And 
frequently  a  young  man  of  reputable  character,  who  has  never  gone  astray  into  gross 
vice,  yet  degenerates  in  spiritual  tone,  and  loses  the  finer  fibres  of  his  nature,  just  because 
he  has  not  cultivated  elevating  tastes,  and  has  been  content  to  cherish  low  ideals.  2. 
Sudden  ruin.  (Ver.  14.)  If  God  sometimes  punishes  slowly,  he  does  so  at  other 
times  swiftly.  The  two  Hebrew  kingdoms  resisted  his  judgments,  when,  in  his  long- 
suffering,  he  came  at  first  somewhat  lightly  as  the  "  moth"  and. the  "  worm."  So  he 
is  compelled  to  adopt  measures  more  dramatic  and  terrible.  Jehovah  will  be  to 
Ephraim  as  a  strong  full-grown  "  lion  " — full-grown  because  the  northern  kingdom  is 
very  soon  to  fall;  and  he  will  be  to  Judah  "as  a  young  lion,"  which  must  become 
mature  before  it  will  do  its  work  of  destruction.  Both  kingdoms,  however — each  in  its 
turn — are  to  be  overwhelmed  with  a  sudden  rush  of  ruin.  " '  I,  even  I,'  the  Lion  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  will  tear  the  nation  and  take  it  hence.  I  will  no  longer  be  its  guardian ; 
I  will  make  it  my  prey."  How  many  powerful  Gentile  states  also  have  been  suddenly 
destroyed  1  And  how  many  ungodly  men,  who  "spread  themselves  like  a  green  bay 
tree,"  have  been  "cut  down  like  the  grass"!  3.  Settled  desertion.  (Ver.  15.)  The 
Divine  judgment  upon  the  sinner,  in  its  superlative  form,  consists  in  the  withdrawal  of 
the  Divine  favour  and  protection.  When  the  two  captivities  took  place  respectively,  the 
Hebrew  nation  became,  as  it  were,  God-forsaken.  The  Lwd  smote  Ephraim  and  Judah, 
and  tore  them,  and  "returned  to  his  place,"  leaving  them  bruised,  bleeding,  and  to  all 
appearance  dying.  To  be  thus  God-deserted  is,  to  a  moral  and  spiritual  being,  the 
acme  of  punishment.  When  a  soul  becomes  consciously  God-forsaken,  It  begms  to 
tiiste  the  pains  of  hell. 

[I.  The  cause  of  the  judgments.    They  fell  upon  the  Hebrew  people  on  account  of 
their  idolatry,  aggravated  by  the  unbelief  which  they  showed  in  resorting  for  aid  to 


en,  T.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  151 

the  As-yiUn  power.  X.  The  worship  of  false  gods.  (Ver.  11.)  "  The  commandment " 
lefcrs  to  Jf-r  boara's  idolatrous  innovation  in  erecting  the  two  golden  calves.  This 
mL'asiiro  was  the  result  of  considerations  of  state  policy  on  the  part  of  a  prince  who 
dill  not  himself  rely  upon  the  Divine  protection.  But  the  people  accepted  it 
"  williiif^ly,"  showing  thereby  that  their  hearts  also  were  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God. 
The  calf-worship  was  the  root  of  the  entire  apostasy  of  Israel ;  it  prepared  the  way  for 
the  grosser  idolatry  of  Baalism,  with  its  attendant  train  of  moral  disorder,  vice,  and 
Clinic.  It  was  Jeroboam's  sin  that  sowed  the  seeds  of  the  ruin  of  the  whole  Hebrew 
nation.  2.  Tlie  calling  in  of  incompetent  physicians.  (Ver.  13.)  Israel  was  suffering 
from  the  "  sicknrss ''  of  anarchy,  and  bleeding  from  the  "  wound  "  of  revolution ;  yet  he 
would  not  r.cogni/ie  in  these  distresses  a  token  of  the  Divine  displeasure.  He  refused 
to  listen  to  the  messages  of  warning  which  God  sent  him  by  Hosea,  and  kept  looking 
to  second  causes  alone,  both  for  the  disease  and  the  remedy.  Ephraim  "sent  to  King 
Jareb."  1  he  word  "  Jareb  "  means  "  warrior,"  "  adversary,"  "  avenger ; "  and  it  is  to  be 
understood  probably  not  as  a  proper  name,  but  as  a  poetical  epithet  applied  by  the  prophet 
himself  to  the  King  of  Assyria.  Again  and  again  the  two  Hebrew  kingdoms  sought  to 
make  peace  with  the  Assyrian  power,  buying  him  off  by  tribute,  and  occupying  a  position 
of  abject  vassalage  (2  Kings  xv. — xviii.).  All,  however,  was  in  vain.  This  untheo- 
cratic  policy  did  not  even  heal  the  hurt  slightly ;  it  made  matters  worse  (2  Chron. 
xxviii,  20).  But  the  nations  still  have  their  King  Jarebs  to  whom  they  apply  when 
seeking  a  cure  for  their  moral  maladies.  How  numerous  are  the  favourite  social 
nostrums  I  With  some,  the  hope  of  Great  Britain  is  the  further  expansion  of  trade; 
with  others,  the  spread  of  education ;  with  others,  "  local  option ; "  with  others, 
parliamentary  reform ;  with  others,  religious  equality.  But  such  expedients,  however 
desirable  in  their  own  place,  are  at  best  only  plasters  and  patches.  Where  the  heart  is 
the  seat  of  the  disease,  the  cure  must  be  inward  and  radical.  We  must  send,  not  to 
King  Jareb,  but  to  King  Jesus.  So,  also,  there  are  Jarebs  to  which  guilt-stricken  and 
sin-sick  souls  still  apply.  One  seeks  an  anodyne  in  the  pursuit  of  wealth ;  another  fills 
high  the  bowl  of  sensuous  pleasure ;  a  third  pays  court  to  culture  and  the  fine  arts ;  a 
fourth  labours  hard  in  his  own  strength  to  live  a  clean  moral  life. '  But  none  of  these 
pursuits  can  salve  the  wounds  of  sin.  Only  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  can 
bring  spiritual  life  and  health  and  blessing. 

III.  The  design  of  the  judgments.  (Ver.  15.)  The  Book  of  Hosea  is  full  of  clouds 
and  darkness;  but  behind  them  Komewheie  the  sun  is  ever  shining.  And  as  we  gaze 
upon  the  storm  we  see  the  rainbow  of  grace  springing  up  in  its  very  bosom.  This 
closing  verse  of  the  chapter  reminds  us  that  the  judgments  are  inflicted :  I.  To  produce 
penitence.  For,  after  all,  the  Lord  has  only  withdrawn  a  little  way  from  his  apostate 
people.  If  they  will  but  have  it  so,  he  has  only  "  returned  to  his  place "  for  a  short 
time  (Isa.  liv.  7 — 10).  He  has  not  cast  them  off  finally,  but  only  until  they  shall 
become  convinced  that  they  can  have  no  comfort  or  salvation  apart  from  himself. 
The  first  step  in  repentance  is  conviction  and  acknowledgment  of  sin.  And  multitudes 
of  souls  have  been  brought  to  take  this  step  during  a  time  of  "  affliction."  2.  To  bring 
hack  to  Ood.  To  "  seek  God's  face  "  is  to  seek  his  favour,  his  Son,  his  Spirit,  the 
ordinances  of  his  grace.  To  "  seek  him  early  "  is  to  do  so  urgently,  after  the  manner 
of  one  who  will  rise  before  the  morning  in  very  eagerness.  If  we  view  this  verse  as  a 
prediction  regarding  the  future  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  we  may  find  partial  fulfilments 
of  it  towards  tlie  close  of  the  Babylonish  exile  (Dan.  ix.),  and  on  the  day  of  Pentecost 
(Acts  ii.)  ;  and  we  know  that  it  will  be  fully  realized  in  that  national  conversion  of  the 
Jews  which  is  to  precede  the  second  advent  of  Christ  (Zech.  xii. ;  Eom.  xi.).  But  the 
promise  before  us  has  a  perennial  lesson  also  to  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles."  It  assures 
us  of  the  glad  welcome  which  our  God  vrill  give  us— despite  whatever  guilt  may  have 
stained  our  lives,  and  the  deep  corruption  which  assuredly  still  dwells  within  our  hearts 

if  only  we  turn  to  him  in  penitence,  and  make  him  our  Righteousness  and  Strength 

and  Hope. — C.  J. 

Vers,  10 13, — The  misuse  of  Divine  judgment$.    It  is  well  for  our  rest  and  strength 

when,  like  the  prophet,  we  can  exercise  steadfast  faith  in  the  unseen  Ruler  of  all 
human  affairs.  Many  events  appear  to  contradict  the  theory  of  a  wise  and  loving 
government.    Causes  which  are  seen  .seem  adequate  to  produce  tne  effects  which  arise 


1S2  THE  BOOK  OF  SOSEA.  [oh.  t.  1—16. 

from  them,  and  we  fail  to  discern  God  behind  the  ambitions  and  the  follies  of  men. 
Happy  is  lie  who,  like  Hosea,  hears  God's  voice  amidst  the  tumult,  believes  in  a 
plan  underlying  confusion,  and  recognizes  a  hand  which  moulds  and  shapes  all  events 
to  a  wise  end.  He  can  "rest  in  the  Lord,  and  wait  patiently  for  him."  It  is  more 
difficult  to  see  God  in  passing  events  than  in  past  history.  The  mists  of  antiquity 
envelop  the  actors  and  they  become  less  real ;  whereas  in  modern  events  the  actors 
project  themselves  in  all  the  greatness  of  their  individuality  upon  our  thought,  to  the 
exclusion  of  him  who  is  greater  than  they.  Coming  from  Chamounix  towards  Geneva, 
the  tourist  sees  the  near  hills,  but  does  not  catch  a  glimpse  of  the  snowy  peaks 
of  Mont  Blanc  till  he  is  far  away;  but  in  the  greater  distance  the  lower  hills  fade 
into  indistinctness,  and  the  everlasting  heaven-lighted' mountain  once  more  asserts 
itself.  In  the  study  of  these  far-off  scenes  we  see  something  of  liim  who  rules  over 
all  things,  God  blessed  for  ever.  "  Our  lives  through  various  scenes  are  drawn,"  etc. 
Learn  from  the  passage — 

I.  That  the  sharing  of  sin  involves  men  in  the  shaeino  of  sin's  punishment. 
1.  The  sin  of  Israel  is  mentioned  in  ver.  11.  "  He  was  oppressed  because  he  willingly 
walked  after  the  commandment."  The  Hebrew  (tsav)  signifies  a  human  ordinance  as 
opposed  to  a  Divine  law,  and  refers  here  to  the  commandment  of  Jeroboam  which 
mculcated  calf-worship,  on  which  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  established  by  his  revolt,  was 
founded  (see  1  Kings  xii.  26 — 33).  This  idolatry  was  willingly,  wilfully  chosen  by 
Bphraim,  and  it  destroyed  him.  How  often  the  thing  chosen  by  the  sinner  is  the 
means  of  his  destruction !  The  Jews  cried,  "  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar,"  and  Csesar 
destroyed  them.  A  nation  chooses  prosperity,  not  righteousness,  and  the  prosperity  of 
fools  destroys  them.  Instances  from  history.  2.  ITie  princes  of  Judah  shared  this  sin 
of  idolatry.  (Ver.  10.)  They  "  were  like  them  that  remove  the  bound."  In  a  literal 
sense  no  doubt  this  was  true.  Deut.  xxvii.  17  was  disobeyed.  The  infringement  of 
another's  rights,  whether  in  business  or  policy,  eyer  brings  a  curse.  Probably  Judah 
would  speculate  as  to  the  profit  that  might  be  made  out  of  Israel's  loss — how  its  own 
bounds  might  be  extended  when  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  was  removed ;  but  the 
reference  in  the  text  is  not  to  that.  Hosea  alludes  to  the  sin  of  Judah  in  breaking 
down  that  barrier  which  Idolatry  had  raised  between  the  two  kingdoms,  which 
separated  between  God's  people  and  Baal's  people.  The  act  was  fataL  It  was  like 
the  opening  of  a  dyke,  which  no  longer  could  keep  out  the  floods  around;  and  the  tide 
of  invasion  swept  over  Benjamin  and  Judah.  The  cornet  and  trumpet  on  the  beacon- 
hills  of  Gibeah  and  Eamah  (ver.  8)  proclaimed  this  woe  too  late  to  avert  it.  "  I  will 
pour  out  my  wrath  upon  them  like  water."  Show  how  the  breaking  down  of  the 
barriers  between  the  Church  and  the  world,  between  Christianity  and  paganism, 
between  the  Christian  and  the  godless,  in  business,  society,  etc.,  brings  desolation  to 
spiritual  life  and  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ, 

II.  'i'HAT   the   warning  OF   GoD  IS   TO    BE    SEEN   SOMETIMES   IN   SIGNS  OF  OBADDAL 

DECAY.  The  siradnalness  of  the  earlier  judgments  is  pointed  out  in  ver.  12  as 
distinguisheil  from  the  overwhelming  destruction  suggested  by  ver.  14,  The  "moth" 
and  the  "  rottenness "  do  their  woik  stealthily  and  slowly.  You  take  out  the  cloth 
laid  by :  it  is  consumed.  You  rest  your  weight  on  the  fiirniture  :  it  breaks  down  with 
a  crash.  Perhaps  a  distinction  is  suggested  here.  "  The  moth  "  destroys  the  softer 
cloth  more  rapidly  than  "rottenness"  the  harder  wood.  An  indication  that  Judah 
would  be  more  slowly  consumed.  The  main  idea,  however,  is  that  destruction  would 
not  come  at  first  suddenly  and  without  warning.  This  is  true  of  the  method  of  him 
to  whom  judgment  is  a  strange  work.  Examples  :  1.  A  nation  suffers,  from  its  want 
of  integrity,  justice,  etc.,  in  depressed  trade,  severance  and  suspicion  between  various 
classes  of  society,  wars  costly  in  treasure  and  blood.  All  this  comes  far  short  ot 
national  destruction;  yet  each  is  a  call- to  sobriety,  self-rule,  integrity,  humiliation 
before  God,  lest  worse  things  befall  it.  2.  An  invalid  finds  his  health  slowly 
impaired.  Weakness  gradually  increases.  Senses  become  less  keen.  All  such  symptoms 
are  reminders  that  he  should  be  seeking  after  a  forgotten  God.  3.  There  is  a  con- 
suming of  character  which  may  be  illustrated  from  this  verse.  A  distaste  for  what  is 
good  creeps  over  the  heart;  doubts  which  at  first  seem  trivial  bring  insecurity  to  the 
religious  profession ;  Indulged  sins  honeycomb  the  spiritual  life,  etc."  As  the  moth  is 
hidden  and  makes  no  sound,  yet  does  its  fatal  work,  so  may  men  lose  innocencT  and 


ofi.T.1— 16.]  I'SE  Boos  OB*  HOSEA.  163 

truth,  till  nothing  is  left  of  the  old  fabric  of  &ith  and  hope.  Therefore  pray,  "  Cleanse 
thou  me  from  secret  faults." 

HL  That  thb  temptation  to  the  distressed  is  to  find  help  in  man  bathes 
THAH  JX  God.  (Ver.  13.)  The  "  sickness,"  or  inward  disease,  refers  to  moral  corrup- 
tion; the  "  wound,"  caused  by  a  blow  from  without,  to  national  weakness  resulting  from 
wars  and  political  disasters.  The  first  recognition  of  these  evils  produced  this  effect — 
"  Then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Assj'rian,  and  sent  to  King  Jareh."  Not  two  persons,  but 
one  referred  to  here.  Jareb  (equivalent  to  "  the  warrior ")  is  Hosea's  epithet  for 
Assyria's  king.  An  account  of  this  incident  is  given  in  2  Chron.  xxviii.  19,  20,  where 
it  is  expressly  stated  that  Assyria  "  helped  him  not."  The  sin  and  cur^e  involved 
are  pointed  out  in  Jer.  xvii.  5,  6.  How  ready  we  are  to  follow  Ephraim  in  this !  We 
involve  ourselves  indifBcnlties  by  our  folly  and  self-seeking,  and  then  try  to  disentangle 
ourselves  by  force  or  fraud.  Examples :  A  nation  bound  by  cords  of  its  own  weaving 
cuts  its  way  to  deliverance  by  the  sword.  A  man  in"  business  becomes  embarrassed  by 
overtrading,  and  tries  to  right  himself  by  further  speculation,  which  ruins  himself  and 
others.  A  Church  fails  of  the  outward  prosperity  it  seeks,  and  resorts  to  unholy 
methods  to  win  transient  success.  This  was  the  temptation  our  Lord  endured  and 
conquered  (Matt.  iv.  8 — 10)  :  "  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down 
and  worship  me." 

Application.  To  those  in  sorrow  about  sin.  Beware  of  getting  rid  of  your 
anxiety  by  plunging  into  gaiety  or  companionship,  but  pray  to  the  Father  who  seeth 
in  secret.  Resist  the  temptation  to  trust  to  outward  observances,  to  self-improvement, 
etc.,  instead  of  falling  at  the  feet  of  him  who  says,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  For  none  are  the  words  (ch.  vi.  1) 
more  bitended  than  for  you,  "  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord :  for  he  hath  torn, 
and  he  will  heal  ub;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up." — ^A.  E. 

Ver.  15. — The  affliction  of  Ood's  withdrawal.  Jehovah  here  threatens  to  withdraw 
his  presence  from  his  people,  until,  conscious  of  their  weakness  and  loneliness,  they 
return  to  him.  In  the  affliction  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  many  did  seek  hun. 
After,  that  night  of  darkness  the  dawn  of  a  new  day  brought  a  few  gleams  of  hope, 
and  some  bestirred  themselves  "  early  "  to  find  mercy  with  Grod  (see  Dan.  ix.  3 — 6). 

I.  The  cause  of  this  affliction  is  to  be  found  in  unrepented  sin.  1.  The  tmwill- 
ingnets  of  Ood  to  send  trouble  to  his  ereatwes  is  constantly  insisted  on  in  Scripture. 
"  He  is  very  pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy ; "  "  Judgment  is  his  strange  work,"  its  object 
being  to  show  the  need  we  have  of  the  mercy  he  proffers.  Evidences  of  the  loving- 
kindness  of  God  to  his  creatures  reveal  themselves  more  distinctly  as  we  study  their 
condition  and  circumstances.  Illustrations  from  insects,  birds,  and  beasts,  in  their 
relations  to  food  and  habitation.  Example  in  provision  for  every  child  of  man.  The 
babe  is  cast  in  its  helplessness  upon  us.  We  are  to  shield  it,  to  foster  its  life,  to  foresee 
and  provide  for  its  wants.  This  is  as  much  for  our  good  as  for  the  child's  good.  We 
learn  thereby  to  conquer  ourselves,  to  exercise  frugality  and  diligence,  and  the  rough 
nature  is  softened  by  the  touch  of  tiny  tender -fingers.  In  the  ways  of  Christ  "  a  little 
child  shall  lead  them."  Then,  as  life  develops,  pleasure  is  found  in  the  sights  and 
sounds  of  nature,  in  the  exercise  of  each  faculty,  etc.  "Lord,  when  I  count  thy 
mercies  o'er,"  etc.  2.  There  are  seeming  contradictions,  however,  to  the  loving-kindness 
of  God's  rule.  The  helpless  racked  with  pain,  the  innocent  born  to  a  heritage  of  shame, 
the  noblest  and  most  useful  snatched  away  by  death,  etc.  Hence  heathen  philosophy 
believed  in  two  antagonistic  deities.  Trace  the  belief  in  ancient  philosophy  and  in 
modem  idolatry.  Holy  Scripture  declares  there  is  but  one  God,  concerning  whom  we 
read  "  I  form  the  light,  and  create  darkness  :  I  make  peace,  and  create  evil :  I  the 
Lord  do  all  these  things"  (Isa.  xlv.  7).  The  boldness  of  that  conception  stamps  it  as 
Divine.  We  know  not  the  effect  on  other  worlds  and  beings  of  the  conflict  waged 
here  between  good  and  evil.     We  cannot  judge  God  from  what  is  seen  in  this  tiny 

^       _      -"  .  A  ^       t -A.ta     »aa1      Cnr^^      ^Itr^       Hunt.      fXp      i\\  J\     ^\  A  r*     yvn^kta     1^ 


nothing  of  fair  fertUe  fields  and  busy  cities,  where  the  moaning  of  the  sea  is  never 
heard.    Our  knowledge  of  God's  method  and  character  from  what  is  around  us  is  as 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  v.  1—15. 

(light.  3.  Tin  revelation  of  Ood  in  Christ  ihowt  that  the  sorrow  is  righUy  mingled 
with  the  sin — just  as  storms  are  good  for  a  vitiated  atmosphere.  We  cannot  breathe 
without  creating  poison.  If  the  air  were  motionless  i^  would  he  fatal  to  us  and  others. 
By  Divine  ordinance  the  air,  hecause  it  is  vitiated  and  heated,  must  move ;  and  then 
comes  the  draught  which  chills  the  invalid  and  kills  him,  and  the  storm  which  sweeps 
over  the  sea  and  causes  wreck.  Yet  the  law  which  causes  these  disasters  is  for  the 
world's  salvation.  So  evils  which  would  corrupt  the  earth,  as  in  olden  time,  are  not  left 
unheeded.    Sorrow  comes  till  men  "acknowledge  their  offence  and  seek  God's  face." 

II.  The  nature  or  this  affliction.  "  I  will  return  to  my  place."  God  is 
everywhere ;  but  relatively  to  us  he  is  sometimes  near,  sometimes  far  away.  He  is  to 
us  according  to  the  conditions  and  desires  of  our  hearts.  He  is  said  to  withdraw  vrhen 
the  sense  of  his  care  and  favour  is  gone.  This  would  he  no  great  trouble  to  some. 
They  have  yet  to  learn  that  to  he  apart  from  God  is  to  he  away  from  light  and  love 
and  hope  for  ever.  It  is  to  be  in  "  the  outer  darkness."  None  of  us  know  to  the  full 
the  sweetness  of  the  Divine  presence,  and  therefore  do  not  completely  know  the 
bitterness  of  its  withdrawal.  Who  of  us  has  prayed  till  the  heavens  were  opened,  and 
we  saw  visions  of  God?  Who  of  us  has  gazed  on  Christ  till  he  was  transfigured 
before  uS;  and  we  cried,  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  "  ?  Who  of  us  knows  the  deepest 
meaning  of  the  promise,  "  If  any  man  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  sup 
with  him,  and  he  with  me  "  ?  It  is  in  proportion  as  we  have  realized  these  blessings 
that  we  can  realize  this  curse.  Imagine  yourself  stricken  down  by  fatal  illness, 
growing  sensibly  weaker,  no  hope  of  recovery  and  no  God  near ;  going  down  into  the 
darkness  of  death,  feeling  in  vain  for  a  hand  that  does  not  meet  yours — a  God-forsaken 
man!  Or  read  the  utterances  of  men  who  knew  more  of  God  than  we.  See  the  agony 
of  the  psalmist  as  he  prays,  "  Be  not  silent  unto  me :  lest,  if  thou  be  silent  to  me, 
I  become  like  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit "  (Ps.  xxviii.  1 ;  also  Job  xiii.  24 ; 
Ps.  xliv.  23,  24,  etc.).  If  the  message  comes  to  the  nation,  to  the  Church,  or  to  you, 
"  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place,"  no  organization  we  can  frame,  no  force  we  can 
muster,  will  avail  us.  It  will  be  time  for  us  (as  it  was  for  Israel  when  Jehovah  refiised 
to  go  up  amongst  them,  and  promised  only  indirect  guidance)  to  put  off  our  ornaments, 
to  bewail  our  sin,  to  acknowledge  our  offence,  and  seek  him  early.  "  Oh,  satisfy  us  early 
with  thy  mercy,  that  we  may  rejoice  and  be  glad  all  our  days." 

Ill  The  besults  of  this  affliction.  "  In  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me 
early."  1.  Acknowledgment  of  sin  is  the  first  sign  of  the  change.  The  reference  is 
not  to  the  unconsidered  declaration  that  we  are  "miserable  sinners,"  but  to  the 
intelligent  and  prayerful  confession  which  follows  on  that  self-examination  which 
affliction  does  so  much  to  stimulate.  When  severe  weather  keeps  us  within  doors,  we 
discover  the  faults  of  our  house.  When  the  vessel  is  under  the  stress  of  storm,  her 
weak  places  reveal  themselves.  So  with  character,  when  thoughts  are  driven  in  upon 
ourselves.  In  society  a  man  asks  himself,  "What  have  I?"  in  solitude  he  asks 
himself,  "  What  am  I  ? "  A  true  answer  to  that  question  leads  to  confession. 
Acknowledgment  of  sin  is  not  synonymous  with  the  cry  of  pain  or  despair.  See  how 
David  distinguishes  between  these  in  his  own  experience  in  Ps.  xxxii.  He  speaks 
of  himself  as  "roaring"  with  his  pain,  yet  that  brought  no  relief;  but  he  adds, 
"I  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgressions  unto  the  Lord:  and  thou  forgavest  the 
iniquity  of  my  sin."  The  same  distinction  is  drawn  by  Hosea  himself  (vii.  14),  "And 
they  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  heart,  when  they  howled  upon  their  beds." 
If  a  man  were  on  the  rack  the  executioner  would  not  stay  his  hand  because  of  his 
shrieks,  but  the  first  whispered  words  of  a  confession  would  give  instant  relief. 
2.  The  seeking  after  God  is  a  further  sign  of  this  change.  We  may  condemn  ourselves, 
we  may  resolve  to  be  holier,  we  may  confess  our  faults  to  our  fellow-man,  without 
having  the  true  repentance  described  here.  Judas  was  conscious  of  sin,  and  it  drove 
him  to  despair ;  but  Peter,  when  contrite,  went  to  the  Lord's  feet,  and  was  able  still  to 
say, "  Lord,  thou  knovvest  all  things ;  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  "  In  their  affliction 
they  shall  seek  me  early."  To  bring  this  about  we  are  sometimes  so  encircled  by 
troubles  that  we  cannot  look  over  them  or  see  beyond  them,  but  can  merely  look  up 
to  the  hills  whence  true  help  comes.  Apply  this  to  the  Christian  who  has  been 
forgetting  God,  and  to  the  sinner  who  has  never  known  him. 

Appeal.     Wait  not  till  the  sorrows  of  life  make  you  fed  yotir  need  of  Ood.    We 


OH.  T.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  ISC 


may  be  thantful  that  we  may  go  even  at  the  last,  but  how  ignoble  to  leave  \t  till  then  ! 
Point  out  the  shame  of  leaving  the  gladness  of  youth  unconsecrated  to  him  who  gave 
it;  of  waiting  till  the  cares  of  life  so  press  upon  the  spirit  that,  weary  and  heartsick, 
we  return  to  the  Father ;  of  delaying  till  the  evening  of  life  is  deepenino;,  and  enfeebled 
by  age  we  say,  "Now  let  us  turn  to  God."  Show  how  destitute  of  magnanimity, 
how  fraught  with  peril,  such  a  course  must  be.  Whether  in  afBiotion  or  in  joy,  "  seek 
him  early." — A.  R. 

Ver.  3. — Divine  omniscience.  Uninspired  teachers  often  act  upon  imperfect  infor- 
mation. Ministers  of  religion  take  some  people  to  be  better  and  otliers  to  be  worse  than 
they  really  are.  From  this  unavoidable  infirmity  of  men  the  omniscient  God  is  free. 
In  dealing  with  a  sinful  soul  or  a  sinful  community  he  speaks  and  acts  from  a  perfect 
knowledge. 

I.  The  fact  of  Divine  omniscience.  It  is  incredible  that  there  should  be  any 
bounds  to  Divine  knowledge  ;  yet  it  is  scarcely  to  be  realized  by  us  that  there  should 
be  none.  See  how  this  thought  inspired  the  psalmist  (Pa.  cxxxix.).  This  natural 
attribute  of  the  Creator  is  one  mode,  so  to  speak,  of  his  infinite  perfection. 

IT.  The  bearing  of  the  Divine  omniscience  upon  the  state  of  the  sinner. 
1.  No  aggravation  of  the  sinner's  guilt  is  hid.  If  Ephraim  sinned  against  light,  this 
was  known  to  Jehovah ;  if  Israel  rejected  the  counsels  of  the  prophets  divinely  sent, 
this  was  not  hid  from  him.  2.  No  extenuation  of  the  sinner's  guilt  is  hid.  The 
temptation  to  which  he  yields,  the  weakness  which  succumbs,  the  regret  and  remorse 
which  follow  sin, — all  are  known  to  Heaven.  3.  The  judgment  which  God  passes  is 
righteous  and  unquestionable.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  Divine  tribunal  to  our 
own ;  for  the  voice  within  accords  with  that  from  above. 

III.  The  peactical  lessons  of  the  Divine  omniscience.  1.  It  should  lead  to 
a  full  and  immediate  confession.  God  knows  all,  and  if  we  do  not  acknowledge  our 
sin  it  will  not  be  hid  from  him.  Whilst  "if  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  ju.st 
to  forgive."  2.  It  should  lead  us  to  watchfulness  and  prayer.  If  his  eye  is  ever  upon 
us,  let  our  eyes  ever  be  up  unto  him ;  if  his  ear  is  ever  open,  let  our  cry  ever  ascend 
unto  him,  3..  It  should  lead  the  accepted  soul  to  constant  fellowship  with  God.  To 
the  Christian  the  thought  of  the  Divine  omniscience  is  fraught  with  holy,  filial,  rejoicing 
confidence.  It  is  not  only  our  sins  that  are  not  hidden  from  him ;  he  knows  out 
prayers,  our  love,  our  hopes,  our  all. — ^T. 

Ver.  6. — Divine  withdrawal.  When  the  Lord  invited  Israel's  approach,  Israel 
remained  afar  off  in  unbelief  and  impenitence.  And  when,  in  distress  and  anxiety, 
Israel  drew  near  the  Lord,  it  was  to  find  that  he  would  no  longer  reveal  his  face  or 
bestow  his  favour. 

L  The  occasion  of  the  Divine  withdrawal.  The  Scriptures  often  represent  the 
Lord  as  hiding  his  face,  as  turning  away  his  ear,  as  repenting  him  of  the  favour  he  had 
shown,  as  hiding  himself.  Why  such  action  ?  Surely  this  withdrawal  is  always  and 
only  because  of  human  sin.  Whilst  his  subjects  are  loyal,  they  always  find  him 
gracious  and  accessible ;  but  from  the  rebellious  and  obstinate  he  withdraws  himself 
in  displeasure. 

II.  The  signs  of  the  Divine,  withdrawal.  In  the  case  of  Israel  prayers  were 
unheard,  sacrifices  were  disregarded,  enemies  were  suffered  to  triumph,  and  national 
disasters  followed  one  another  thick  and  fast.  God  has  ways  of  withdrawing  himself 
from  a  soul  as  well  as  from  a  nation.  He  removes  the  joyful  light  of  his  countenance, 
and  suffers  afflictions  to  befall  those  from  whom  he  hides  his  face  for  a  moment 

III.  The  purposes  of  the  Divine  withdrawal.  It  is  a  purpose  of  mercy,  not  of 
malevolence  or  vindictiveness.  If  men  will  not  obey  God,  he  leaves  them  to  taste  the 
fruits  of  disobedience.  When  they  are  wearied  of  his  absence,  and  turn  unto  him, 
it  is  with  great  mercies  that  he  gathers  them. — T. 

Ver.  1.— Human  treachery.  Israel's  idolatry  was  unfaithfulness  and  treason  to 
Jehovah.  And  every  one  who  does  wickedly  in  depariing  from  God  is  similarly  guilty, 
and  is  similarly  marked  by  Divine  omniscience  and  regarded  with  Divine  displeasure. 

L  The  proofs  of  tbbaohebt.    The  maiu  principle  of  infidelity  and  traitorousnesa 


156  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  v,  1— !& 

is  the  preference  of  another  for  God.  Whether  our  own  carnal  gratification,  or  the 
applause  of  men,  or  the  wealth  of  this  world,  he  desired  rather  than  the  service  and 
favour  of  God,  in  every  such  case  treason,  spiritual  treason,  has  been  committed.  This 
is  shown  by  idolatry,  by  sensuality,  by  worldliness,  by  pride ;  all  of  which  are  evidences 
of  a  treasonable  intent. 

II.  The  sin  or  trbachebt.  This  appears  when  we  consider :  1.  God's  claim  upon 
our  fidelity.  In  calling  us  bis  and  treating  us  as  his,  in  providing  for  all  our  wants, 
our  Divine  Lord  has  established  and  exhibited  his  right  to  our  loyal  subjection 
and  service.  2.  God's  grace  and  indulgence.  He  has  shown  his  affection  by  his 
considerate  care  for  our  happiness.  To  be  disloyal  to  him  is  base  insensibility  and 
ingratitude. 

III.  The  consequences  of  tbeachebt.  God  is  as  a  king,  who  cannot  be  indifferent 
to  the  treason,  the  rebellion,  of  his  subjects ;  he  is  as  a  husband,  who  cannot  pass  over 
the  infidelity  of  his  wife.  He  will  exeicise  his  sovereign  power,  vindicate  his  righteous 
claims,  and  punish  the  disloyal  and  the  traitorous.  To  avoid  a  doom  bo  awful,  "  kiss 
the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way." — T. 

Ver.  13. — Hwmom  physicians  helpleu.  The  reference  here  is  to  both  Israel  and 
Judah ;  for  both  kingdoms  were  alike  suffering,  alike  guilty  of  reliance  on  human  help 
and  deliverance,  and  alike  in  their  experience  of  its  utter  vanity. 

L  National  disease  and  suFFBEiNa.  The  language  is,  of  course,  figurative,  but 
it  is  very  expressive.  Whoever  reads  the  chronicles  of  the  chosen  people  must  become 
familiar  with  the  civil  troubles^  afflictions,  and  disasters  they  were  called  upon  to 
endure.  Had  they  been  faithful  to  God  and  to  one  another  they  would  have  been 
spared  very  much  which  they  brought  upon  themselves  of  sorrow  and  of  disaster. 

II.  The  appeal  to  political  physicians.  It  was  to  Assyria  that  tlje  Israelites 
were  often  so  foolish  as  to  appeal.  Beset  ;by  Babylon  on  the  east  and  Egypt  on  the 
south,  the  Hebrews  were  often  at  a  loss  how  to  steer  their  course.  Their  danger  was 
lest  they  should  rely  for  healing  and  for  safety  upon  "  an  arm  of  flesh."  It  was  not 
unnatural  that  they  should  do  so;  but  it  was  wrong  and  foolish  policy,  as  the  event 
always  proved. 

III.  The  powerlbssness  of  the  nations  to  heal  the  maladies  and  wounds 
OP  Israel.  The  children  of  the  covenant  gained  nothing  by  going  after  other  gods 
or  by  courting  the  alliance  of  heathen  kings.  These  physicians,  when  called  in, 
could  effect  no  cure  and  could  afford  no  relief.  In  this  we  discern  a  symbol  of  the 
powerlessness  of  all  human  friends  and  helpers  to  bring  deliverance  to  the  captive  soul, 
health  to  the  spiritually  sick  and  suffering,  relief  to  the  burdened. 

"  X  have  tried,  and  tried  in  vain. 
Other  ways  to  ease  my  pain." 

IV.  The  lesson  or  this  experience.  It  is  an  easy  one  to  understand,  but  a 
difficult  one  to  practise.  We  are  summoned  to  cast  aside  air  confidence  in  human 
helpers,  and  to  rely  simply  and  only  upon  the  Divine  Physician.  In  him  is  salvation. 
"  There  is  balm  in  Gilead ;  there  is  a  physician  there."  Christ  is  the  Healer  alike  of 
body  and  of  soul,  of  individuals  and  of  nations;  and  his  healing  is  both  for  time  and 
for  eternity. — T. 

Ver.  15.— Fruits  of  affliction.  Prosperity  is  not  so  unmixed  a  blessing  as  men  are 
prone  to  imagine.  It  olten  withdraws  the  attention  from  the  unseen  world  and  the 
eternal  future.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  much  as  men  may  dread  adversity,  multi- 
tudes have  had  reason  to  be  grateful  for  affliction.  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  I  went 
astray,"  etc. 

I.  Affliction  is  divinely  appointed.  The  order  of  things,  as  a  result  of  which 
troubles  and  privations  befall  men,  is  constituted  by  Divine  wisdom.  In  the  Hebrew 
manner  of  thought  this  fact  is  conveyed  by  the  language  put  into  the  lips  of  Jehovah, 
''  I  will  go  and  return  to  my  place." 

**  Let  US  be  patient ;  these  severe  affliotiona 
Not  from  the  Kround  arise." 


0H.T.1— 16.]1  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  167 

n.   AfFLIOTIOH  IB  INTENDED  TO  DIBEOT    THE  THOUaHTS    TO    THE    SUPFEEBb'b  BIITS. 

It  is  often  idle  curiosity  to  speculate  upon  the  connection  between  disobedience  and 
particular  troubles.  But,  as  a  general  principle,  sin  is  tho  root  of  wbich  suffering  is 
the  fruit.  And  times  of  affliction  call  upon  the  "  tried  "  and  harassed  to  scrutinize 
their  own  conduct  and  their  own  heart,  "  till  they  acknowledge  their  offence,"  or 
"  hold  themselves  guilty."  Men  go  on  sinning,  from  one  crime  or  folly  to  another, 
and  confirm  themselves  in  their  evil  courses,  until  a  check  comes,  until  calamity  over- 
takes them,  until  they  are  constrained  to  ask  themsilves — Have  we  forgotten  that  the 
world  is  ruled  by  a  righteous  God,  who  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  ?  Thus 
they  are  bed,  by  God's  grace,  to  coufession  and  to  penitence. 

IQ.  Affliction  is  intended  to  direct  the  thoughts  to  God.  It  is  not  enough 
for  the  offender  to  look  inwards  to  himself;  he  must  look  upwards  to  his  God.  "Till 
they  seek  my  face;"  "They  will  seek  me  early."  In  days  of  calm,  of  pleasure,  of 
health,  of  plenty,  God  has  been  forgotten.  But  "  sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity ; " 
and  there  is  no  use  sweeter,  more  profitable,  than  this — its  tendency  to  raise  the  mind 
to  heaven.  To  seek  forgiveness  for  careless,  forgetful  days,  to  seek  the  favour  which  has 
been  justly  forfeited,  to  seek  the  help  which  has  been  despised, — such  is  the  attitude  of 
the  humbled  and  the  contrite.  And  such  suppliants  shall  not  seek  the  face  of  God 
In  vain. — T. 

Vers.  1—3. — Natitmdl  depravity.  "  Hear  ye  this,  0  priests ;  and  hearken,  ye  house 
of  Israel ;  and  give  ye  ear,  0  house  of  the  king ;  for  judgment  is  toward  you,  because 
ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  and  a  net  spread  upon  Tabor.  And  the  revolters  are 
profound  to  make  slaughter,  though  I  have  been  a  rebuker  of  them  all.  I  know 
Bphraim,  and  Israel  is  not  hid  from  me:  for  now,  0  Ephraim,  thou  committest 
whoredom,  and  Israel  is  defiled."  "  With  the  words,  '  Hear  ye  this,'  the  reproof  of 
the  sins  of  Israel  makes  a  new  start,  and  is  specially  adiiressed  to  the  priests  and  the 
king's  house,  i.e.  the  king  and  his  court,  to  announce  to  the  leaders  of  the  nation  the 
punishment  that  will  follow  their  apostasy  from  God  and  their  idolatry,  by  which 
they  have  plunged  the  people  and  kingdom  headlong  into  destruction "  (Keil  and 
Delitzsoh).    These  words  lead  us  to  consider  the  depravity  of  a  nation. 

I.  Priests  and  people  aee  involved  in  it.  "  Hear  ye  this."  All  orders  and 
degrees  of  men  are  here  cited  to  appear  before  the  Almighty  on  account  of  the  sin  of 
the  country.  Both  priests  and  rulers,  clergy  and  kings,  ought,  not  only  to  be  unimpli- 
cated  in  the  moral  corruption  of  a  country,  but  to  be  evermore  the  most  zealous  and 
efficient  agents  in  purifying  the  spirit  and  elevating  the  moral  character  of  a  nation. 
In  their  elevated  positions  they  should  not  allow  a  breath  of  general  depravity  to  touch 
them,  but  pour  down  evermore  upon  all  grades  of  people  sentiments  and  influences 
that  shall  purify  and  bless.  Alasl  it  has  been  otherwise;  both  have,  for  ages,  proved 
the  greatest  contaminators  and  curses  of  their  race.  Priests  have  oftentimes  been 
fiends  in  sacerdotal  robes,  and  kings  beastly  voluptuaries  in  royal  garb  and  stately 
gait.  No  man  is  a  real  priest  of  God,  and  no  man  a  true  king,  who  is  not  the  most 
distinguished  exemplar  and  promoter  of  those  heavenly  virtues  which  alone  can  confer 
peace,  stability,  and  honour  upon  a  country, 

II.  Unfaithfulness  to  God  is  a  proof  of  it.  "  For  judgment  is  toward  you, 
because  ye  have  been  a  snare  on  Mizpah,  and  a  net  spread  upon  Tabor."  "  As  hunters 
spread  their  net  and  snares  upon  the  hills  Mizpah  and  Tabor,  so  ye  have  snared  the 
people  into  idolatry,  and  made  them  your  prey  by  injustice."  As  Mizpah  and  Tahor 
mean  a  "  watch-tower"  and  a  "lofty  place,"  a  fit  scene  for  hunters;  playing  on  the 
words,  the  prophet  implies,  "In  the  lofty  place  in  which  I  have  set  you,  whereas  ye 
ought  to  have  been  the  watchers  of  the  people,  guarding  them  from  evil,  ye  have  been 
as  hunters  entrapping  them  into  it."  The  meaning  is  "These  kings  and  priests  use 
their  elevated  positions  in  turning  men  away  from  the  true  God."  "  And  the  revolters 
are  profound  to  make  slaughter,  though  I  have  leen  a  rebuker  of  them  all."  «  Ee- 
volt^s "  means  apostates,  and  these  apostates  were  "  profound,"  deeply  rooted,  sunk 
into  the  lowest  depths  of  idolatry.  "  To  make  slaughter."  Their  offerings  were  not 
sacrifices  they  were  mere  slaughters,  butcheries;  there  was  nothing  sacred  about 
them  Here  then,  is  a  proof  of  the  general  depravity  of  a  nation.  A  nation  that  is 
unfaithful  to  its  true  God  is  a  tree  rotten  in  its  roots,  a  river  poisoned  in  its  springs 


t58  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  v.  1—15. 

Philosophically  there  can  be  no  morality  where  there  is  no  fidelity  to  him  whose 
existence  is  the  foundation  and  whose  will  is  the  rule  of  all  virtue. 

III.  The  Judge  of  the  wobld  ib  cognizant  of  it,  "  I  know  Ephraim,  and 
Israel  is  not  hid  from  me."  No  covering  can  conceal  it,  no  argument  will  disprove  it. 
it  lays  bare  to  the  eye  of  Omniscience.  "I  know  Ephraim."  Though  they  were 
ignorant  of  him,  he  knew  them  and  read  them  through  and  through.  Nations  often 
cover  over  their  depravity  by  the  promotion  of  benevolent  institutions,  by  encoiirauing 
the  ordinances  of  public  worship,  and  by  a  public  profession-  of  religion.  But  there  is 
an  eye  that  penetrates  through  the  thick  covering — he  sees  the  devil  in  the  angel;  "  He 
searcbeth  the  heart,  and  trieth  the  reins  of  the  children  of  men." 

Conclusion.  Suppose  not  that  national  depravity  is  something  distinct  from  the 
depravity  of  the  individual.  It  is  but  the  a;.'gregation  of  individual  depravities.  Nor 
suppose  that,  because  priests  and  kings  may  be  the  mightiest  agents  in  promoting 
iiitional  immorality  and  irreligion,  each  individual  in  the  nation  is  less  accountable 
for  his  sins  on  that  account.  No  priest  or  kin^  can  compel  us  to  sin.  Sin  is  an 
act  of  freedom,  and  for  it  each  man  is  held  responsible  to  the  Most  High.  Daniel 
Webster  was  once  asked,  "What  is  the  most  important  thought  you  ever  entertained?" 
He  replied,  after  a  moment's  reflection,  "  The  most  important  thought  I  ever  had  was 
my  individual  responsibility  to  God." — D.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Necessary  preliminaries  to  a  godly  life.  "  They  will  not  frame  their  doings 
to  turn  unto  their  God,"  etc.  Preachers  do  not  always  deal  wisely  with  their  hearers. 
They  call  upon  men  to  repent;  they  often  describe  repentance  with  metaphysical 
accuracy,  and  enforce  it  with  resistless  louic  and  pressing  rhetoiic.  So  with  faith ; 
they  explain  its  nature  and  enforce  its  duty.  They  say,  "  Kepent  or  be  damned," 
"  Believe  or  be  damned."  They  seldom  go  further.  But  few  have  any  notion  that 
there  is  a  certain  way  to  repent  and  believe,  fewer  still  indicate  the  nature  of  that  way. 
Long  have  I  had  the  impression,  which  deepens  with  years,  that  there  is  as  truly  a 
way  to  "  repent  and  believe,"  as  there  is  a  way  to  cultivate  the  farm,  build  the  house, 
or  master  any  art  or  science.  The  text  implies  this,  "They  will  not  frame  their 
doings  to  turn  unto  their  God."  What  is  the  way  ?  How  are  men  to  frame  their 
doings  as  to  turn  unto  their  God  ? 

I.  By  thinking  on  certain  subjects.  We  ever  act  from  motives  when  we  act 
as  men.  But  what  are  motives?  The  creation  of  our  own  thoughts.  The  man  who 
centres  his  thoughts  on  the  advantages  of  wealth,  or  fame,  or  knowledge,  turns  to  their 
pursuit.  His  thoughts  excite  his  feelings,  and  his  feelings  urge  him  to  a  resolution. 
But  what  are  the  subjects  which  thought  must  dwell  on  in  order  that  we  may  move 
religiously  ?  If  I  am  to  repent  I  must  think  of  my  sins  in  relation  to  the  character  of 
the  holy  God  and  the  aelf-sacrifioing  Christ.  It  is  only  as  I  muse  that  the  fires  of 
jienitence  will  burn.  If  I  am  to  believe,  I  must  think  upon  the  object  who  alone  has 
the  attributes  to  command  my  highest  confidence  and  unbounded  trust.  If  I  am  to 
love  supremely,  I  must  meditate  on  the  perfections  of  him  who  is  supremely  good.  In 
fact,  if  a  man  is  to  turn  to  any  new  course  of  conduct,  he  must  have  new  motives  ;  and 
if  he  is  to  have  new  motives,  he  must  have  new  thoughts.  "  I  thought  of  my  ways,  I 
turned  my  feet  unto  thy  statutes."  Thought  is  the  rudder  of  the  soul;  as  it  is 
turned,  the  vessel  takes  the  direction. 

II.  By  thinking  on  certain  sulijects  in  a  certain  way.  There  is  a  way  to  think. 
You  may  think  on  the  most  serious  sulijeots  in  such  a  way  as  to  produce  profanity  and 
mirth.  How  must  you  think,  then,  on  these  subjects?  1.  "^'xth  concentration.  The 
whole  thinking  force  of  the  soul  must  be  centred  on  them.  The  most  solemn  of  them 
taken  up  lightly  and  despatched  with  a  reflection  or  two,  will  not  [noduce  the  result. 
If  you  would  bring  the  beams  of  the  sun  into  a  scorching  fiame,  you  must  draw  them 
to  a  focus.  And  if  you  would  make  the  great  truths  of  religion  kindle  repentance 
within  you,  you  must  focalize  them  by  a  process  of  intense  thinking.  2.  With 
persistency.  It  is  not  enough  to  bend  even  the  whole  force  of  the  mind  upon  tViem  now 
and  then  at  distant  intervals ;  it  must  be  done  consecutively.  They  must  be  kept 
constantly  before  the  mind  as  objects  in  its  horizon  so  grand  and  solemn  that  all  else 
shall  seem  trifling  and  contemptible.  3.  With  devotion.  God  must  bo  brought  to 
ihem.    His  presence  and  aid  must  be  invoked. 


OH.T.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  169 

IIL  By  thinking  on  certain  subjects  with  a  praotioal  intbnt.  To  think  upon 
religious  subjects  in  order  to  increase  our  theological  knowledge  or  to  make  our  feelings 
glow  for  a  time  with  a  religious  sentiment  would  be  of  little  service ;  but  to  think  in 
order  to  translate  the  thought  into  action,  to  embody  the  idea  in  the  life — ^this  is  the 
way.  They  must  be  thought  upon  in  order  to  answer  the  question,  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?" 

CoNOLUBioN.  "This  is  the  way;  walk  ye  in  it."  Think.  Thoughtlessness  is  the 
curse  of  humanity.  Think  on  right  subjects ;  wrong  subjects  will  do  you  harm. 
Think  on  right  subjects  in  a  right  way ;  thinking  on  right  subjects  in  a  wrong  way 
must  prove  disastrous.  Think  on  right  subjects  with  a  practical  intent,  not  for  specu- 
lation nor  sentimentalizing,  but  for  action — real,  living,  godly  action.  Thus  frame 
your  doings,  and  "  turn  unto  the  Lord."  Think,  brethren,  think ;  there  is  nothing 
like  noble  thoughts.  "  It  is  a  grand  thing  when,  in  the  stillness  of  the  soul,  thought 
bursts  into  flame,  and  the  intuitive  vision  comes  like  inspiration;  when  breathing 
thoughts  clothe  themselves  in  burning  words,  winged  as  it  were  with  lightning;  or 
when  a  great  law  of  the  universe  reveals  itself  to  the  mind  of  genius,  and,  where  all  was 
darkness,  his  single  word  bids  light  be,  and  all  is  wder  where  chaos  and  confusion 
were.  Or  when  the  truths  of  human  nature  shape  themselves  forth  in  the  creative 
fancies  of  one  life,  the  million-minded  poet,  and  you  recognize. the  rare  power  of  heart 
which  sympathizes  with  and  can  reproduce  all  that  i«  found  in  man"  (F.  W. 
Robertson).— D.  T. 

Ter.  6. — Too  late.  "  They  shall  go  with  their  flocks  and  with  their  herds  to  seek  the 
Lord ;  but  they  shall  not  find  him ;  he  hath  withdrawn  himself  from  them."  This 
verse  directs  us  to  two  subjects  of  thought.* 

L  The  most  imfobtant  of  all  wobkb.  "  They  shall  go  with  their  flocks  and  with 
their  herds  to  seek  the  Lord."  "  Seek  the  Lord : "  this  implies  a  distance  between  man 
and  his  Maker.  The  Bible  abounds  with  allusions  to  this  distance.  What  is  it  ?  It  is 
not  the  distance  of  heing,  for  both  are  in  close  vital  contact.  "  In  him  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being."  It  is  the  distance  of  character.  Between  the  sympathies, 
principles,  and  aim  of  the  two  there  is  a  distance  vast  as  infinitude.  "  His  tbought* 
are  not  our  thoughts,"  etc.  Hence  the  great  work  of  man  is  to  seek  the  Lord  morally — 
to  seek  his  character,  and  thus  become  a  "  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature."  1.  This  ia 
a  work  in  which  all  men  should  engage.  The  grand  duty  of  all  souls  is  to  be  "  holy, 
even  as  he  is  holy."  Holiness  is  the  condition  of  fellowship  with  him  in  "whose 
presence  there  is  joy,  and  at  whose  right  hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore."  2. 
This  is  a  work  which  all  men  must  attend  to  sooner  or  later.  The  time  hastens  on 
when  the  most  wicked  and  worthless  man  on  earth  will  wake  up  to  the  importance  of 
.holiness,  and  strenuously  try  for  his  friendship.  Of  all  works,  then,  this  is  the  most 
important.  Every  otlier  avocation  of  life  is  puerile  compared  with  this.  Man's  great 
want  is  the  Lord — the  Lord's  character,  the  Lord's  fellowship.  Without  this,  whatever 
else  he  has,  he  is  lost — ^lost  to  happiness,  to  usefulness,  and  to  the  grand  ends  of  his 
being. 

II.  The  most  important  of  all  works  uudbetaken  too  latb.  "  They  shall  not  find 
him ;  he  hath  withdrawn  himself  from  them."  Though  they  take  with  them  their 
flocks  and  their  herds,  and  are  prepared  to  make  the  greatest  sacrifices,  their  efforts  are 
fruitless — "  He  hath  withdrawn  himself  from  them."  This  is  the  language  of  accom- 
modation. He  puts  forth  no  effort  to  conceal  himself,  he  alters  not  his  position,  but 
he  seems  to  withdraw  from  them.  As  the  white  cliffs  of  Albion  seem  to  withdraw 
from  the  emigrant  as  his  vessel  bears  him  away  to  distant  shores,  so  God  seems  to 
withdraw  from  the  man  who  seeks  him  "  too  late." 

Conclusion.  "  Then  shall  they  call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer;  they  shall 
seek  me  early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me :  for  that  they  hated  knowledge,  and  did  not 
choose  the  fear  of  the  Lord:  they  would  none  of  my  counsel ;  they  despised  aU  my 
leproof.  Therefore  shall  tiiey  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  filled  with  their 
own  devices." — ^D.  T. 

Yer.  8. — An  earnest  ministry,  "  Blow  ye  the  comet  In  Qibeah,  and  the  trumpet  ia 
Bamah :  cry  aloud  at  Beth-aren,  after  thee,  0  Benjamin."    The  prophet  in  vision  sees 


160  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  v.  1—15. 

Divine  judgment  coming  on  the  rebellious  nation,  and  commands  an  alarm  to  be  given 
of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  Gilioah  (Josh,  xviii.  28)  and  Bamah  (xviii.  25)  were 
two  elevated  places  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  were  well  adapted  for  signals  on 
account  of  their  lofty  elevation.  The  introduction  of  these  particular  towns,  which 
did  not  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Israel,  but  to  Judah,  is  intended  to  indicate  that  the 
enemy  had  already  conquered  the  ten  tribes,  and  had  advanced  to  that  on  the  border  of 
Judah.  The  idea  of  the  passage  is — Give  an  earnest  warning  of  the  juilgment  about  to 
break  on  the  people,  sound  the  alarm,  and  startle  the  population.  The  subject  sug- 
gested is  that  of  an  earnest  ministry.    Notice — 

I.  The  nature  of  an  earnest  ministbt.  "Cry  aloud."  Let  the  whole  sonl  go 
forth  in  the  work.  Let  us  not  mistake  the  nature  of  earnestness.  It  is  not  noise. 
Ignorant  people  imagine  that  the  minister  who  makes  the  greatest  noise,  roars  and 
raves  the  most  in  the  pulpit,  or  parades  his  doings  most  in  journals  and  reports,  is  the 
earnest  man.  "A  celebrated  preacher,  distinguished  for  the  eloquence  of  bis  pulpit 
preparations,  exclaimed  on  his  death-bed, '  Speak  not  to  me  of  my  sermons.  Alas !  I 
was  fiddling  whilst  Borne  was  burning.'  It  is  not  frightening  people.  Often  he  who 
is  the  most  successful  by  graphic  and  impassioned  descriptions  of  the  judgment  day 
and  hell  fires,  in  terrifying  men,  is  considered  the  most  earnest.  This  is  a  mistake — a 
popular  and  fatal  mistake.  It  is  not  hustle.  He  who  is  always  on  the  "go"  whose 
limbs  are  always  on  the  stretch,  into  this  house  and  that  house,  into  this  meeting  and 
that,  who  is  never  at  rest,  men  are  always  disposed  to  regard  as  an  earnest  man. 
Genuine  earnestness  is  foreign  to  all  these  things.  It  has  nothing  in  it  of  the  noise 
and  rattle  of  the  fussy  brook ;  it  is  like  the  deep  stream  rolling  its  current  silently, 
resistlessly,  and  without  pause.  An  earnest  ministry  is  living.  It  is  not  mere 
preaching  or  service,  occasional  or  even  systematic ;  it  is  the  influence  of  the  whole 
man.  It  is  the  "Word"  made  flesh;  so  permeating  the  whole  man  that  every  word, 
act,  and  expression  are  as  the  blasts  of  a  Divine  trumpet,  rousing  sinners  to  a  sense  of 
their  moral  danger.  Such  a  ministry  is  a  matter  of  necessity.  The  Divine  thing  in 
the  man  becomes  irrepressible,  it  breaks  out  as  sunbeams  through  the  clouds  :  "  Woe 
is  unto  me  if  I  preach  not  the  gospel."  Such  a  ministry  is  constant.  It  is  not  a 
professional  service ;  it  is  as  regular  as  the  functions  of  life  ;  it  is  a  thing  that  is  "  in 
season  and  out  of  season"— in  shops  and  in  sanctuaries,  on  hearths  as  well  as  in  pulpits. 
Such  a  ministry  is  mighty.  Men  can  stand  before  the  most  thunderous  words  and 
violent  attitudinizationa,  but  tliey  cannot  stand  before  such  a  ministry  as  this;  they  are 
before  it  as  snow  before  the  sun. 

"  Oh  I  let  all  the  soul  within  yon 
For  the  truth's  sake  go  abroad  t 
Strike  I  let  every  nerve  and  sinew 
Tell  on  ages— tell  for  God." 

II.  The  need  or  an  earnest  ministry.  Why  was  the  "  comet "  to  be  now  blown 
in  Gibeah,  and  the  "  trumpet "  in  Bamah  ?  Because  there  was  danger.  The  moral 
danger  to  which  souls  around  us  are  exposed  is  great.  There  is  the  danger  of  losing, 
not  existence,  but  all  that  makes  existence  worth  having — love,  hope,  power,  friendstiip. 
etc.  "  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death."  It  is  near.  It  is  not  the  danger  of  an 
invading  army  heard  in  the  distance.  The  enemy  has  entered  the  soul,  and  tlie  work 
of  devastating  has  commenced.  It  is  increasing.  The  condition  of  the  un  regenerate 
soul  gets  worse  and  worse  every  hour.  Brothers,  let  us  be  earnest  in  our  work,  always 
"  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  "  1 

"  Time  is  earnest,  passing  by ; 
Death  is  earnest,  drawing  nigh ; 
Life  is  earnest ;  when  'tis  o'er 
Thou  retuinest  nevermore." 

D.T. 

Vor.  12.—"  The  moth ; "  or,  God's  quiet  method  of  destroying.  "  Therefore  will  I  be 
unto  Ephraim  as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  rottenness."  "  And  I  am  like 
the  moth  to  Ephraim,  and  like  the  worm  to  the  house  of  Judah"  (Keil  and  Delitzsch). 
"  The  moth  and  worm  are  figures  employed  to  represent  destructive  powers — the  ingtb 


3H.  T.  1— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  161 


destroying  clothes  (Isa.  1.  9  ;  Ps.  xxxix.  12),  the  worm  injuring  hoth  wood  and  flesh." 
The  words  indicate  Ood's  quiet  method  of  destroying.  In  two  or  three  verses  in  this 
chapter  he  is  spolsen  of  as  proceeding  in  his  work  of  destruction  as  a  lion  :  "  I  will  be 
unto  Ephraim  as  a  lion."  Here  as  a  "  moth  " — working  out  ruin  silently,  slowly,  and 
gradually, 

I.  He  W0HK8  DECAY  THUS  SOMETIMES  IN  THE  BODIES  OF  MEN.  Oftentimes  men  die 
violently  and  suddenly,  but  more  frequently  by  some  insidious  hidden  disease  which, 
like  a  "  moth,"  works  away  quietly  at  the  vitals,  gradually  poisoning  the  blood  and 
undermining  the  constitution.  In  truth,  the  seed  of  death,  like  a  moth,  gnaws  away 
day  after  day  and  year  after  year  in  every  human  frame.  The  moth  is  often  so  small 
and  secret  in  its  workings  that  meiHcal  science  can  seldom  find  it  out,  and,  when  it 
finds  it  out,  though  it  may  check  it  for  a  time,  it  cannot  destroy  it :  the  moth  defies 
all  medicine.  Truly  we  are  crushed  by  a  moth.  At  the  heart  of  some  of  the  strongest 
trees  in  the  forest  there  are  hosts  of  invisible  insects  noiselessly  at  work ;  the  forester 
knows  it  not,  the  tree  seems  healthy;  until  one  fine  morning,  before  a  strong  gust  of 
wind,  it  falls  a  victim  to  these  silent  workers.     So  with  the  strongest  man  amongst  us. 

II.  Hk  works  decay  thus  sometimes  in  the  bntbepeises  of  men.  Often  men  find 
it  impossible  to  succeed  in  their  worldly  avocations.  Mercantile  establishments  that 
have  been  prosperous  for  generations  have  the  "  moth  "  in  them.  For  years  the  fabric 
has  been  so  firm  that  it  has  made  but  little  way,  the  tree  has  grown  and  flourished 
though  the  worm  was  at  its  root ;  but  the  time  comes  when  the  effects  are  seen,  and 
the  existing  proprietors  begin  to  wonder  they  do  not  go  on  as  usual,  why  the  fruit  is 
not  so  juicy  and  abundant  as  in  their  father's  time.  One  of  their  projects  brings  poor 
results,  and  another  fails,  at  last  the  establishment  collapses ;  the  outsiders  wonder,  and 
a  panic  is  created  in  the  market.  What  is  the  matter  ?  There  has  been  a  "  moth  " 
there  for  years.  It  has  not  been  conducted  by  godly  men,  and  that  in  a  right  spirit ; 
so  God  sent  a  "  moth,"  and  the  moth  has  been  working  away  for  years  silently,  secretly, 
and  gradually,  until  all  the  vitality  has  been  eaten  up. 

III.  He  works  decay  thus  sometimes  in  the  kingdoms  of  men.  For  a  time  a 
country  flourishes  ;  there  is  a  vigour,  an  elasticity,  an  enterprise,  a  lova  of  justice  and 
honour  in  the  spirit  of  the  people,  and  all  things  seem  to  pros^'cr.  Its  commerce 
flourishes,  its  laws  are  respected,  its  influence  great  amongst  the  nations,  but  there  is  a 
"  moth  "  in  its  heart.  Effeminacy,  luxury,  ambition,  greed,  self-ind\il;euoe,  servility, 
irreverence, — these  are  moths,  and  decay  sets  in,  and  it  falls,  not  by  the  sword  of  the 
invader,  but  by  its  ovra  "  rottenness."  We  fear  there  isa"  moth  "  secretly  but  regularly 
working  out  the  ruin  of  England.  "  I  will  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  n.oth."  It  was  thus 
with  the  nations  of  antiquity.     Where  are  they  ?    The  moth  has  eaten  them, 

"When  nations  go  astray  from  age  to  age, 
The  effects  remain  a  fatal  heritage ; 
Bear  witness,  Egypt,  thy  huge  monuments 

Of  priestly  fraud  and  tyranny  austere  1 
Bear  witness,  thou,  whose  only  name  presents 

All  holy  feelings  to  religion  dear — 
In  earth's  dark  circlet  once  the  precious  gem 
Of  living  light,  0  fallen  Jerusalem!" 

(Robert  Southey.) 

IV.  He  works  decay  thus  sometimes  in  the  Churches  of  men.  What  destroyed 
the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  ?  The  "  moth  "  of  worldliness  and  religious  errois.  Some 
of  our  modern  Churches  are  obviously  slowly  rotting  away.  A  realizing  faith  in  the 
invisible,  brotherly  love,  practical  self-sacrifice,  Christliness  of  spirit, — these,  which 
constitute  the  moral  heart  of  the  true  Church,  are  being  eaten  up  by  the  moth  of 
secularity,  sectarianism,  superstition,  and  religious  pretence.  Thus,  too,  individual 
souls  lose  their  spiritual  life  and  strength.  Many  a  soul,  once  earnestly  alive  to  the 
higher  things  of  being,  has  lost  its  vigour  and  fallen  into  spiritual  decay.  God  deliver 
us  from  those  errors  of  heart  that  like  a  moth  eat  away  the  hfe  1  "  We  read,"  says 
Archbishop  Trench,  "  in  books  about  the  West  Indies  of  a  huge  bat,  which  goes  under 
the  ugly  name  of  the  vampire  bat.  It  has  obtained  this  name,  sucking  as  it  does  the 
blood  of  sleepers,  even  as  the  vampire  is  fabled  to  do.  So  far,  indeed,  there  can  be  no 
doubt ;  but  it  is  further  reported,  whether  truly  or  not  I  will  not  undertake  to  say,  to 

HOBKA.  V 


168  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  t.  1—15. 

fan  them  with  its  mighty  wings,  that  so  tliey  may  not  wake  from  their  shunters,  but 
may  be  hushed  into  deeper  sleep,  while  it  is  thus  diaining  away  the  blood  from  their 
veins.  Sin  has  often  presented  itself  to  me  as  such  a  vampire  bat,  possessing  as  it  does 
the  same  fearful  power  to  lull  its  victims  into  an  even  deeper  slumber,  to  deceive  those 
whom  it  is  also  destroying." — D.  T. 

Ver.  13.— Wrong  methods  of  relief.  "  When  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah 
saw  his  wound,  then  went  Ephraim  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  toKingJareb:  yet 
could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you  of  your  wound."  Tiie  "  moth  "  had  so  far  eaten  into 
the  political  heart  of  Ephraim  and  Judah  that  they  began  to  ftel  the  wound  and  to 
grow  conscious  of  thi  ir  weakness.  They  felt,  it  may  be,  that  from  the  sole  of  the  foot 
to  the  crown  of  the  head  there  was  no  soundness  in  them,  but  v/ounds  and  bruises  and 
putrefied  sores.  Under  a  grievous  sense  of  their  disease  and  weakness,  instead  of  apply- 
ing to  Jehovah  for  help,  they  went  "  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  to  King  Jareb."  The 
Assyrian  king  was  ever  ready  for  his  own  aggrandizement  to  mix  himself  up  with  the 
affairs  of  neighbouring  states,  and  profess  to  undertake  Israel  and  Judah's  cause.  As 
the  real  disease  of  the  two  kingdoms  was  apostasy  to  the  Lord,  which  ever  gives  rise 
to  all  the  evils  that  destroy -political  states  as  well  as  individual  souls,  we  are  justified 
in  giving  the  text  a  spiritual  application;  and  we  raise  from  it  the  following 
remarks : — 

I  Men  are  often  made  conscious  of  their  spiritual  malady.  Depravity  is  a  disease 
of  the  heart ;  it  is  often  represented  as  such  in  the  Bible,  and  it  is  so.  As  a  disease  it 
impairs  the  energies,, mars  the  enjoyment  of  the  soul,  and  inca]acitates  it  for  the  right 
discharge  of  the  dutips  of  life.  Often  men  remain  insensible  to  this  disease,  but  the 
time  comes  when  they  become  deeply  conscious  of  it.  As  "  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness, 
and  Ji'.dah  saw  his  wound,"  tbey  see  their  moral  wretchedness,  and  cry  out,  "  Who  shall 
deliver  us  from  the  bondage  of  this  sin  and  death  ?  "  A  great  point  is  gained  when  the 
sinner  becomes  conscious  of  his  sins. 

II.  Men  under  a  consciousness  of  their  spiritual  malady  fkequbntly  kesort  to 
WRONG  MEANS  OP  KEUBP.  Ephraim  now  "  went  to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  to  King 
Jareb."  'I'he  Assyrians  had  neither  the  power  nor  the  disposition  to  effect  their  restora- 
tion to  political  health.  How  often  men  whose  consciences  are  touched  by  the  events 
of  providence  and  the  truths  of  the  gospel  appeal  for  help  to  some  moral  Assyrian ! 
Sometimes  they  go  to  scenes  of  carnal  amusemsnt ;  sometimes  to  sceptical  philosophiz- 
ings;  sormelimes  to  false  reliyions.  These  are  all  "  miserable  comforters,"  "  broken 
cisterns." 

in.  That  resorting  to  wrong  methods  of  relief  will  pbovb  tjTTERLT  ineffeotivb. 
"  Yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you  of  your  wound."  What  can  worldly  amuse- 
ments, sceptical  reasonings,  and  false  religions  do  towards  healing  a  sin-sick  soul? 
Nothing.  Like  anodyne,  they  may  deaden  the  pain  lor  a  minute  only,  that  the  anguish 
may  return  with  intenser  acuteness.  'there  is  but  one  Physician,  and  that  is  Christ. 
Public  amusers,  sceptical  philosophers, entertaining  novelists, ceremonial  priests, — these 
have  been  tried  a  thousand  times,  and  have  failed — signally  failed.  Christ  only  can 
bind  up  the  broken-hearted.  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest." — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 7.^—Ood  and  man.  All  classes  are  addressed  by  the  prophet — priests,  king, 
nobles,  the  whole  house  of  Israel.  'J'he  prophecy  makes  an  advance,  in  the  previous 
chapter  judgment  is  threatened ;  in  this  it  is  announced  as  imminent.  Judah  also  is 
menaced  with  punishment  (vers.  6,  10,  12). 

I.  God  WILL  ENSNARE  THE  ENSNARERS.  (Ver.  1.)  The  dignitaries — ^priests,  kings, 
and  nobles — had  led  the  people  astray.  They  had  put  stumbling-blocks  in  their  way. 
'I'hey  had  become  a  snare  to  them.  Mizpah  and  Tabor  may  be  referred  to  as  conspicuous 
centres  of  wickedness.  1  he  figure  is  taken  from  the  ensnaring  of  birds.  We  may 
ensnare:  1.  Thraugh  evil  example.  The  example  of  a  court,  of  the  aristocracy,  of 
ministers  of  religion,  of  the  wealthy,  has  a  powerful  influence  on  the  tone  of  morals  and 
religion.  If  evil,  it  gjves  an  immense  impetus  to  corruption.  The  multitudes  think 
nothing  wrong  which  they  see  in  their  betters  (cf.  Massillon's  sermon  on '  Des  Exemples 
de«  Grands  ')•    2.  Through  traps  utfor  virtue.    The  idolatrous  festivals  patronized  by 


«&.t.l— 15.]  THE  BOOK  Of  HOSfiA,  M 

the  great  were  direct  temptations  put  in  the  way  of  the  people.  What  shall  we  say 
of  the  countenance  given  by  many  in  high  positions  in  our  own  land  to  the  turf,  to 
demoralizing  sports,  to  gambling  institutions,  to  Sunday  festivals,  etc.  ?  The  toleration 
and  licensing  of  vice  by  public  authorities  is  the  spreading  of  a  "  snare."  Every  effort 
should  rather  be  made  to  remove  stumbling-blocks  from  the  midst  of  a  community. 
3.  By  direct  solicitation  to  evil.  The  vicious  take  a  wicked  delight  in  seducing  others. 
They  gloat  in  seeing  the  innocent  brought  down  to  Iheir  own  level.  Tliey  are  active 
and  unremitting  in  compassing  men's  destruction.  They  cannot  bear  that  any  should 
remain  to  be  a  rebuke  to  them.  Hence  the  ensnaring  influence  of  evil  companionships. 
Sod,  however,  declares  that  the  ensnarers  in  Israel  shall  not  escape  his  judgment. 
"  Judgment  is  toward  you."  He  will  dig  a  pit  for  those  who  are  digging  pits  for  their 
fellows.  He  will  take  them  in  their  own  net,  and  destroy  them  suddenly  (Pa.  vii.  11 — 
16  ;  ix.  15, 16). 

II.  God  is  mobb  PEorouNO  than  the  plotters.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  The  revolters  in 
Israel  were  "  profound  to  make  slaughter."  They  laid  their  plots  deep.  They  concocted 
conspiracies  (ch.  vii.  3 — 7)  and  planned  deeds  of  blood  (ch.  vi.  8,  9).  They  thought 
that  no  one  knew  of  their  doings.  But  God  was  more  profound  than  they  were.  "  I 
know  Ephi  aim,  and  Israel  is  not  hid  from  me."  They  would  find  him  "  a  rebuker  "  of 
them  all.  All  their  sins  were  "  naked  and  open  "  to  him — ^their  plottings,  their  "  whore- 
dom," and  everything  else.  1.  The  wicked  pride  themselves  on  their  deep  cunning. 
They  imagine  that  their  deeds  are  wrapped  in  impenetrable  darkness.  They  are  strong 
in  a  fancied  security.  They  think  no  one  can  find  them  out.  2.  They  forget  about 
Ood.  All  the  while  God  is  watching  their  doings;  he  is  privy  to  their  most  secret 
counsels ;  he  knows  how  to  counterwork  and  defeat  their  plots  ;  he  will  at  last  "  bring 
every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it 
be  evil "  (Ecdes.  xii.  14). 

III.  God  is  not  eegabdlbss  of  those  who  eepuse  to  know  him.  (Vers.  4, 6.) 
1.  The  sinner  puts  Ood  out  of  his  thoughts.  Israel  had  turned  its  back  on  Jehovah. 
It  would  not  know  him.  "They  will  not  frame  their  doings,"  etc.  The  cause  of  this 
was  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  the  people,  leading  them  to  depart  from  the  living  God. 
"  The  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in  the  midst  of  them."  The  alternative  rendering  of 
the  clause  first  suggests  that,  once  the  sinner  has  embarked  on  evil  courses,  he  finds  it 
(JifBeult  again  to  leave  them  :  "  Their  doings  will  not  suffer  them  to  turn  unto  their 
iiod."  The  "  spirit  of  whoredoms"  binds  the  transgressor  in  love  to  ways  that  are  not 
right.  These  fix  themselves  as  habits,  customs.  The  latent  sense  of  wrong-doing  in 
the  mind  will  not  allow  of  further  debate  with  conscience.  The  sinner,  in  this  condi- 
tion, is  apt  to  think  that,  because  he  has  succeeded  in  forgetting  God,  God  has  forgotten 
him  as  well.  2.  God,  however,  is  not  forgetful  of  the  sinner.  With  the  latter  it  may 
be  "  out  of  sight,  out  of  mind ; "  but  there  is  neither  "  out  of  sight "  nor  "  out  of  mind  " 
with  God.  The  "  pride  of  Israel "  here  (ver.  5)  and  in  ch.  vii.  10  is  best  interpreted 
— after  the  analogy  of  the  similar  expression,  "  excellency  [pride]  of  Jacob,"  in  Amos 
viii.  7 — of  God  himself,  Israel's  glory.  Israel  had  forgotten  God,  but  God  remembered 
Israel,  and  testified  against  it  "to  its  face."  He  testified  now  (1)  by  reproofs ;  and 
would  testify  afterwards  (2)  by  judgments.  "  Therefore  shall  Israel  and  Ephraim  fall 
in  their  iniquity."  What  applied  to  Israel  applied  also  to  Judah — ^"  Judah  also  shall 
fall  with  them ;  "  and  applies  to  every  sinner.  God  testifies  to  the  sinner  of  his  sins, 
of  his  ingratitude,  of  his  folly,  and  of  his  certain  punishment.  This,  through  conscience, 
in  the  Word,  by  the  Spirit,  by  the  reproofs  of  his  servants. 

IV.  God  can  withdraw  himself  when  men  seek.  (Vers.  6,7.)  1.  The  time  would 
come  when,  convinced  of  its  folly,  Israel  would  begin  to  seek  eagerly  after  God.  "They 
shall  go  with  their  flocks  and  with  their  herds,"  eto.  2.  But  it  would  then  be  too  late. 
"  He  hath  withdrawn  himself  from  them."  The  reason  why  God  would  thus  withdraw 
himself  would  be  that  there  was  no  sincerity  in  their  approach.  They  would  come  with 
flocks  and  herds,  but  not  with  the  essential  sacrifice — the  contrite  spirit.  The  character 
of  Israel  was  not  such  as  held  out  any  hope  of  genuine  repentance.  "  They  have  dealt 
treacherously  against  the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  The  right  time  to  seek  the  Lord  is  while 
he  "  waits  to  be  gracious."  After  that  it  is  too  late  (Prov.  L  24 — 34).  3.  They  would 
be  cut  off  in  a  short  time,  and  in  the  very  midst  of  their  sacrifices.  "  A  month  shaU 
devour  them  with  their  portions"  (cf.  Zech.  xi.  8).— -J.  0. 


164  THE  BOOE  OF  HOSBA.  [ch.t.1— 16. 

Vers.  8 — 12. — EpJiraim  and  Judah.  The  judgment  is  represented  in  these  verses  as 
already  fallen.  Shrill  cornet  and  trumpet  blasts  announce  the  presence  of  the  invadera, 
They  fill  the  land.    They  are  at  the  borders  of  Judah.    They  menace  Benjamin. 

L  In  the  grasp  of  the  destboyeb.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  1.  Ephraim's  destruction  eame 
upon  him  suddenly.  It  was  on  hira  before  he  was  aware.  Ere  almost  he  could  realize 
the  fact,  the  land  was  in  possession  of  invaders.  It  is  thus  that  God's  judgments 
commonly  overtake  transgressors.  While  they  are  saying  to  themselves,  "  Peace  a,nC 
safety,"  "  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them  "  (1  Thess.  v.  3).  They  mocked  at 
the  warning  and  professed  to  disbelieve  it.  Now,  to  their  amazement,  they  find  God's 
word  come  true.  They  are  caught  in  the  wave  of  judgment.  "  The  sorrows  of  death 
compass  them,  the  pains  of  hell  get  hold  upon  them."  It  was  so  at  the  Flood  (Matt. 
xxiv.  38,  39);  at  Sodom  (Luke  xvii.  28,  29);  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (Luke 
xvii.  30,  31) ;  and  shall  be  so  at  the  Lord's  second  advent  (Matt,  xxiv,  48—51). 
2.  When  Ephraim's  hour  came  he  was  powerless  to  save  himself.  He  might  blow  his 
trumpets ;  he  might  raise  cries  of  frantic  distress ;  he  might  warn  Benjamin ;  but  he 
could  not  deliver  his  own  soul.  So,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  the  haughtiest  of  those 
who  now  exalt  themselves  against  God  will  find  themselves  to  be  impotent.  They  will 
find  their  foe  to  be  one  against  whom  there  is  no  contending.  They  may  cry  for 
mercy;  may  shout  to  the  mountains  and  rocks  to  fall  on  tliem  (Eev.  vi.  16);  may 
plead,  like  Dives,  for  their  "  five  brethren  "  (Luke  xvii.  27,  28)  ;  but  they  will  know 
that  for  themselves  there  is  no  hope  iii  resistance.  3.  Ephraim's  desolation  wovld  he 
complete.  "  Ephraim  shall  be  desolate  in  the  day  of  rebuke,"  etc.  (1)  The  judgment 
would  fall  in  successive  strokes.  The  land  was  frequently  overrun  by  the  Assyrians, 
prior  to  the  final  overthrow.  There  is  an  evolution  in  God's  judgments.  They  run  on 
till  they  are  fulfilled.  "  That  which  shall  surely  be."  (2)  It  would  be  entire.  The 
land  would  be  reduced  to  utter  desolation.  (3)  It  would  be  lasting — "  great  plagues, 
and  of  long  continuance  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  59).  So  the  last  clause  may  be  rendered,  "  I 
have  declared  what  is  lasting." 

II.  The  DANOBB  TO  Judah.  (Vers.  8, 10.)  1.  The  ruin  <^  one  sinner  is  a  warning 
to  others.  Judah  was  partaker  in  Israel's  sins.  The  destruction  of  Ephraim  was  there- 
fore of  very  special  significance  to  the  sister  state.  It  portended  judgment  to  it  also. 
Wiien  the  northern  kingdom  was  in  the  hands  of  the  foe,  the  cry  might  well  be  raised, 
"  After  thee,  O  Benjamin."  (1)  The  sinner  overtaken  by  judgment  gives  warning. 
He  is  now  conscious,  if  he  was  not  previously,  that "  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God"  (Heb.  x.  31).  Transgressors  have  often  died  warning  those 
related  to  them  against  drinking,  sabbath-breaking,  bad  company,  and  whatever  else 
brought  them  to  their  shameful  end.  (2)  Conscience  gives  warning.  When  judgment 
is  seen  descending  on  another,  conscience  is  quick  to  interpret  the  meaning  for  one's  self. 
"  After  thee,  0  Benjamin."  2.  The  ruin  of  one  sinner  foretells  Judgment  on  others. 
It  not  merely  warns  of  it ;  it  predicts  it.  It  says,  "  Except  yo  repent,  ye  shall  all 
likewise  )«rish"  (Luke  xiii.  8).  Judah's  punishment  was  as  certain  as  Ephraim's. 
(1)  Judah's  sins  called  for  punishment.  "  The  princes  of  Judah  were  like  them  that 
remove  the  bound."  They  changed  God's  commandments.  They  refused  to  be  bound 
by  the  Law  God  had  given  them.  They  altered  the  limits  of  conduct  to  suit  themselves. 
They  called  that  good  which  God  called  evil.  They  were  thus  like  boumlary-reraovers. 
All  sin  is  a  boundary -removing.  It  is  the  refusal  to  abide  within  prescribed  limits. 
It  is  "  transgression,"  a  stepping  across.  It  is  "lawlessness"  (1  John  iii.  4).  (2)  God 
had  threatened  Judah  with  punishment.  That  threatening  he  now  ratifies  and  repeats. 
Ephraim's  overthrow  was  a  pledge  of  its  fulfilment.  "  I  will  pour  out  my  wrath  upon 
them  like  water."  The  judgment  predicted  is  not  of  so  fatal  a  kind  as  that  on  Ephraim, 
but  it  would  be  still  very  terrible.  It  is  well  to  remember  that  there  is  wrath  iu  God ; 
that  it  is  roused  against  sin;  and  that,  in  its  effects,  when  poured  forth,  it  is  dreadful 
and  overwhelming.     Here  it  is  figured  as  a  flood  which  carries  all  before  it. 

III.  Moral  causation.  (Vers.  11, 12.)  The  moral  state  of  Ephraim  and  Judah, 
and  the  judgments  which  overtook  them,  stand  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
There  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  the  Divine  government.  God  but  gives  to  the  sinner 
what  his  own  doings  have  earned  (oli.  iv.  9).  1.  Judah's  sin  and  Ephraim's  sin  were 
practically  the  same  sin.  (1)  Judah's  princes  removed  the  bound;  but  this  also  was 
the  sin  of  Ephraim.    What  was  the  institution  of  the  calves  but  a  removing  of  bounds 


en.  V.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  165 


Bet  by  God's  commandments?  Tt  was  the  substituting  of  a  human  statute  for  a  Divine 
— the  setting  aside  of  a  prohibition  of  the  Decalogue.  (2)  The  people  of  Ephraim 
"  walked  willingly  after  the  commandment,"  i.e.  after  the  man-made  statute ;  but  so 
also  did  the  people  of  Judah.  They  followed  the  example  of  their  princes.  Both 
kingdoms  were  antinomian.  2.  Judah's  punishment  and  Ephraim' i  punishment  would 
accordingly  he  alike.  "  Therefore  will  I  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house 
of  Judah  as  rottenness."  The  agency  at  work  in  their  destruction,  while  supernatural 
in  origin,  would  work  through  natural  causes  and  in  accordance  with  natural  kws. 
Destruction  is  prepared  for  by  a  process  of  internal  decay.  This  decay  is  gradual,  secret, 
sure,  ruinous.  It  affects  all  parts  of  the  social  fabric.  It  so  eats  away  its  substance 
that  it  needs  but  a  touch  to  make  it  fall  in  pieces.  This  is  precisely  what  happens  in 
a  state  when  moral  laws  are  tampered  with. — J.  0. 

Vers.  13—15. — The  false  physician  and  the  true.  The  aid  of  the  King  of  Assyria 
was,  when  times  became  troublous,  freely  sought  by  both  Ephraim  and  Judah. 
Ephraim,  however,  was  the  chief  offender.  The  relations  between  Israel  and  Assyria 
were  at  this  time  very  close. 

L  The  fatal  sickness.  (Ver.  13.)  "  When  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah 
saw  his  wound,"  etc.  The  sickness  was  a  deadly  one.  Its  diagnosis  is  not  difScult. 
"  The  real  disease,"  one  has  said,  "  was  apostasy  from  the  Lord,  or  idolatry,  with  its 
train  of  moral  corruption,  injustice,  crimes,  and  vices  of  every  kind,  which  destroyed 
the  vital  energy  and  vital  marrow  of  the  two  kingdoms,  and  generated  civil  war  and 
anarchy  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel."  It  was  the  disease  of  tin,  which  in  more  or  less 
aggravated  forms  afQicts  us  alL  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint " 
(Isa.  L  5). 

IL  The  phtsioiah  that  oonLD  not  help.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  "  Then  went  Ephraim 
to  the  Assyrian,  and  sent  to  King  Jareb  [the  warlike  king],"  etc.  1.  ITie  sinner  will 
apply  to  any  helper  rather  than  to  God.  Israel  had  God  to  come  to,  but  he  would  not 
avail  himself  of  this  aid.  He  preferred  to  send  to  the  Assyrian.  The  reason  was  that 
he  did  not  believe  much  in  God's  help.  He  knew,  too,  that,  did  he  come  to  God,  he 
would  require  to  "  acknowledge  his  offence  "  (ver.  15)  and  give  up  his  evil  ways.  For 
this  he  was  not  prepared.  In  like  manner,  the  sinner's  first  resort  is  usually  to  earthly 
helpers.  He  neglects  the  great  Physician.  He  looks  to  man  for  his  comfort,  counsel, 
strength,  assistance,  and  happiness.  He  tries  the  "  broken  cisterns  "  (Jer.  ii.  13).  He 
seeks  remedies,  not  in  the  gospel,  but  in  science,  philosophy,  politics,  literature,  and 
art.  It  is  in  vain.  The  physician  is  not  to  be  found  there.  2.  No  helper  other  than 
Ood  cam,  heal  the  sickness.  "  Yet  could  he  not  heal  you,  nor  cure  you  of  your  wound." 
"  King  Jareb"  could  not  heal  Israel,  and  neither  can  these  earthly  physicians  we  speak 
of  heal  the  trouble  of  the  sinner.  It  passes  their  skill.  The  Assyrian  could  not  heal 
Israel  j  for :  (1)  The  cause  of  the  trouble  lay,  not  in  anything  outward,  but  in  the  moral 
state.  Social,  moral,  and  political  evils  need  a  deeper  remedy  than  any  earthly  helper 
knows  how  to  apply.  Unless  a  cure  can  be  discovered  for  sin,  other  remedies  will  fail. 
The  seat  of  the  mischief  is  in  the  heart.  It  is  that  which  needs  healing.  (2)  God's 
hand  was  against  Israel.  "  For  I  will  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  lion,  and  as  a  young  lion 
to  the  house  of  Judah,"  etc.  So  long  as  God  had  this  "  controversy  "  with  the  people 
it  was  vain  to  look  for  healing.  God  being  against  them,  no  human  being  could  make 
things  go  well.  They  might  heal,  but  he  would  rend  again.  They  might  rescue,  but 
he  would  take  away.  They  might  gather,  but  he  would  scatter.  There  is  no  help  so 
long  as  God  is  angry  with  us.  (3)  After  all,  the  Assyrian  was  not  honest  in  his  help. 
He  did  not  really  mean  to  help  Israel.  He  sought  only  his  own  ends.  Once  he  got 
the  nation  in  his  power,  he  would  turn  and  rend  it.  Instead  of  helping,  Assyria 
became  the  chief  instrument  in  God's  hand  in  inflicting  the  threatened  punishment. 
Equally  vain  is  the  help  we  seek  from  earthly  physicians.  They  cannot  render  it, 
even  supposing  they  were  willing,  and  they  often  are  not  willing.  Our_  own  age  finds 
no  real  balm  for  its  wounds  iu  its  theories  and  systems.  It  needs  Christ.  He  is  the 
only  true  Physician.  x .       .      -n      . 

in.  The  Physician  that  could  help.  (Ver.  16.)  This  was  JehoTah.  But  him, 
as  yet,  Israel  would  not  seek.  1.  Only  on  one  condition  could  his  help  be  bestowed. 
This  was  thiit  they  should  "acknowledge  their  offence,  and  seek  his  face."    It  was  the 


166 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  VI.  1— H. 


indisposition  to  do  this  which  kept  Israel  back.  2.  Till  Israel  was  brought  to  this 
point  of  acknowledgment  God  would  hide  himself  in  chastisements.  "  I  will  go  and 
return  to  my  place,"  etc.  It  is  the  sinner  that  must  change.  God  cannot.  3.  There 
remained  the  hope  that  a£3iction  might  ultimatelv  lead  them  to  seek  Iiim.  "In 
their  a£3ictiod  they  will  seek  me  early."— J,  O. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VL 


Vers.  1 — 3. — These  three  verses  have,  by 
the  division  into  chapters,-  been  violently 
and  improperly  torn  from  the  preceding 
chapter,  to  which  they  naturally  l)elong. 
Their  oonneotion  with  the  foregoing  senti- 
ments is  indicated  by  the  ancient  versions 
— Chaldee  and  Septuagint,  the  LXX.,  for  ex- 
ample, inserting  \eyovTis,  as  if  the  reading 
had  been  -Oih,  This  (1)  represents  the 
Israelites  exhorting  one  another  in  that  good 
time  which  the  prophet  encourages  them  to 
expect.  But  (2)  it  may  be  regarded  as  the 
prophet's  own  exhortation  to  the  exiles; 
their  afSiction  urging  them  to  seek  the  Lord, 
and  their  encouragement  consisting  in  the 
knowledge  of  his  ability  and  willingness  to 
heal  the  wounds  which  his  own  hand  had 
inflicted. 

Ver.  1. — He  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal 
QS.  The  preseuce  of  the  pronoun  imparts 
emphasis  to  the  statement,  so  that  it  is 
rather,  he  it  i>  that  hath  torn;  and  the  prete- 
rite of  this  verse,  compared  with  the  future 
in  ver.  14  of  the  foregoing  chapter,  implies 
that  the  destruction  there  predicted  has 
become  an  accomplished  fact.  He  hath 
smitten,  and  he  will  bind  ns  up.  The 
language  is  figurative,  and  borrowed  from 
medical  science.  Jehovah,  not  Jareb  nor 
an;  sovereign  of  Assyria,  is  the  physician. 
Long  before  he  had  assured  his  people  Israel 
of  this,  saying,  "  I  am  the  Ijord  that  healeth 
thee"  (Exod.  xv.  26);  and  again,  "I  kill, 
and  I  make  alive;  I  wound,  and  I  heal" 
(Deut.  xxxii.  39).  Aben  Ezra,  commenting 
on  yachbeshena,  alludes  to  the  ancient  mode 
of  surgical  practice,  probably  as  indicated 
in  Isa.  i.  6 :  "A  wound  needs  to  be  pressed 
out  and  botmd  up,  and  afterwards  softened 
with  oiL" 

Ver.  2. — After  two  days  will  he  revive  ns : 
in  the  third  day  he  wiU  raise  ns  np,  and  we 
shall  live  in  his  sight.  The  expression  of 
time  here  employed  denotes  a  comparatively 
short  period,  and  implies  that  Israel's  revival 
would  be  speedily  as  well  as  certainly  ac- 
complished. Paucity  is  signified  by  the 
binary  number  in  Old  Testament  language, 
just  as  we  speak  of  two,  or  a  couple,  in  the 
sense  of  fewness.  In  1  Kings  xvii.  12  we 
find  "  two"  used  in  this  way  :  "  Behold,  I 
am  gathering  two  sticks ; "  so  in  Isa.  vii.  21, 


"  A  man  shall  nourish  a  yonng  cow  and  two 
sheep ; "  in  Isa.  xvii.  6  a  small  number  is 
spoken  of  as  "  two  or  three ; "  while  a  short 
period  is  similarly  described  in  Luke  xiii. 
32,  "  Behold,  I  cast  out  devils,  and  I  do  cures 
to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  the  third  day  I 
shall  be  perfected."  The  important  idea  of 
this  verse  connects  itself  with  the  terms 
oorresponding  to  revival,  resurrection,  and 
restoration  to  the  Divine  favour  and  protec- 
tion. The  drooping,  declining,  dying  state 
of  Israel  would  be  revived  ;  their  deathlike 
condition  would  undergo  a  resurrection  pro- 
cess; their  disfavour  would  give  way  to 
Divine  complacency;  and  all  this,  though 
not  immediately,  yet  in  a  comparatively  short 
time.  This  appears  to  us  the  import  of  tlie 
prophecy.  Similar  figurative  language,  and 
with  like  Bignificancy,is  employed  by  Ezekiel 
(xxxvii.)  in  his  vision  of  the  valley  and  the 
resurrection  of  its  dry  bones;  as  also  by 
Isaiah  (xxvi.),  where  the  same  or  a  similar 
thought  is  presented  in  briefer,  but  still 
more  beautiful,  language :  "  Thy  dead  men 
shall  live,  together  with  my  dead  body  shall 
they  arise.  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell 
in  the  dust :  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of 
herbs,  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead." 
Calvin  understands  this  verse  as  containing 
a  source  of  consolation  to  Israel.  "  When," 
he  says,  "  the  Israelites,  through  their  long 
obstinacy,  bad  become  nearly  incurable,  it 
was  needful  to  lead  them  to  repentance  by 
slow  punishments.  They,  therefore,  said. 
After  two  days  Ood  wiU  revive  us  ;  and  thus 
they  confirmed  themselves  in  the  hope  of 
salvation,  though  it  did  not  immediately 
appear ;  though  they  long  remained  in  dark- 
ness, and  the  exile  was  long  which  they  had 
to  endure,  they  yet  did  not  cease  to  hope. 
'  Well,  let  the  two  days  pass,  and  the  Lord 
will  revive  us.' "  To  man  in  sorrow  the  time 
appears  long ;  it  is  short  in  the  sight  of  him 
with  whom  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day. 
Kimchi's  explanation  is  also,  to  a  certain 
extent,  satisfactory :  "  The  prophet  says, '  If 
our  sickness  lasts  for  two  days,  yet  he  will 
heal  us  of  our  sickness,  till  on  the  lliird  day 
he  will  raise  us  up,  and  we  shall  live  long 
before  him,'  as  if  he  said, '  though  our  afflic- 
tions continue  a  long  time.'  The  two  days 
are  a  figure,  for  *  in  a  short  time  he  will 
bring  us  his  salvation,'  and  '  on  the  third 
day  Ms  flgnrativa."  He  afterwards  refers  the 


OH.  TI.  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE^ 


167 


"two  days"  to  the  two  captivitiea  of  his  people 
^that  in  Egypt  and  that  in  Babylon ;  while 
"  the  third  day  "  denotes  the  third  or  present 
Boman  captivity,  "out  of  which  he  will  raise 
us  up  and  we  shall  live  before  him,  so  that  we 
shall  never  again  go  into  captivity,  but  shall 
live  continually  before  him,  while  we  sin  no 
more."  Bashi  refers  the  words  to  the  three 
temples — that  of  Solomon,  that  ofZerubbabel, 
and  the  temple  that  is  to  be  built  by  Mes- 
siah, gome  of  the  Fathers  understand  the 
three  periods  in  the  history  of  humanity — 
the  first,  under  Adam,  as  the  time  of  Law  and 
captivity  to  sin ;  the  second,  under  Christ,  as 
the  time  of  tlie  gospel  and  of  grace ;  and 
the  third,  with  Chriat,  as  the  time  of  the 
general  resurrection.  Theodoret  and  most 
of  the  Fathers  uuderstood  this  verse  to  refer 
to  the  resurrection  of  Christ  on  the  third 
day  after  three  days'  rest  in  the  grave. 
Calvin,  after  giving  what  appeared  to  him 
"  the  simple  and  genuine  sense "  of  the 
passage  as  applying  primarily  to  the  Jews, 
as  we  have  already  seen,  adds,  "I  do 
not  deny  but  that  God  has  exhibited  a  re- 
markable and  memorable  instance  of  what 
is  here  said  in  his  only  begotten  Son.  As 
often,  then,  as  delay  begets  weariness  in  us, 
let  us  flee  to  Christ ;  for,  as  it  has  been  said, 
his  resurrection  is  a  mirror  of  our  life ;  for 
we  see  in  that  how  God  is  wont  to  deal 
with  his  own  people:  the  Father  did  not 
restore  life  to  Christ  as  soon  as  he  was  taken 
down  from  the  cross ;  he  was  deposited  in 
the  sepulchre,  and  he  lay  there  till  the  third 
day.  When  God,  then,  intends  that  we 
should  languish  for  a  time,  let  us  know  that 
we  are  thus  represented  in  Christ  our  Head, 
and  hence  let  us  gather  materials  of  confi- 
dence. We  have,  then,  in  Christ  an  illus- 
trious proof  of  this  prophecy."  The  political 
resurrection  of  Isjael  may  dimly  shadow 
forth,  by  way  of  type,  the  resurrection  of 
Messiah  and  the  general  resurrection  of 
wliich  he  is  the  Firstfruits. 

Ver.  3. — Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow 
on  to  know  the  Lord.  This  is  more  accurately 
rendered  by,  let  u»  therefore  know,  hunt 
after  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah,  the  verbs 
being  both  cohortative  and  no  conditional 
particle  (-'if")  in  the  second  clause.  The 
second  clause  is  a  more  emphatic  and  ener- 
getic reaffirmation  of  the  first,  urging  to 
active  and  zealous  effort  and  steady  perse- 
verance in  obtaining  the  knowledge  of  God 
— a  knowledge  theoretic,  but  especially 
practical.  Aben  Ezra  understands  the 
exhortation  of  intellectual  knowledge :  "  To 
know  Jehovah  is  the  secret  of  all  wisdom, 
and  for  this  alone  was  man  created.  But  he 
cannot  know  God  till  he  has  learnt  many 
doctrines  of  wisdom,  which  are,  as  it  were, 
a  ladder  in  order  to  mount  up  to  this  highest 
gtep  of  knowledge."    Kimchi,  on  the  other 


hand,  though  quoting  Aben  Ezra's  comment 
with  approval,  inclines  to  the  practical  side 
of  knowledge:  ''  Let  us  follow  on  to  know 
Jehovah,  exercising  justice  and  righteous- 
ness.'' His  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the 
morning;  and  he  shall  oome  onto  ns  as 
the  rain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rain  onto 
the  earth.  Here,  again,  the  translation  of 
the  Authorized  Version  is  susceptible  of  im- 
provement :  hit  going  forth  is  fixed  a$  the 
morning  dawn  ;  and  he  thaU  come  to  us  at 
the  plentiful  rain,  at  the  latter  rain  which 
watereth  (or,  watering)  the  earth.  Here  we 
have  two  beautiful  figoies — ^the  morning 
dawn  and  the  fertilizing  rain.  The  going 
forth  of  Jehovah  is  represented  as  the  sun 
rising  upon  the  earth,  or  rather  as  the  dawn 
which  heralds  the  day.  The  advent  of  sal- 
vation to  liis  people  is  identified  with,  or 
symbolized  by,  his  appearance.  But  the 
dawn  of  day  only  brings  the  commencement 
of  salvation ;  its  complement  is  found  in  the 
fruits  and  blessidgs  of  salvation.  The  root 
of  motsav  is  tatsa,  which  is  applied  to  the 
sunrise  in  Gen.  six.  23,  as  also  in  Ps.  xix.  7. 
Parallel  passages  are  fouud  in  Isa.  Iviii.  8, 
"  Then  shall  thy  light  break  forth  as  the 
morning  (dawn),  and  thy  health  shall  spring 
forth  speedily ; "  and  Ix.  2,  "  The  Lord  shall 
arise  upon  thee,  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen 
upon  thee."  Further,  the  word  nalton, 
meaning  "prepared,"  "fixed  firm,"  is  applied 
to  the  clear  bright  light  of  morning,  as  in 
Prov.  iv.  18,  "  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the 
shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more 
unto  the  perfect  (n'kon)  day."  The  plentiful 
rain  is  that  which  falls  after  the  sowing  of 
the  seed  in  October  (the  beginning  of  the 
Hebrew  year)  and  in  the  following  months  j 
while  the  itMlqoeh  is  the  late  or  spring  rain, 
which,  falling  in  March  and  till  the  middle 
of  April,  precedes  and  promotes  the  harvest. 
The  LXX.  translates  the  (1)  concluding 
clause  by  verbs  irpdi/ios  and  ji(ii/uu  errone- 
ously, for  torch  is  not  a  noun  with  6«  being 
understood  before  "  earth  ;  '  neither  is  it  (2) 
the  future  Hiph.,  which  would  necessitate 
the  ellipse  being  supplied  by  asher  ;  it  is  the 
Qal  partici  pie  in  the  sense  of  "  watering."  Ge- 
them  is  "a  viohnt  or  plentiful  rain,"  strosger 
than  the  usual  word  for  "  rain,"  matar  ;  while 
malqosh  is  "  the  late  rain  "  which  ceases  a 
short  time  before  harvest.  The  explanation 
of  the  "  dawn  "  by  Aben  Ezra  is  erroneous : 
"The  intelligent  man  at  the  beginning 
knows  God — blessed  be  hel — by  his  works, 
like  the  dawn  of  day  in  its  going  forth ;  but 
moment  after  moment  the  light  increases, 
until  thefuU  truth  becomes  visible."  Kimchi 
more  con'ectly  explains  the  figure  as  follows : 
"  If  we  shall  do  ttiis,  viz.  follow  on  to  know 
the  Lord,  then  he  will  be  to  us  as  the  morn- 
ing dawn,  of  which  the  going  forth  is  fixed 
[purposed  by  God  and  certain]  as  though  hu 


168 


TB£  BOOK  Ot  HOSEA. 


[oh.  vl  1 — 11 


said,  He  will  cause  his  light  and  his  goodness 
to  shine  over  us."  His  comment  on  the 
second  similitude  is  equally  appropriate: 
"  He  will  come  to  us  as  the  plentiful  rain, 
as  the  plentiful  rain  whioli  revives  the  dead 
plants ;  bo  man  sunk  in  sorrow  is  like  one 
dead ;  but  when  deliverance  comes  to  him 
it  is  with  bim  as  if  he  revived  out  of  his  dead 
state."  Thus  he  shall  be  to  his  people  as 
"morning  to  the  weary  watcher,"  and  as 
"  plentiful  ruin  to  the  parched  ground." 

Ver.  4. — ror  your  goodness  is  as  a  morning 
cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away. 
A  new  section  here  commt'neea.  God, 
having  tried  various  expedients  and  many 
ways  to  restore  Israel  to  faithfulness,  finds 
all  those  methods  unavailing ;  and  now  he 
asks  what  further  means  of  reclamation 
he  can  resort  to  ;  what  further  punishment 
he  is  to  inflict.  Thus  in  Isa.  i.  5,  "  Why 
should  ye  be  stricken  any  more?  ye  will 
revolt  more  and  more  I "  or  what  additional 
privileges  can  be  vouchsafed?  Thus  in 
Isa.  V.  4,  "  What  could  have  been  done  more 
to  my  vineyard,  than  I  have  not  done  in  it  ?  " 
The  reason  is  then  assigned  for  such  ques- 
tioning ;  it  was  the  brief  duration  of  Israel's 
piety.  It  was  evanescent  as  the  early  cloud 
which  floats  across  a  summer's  sky  and  which 
the  sun  soon  scatters  for  ever,  or  which  pro- 
mises a  refreshing  shower,  but  which  is 
exhaled  by  the  sun's  heat ;  it  was  transient 
as  the  dew  which  lies  in  pearly  drops 
of  beauty  upon  the  grass,  but  which  the 
foot  of  the  passing  traveller  brushes 
away  in  a  moment.  The  prophet  had,  in 
the  opening  verses,  referred  to  real  repent- 
ance ;  but  now,  turning  to  Israel,  he  reminds 
them  of  their  repentance  by  way  of  con- 
trast, showing  them  that  it  was  neither  of 
tlie  oonaisteney  nor  pbrmanent  character 
required.  Proofs  of  their  deficiency  lay  on 
the  pages  of  their  national  history.  Heze- 
kiah  had  done  "  that  which  was  right  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord ; "  but  his  son  and 
successor,  Manasseh,  "  wrought  much  wick- 
edness in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  to  provoke 
him  to  anger."  Josiah,  again,  was  eminent 
for  piety,  so  that  "  like  unto  him  was  there 
no  king  before  him,  that  turned  to  the  Lord 
with  all  his  heart,  and  with  all  his  soul, 
and  with  all  his  might ; "  but  his  successors 
degenerated,  for  it  is  added,  "neither  after 
him  arose  there  any  like  him."  The  con- 
nection and  meaning  are  well  given  by 
Kimchi :  "  How  shall  i  heal  you,  and  how 
shall  I  bind  you  up,  as  your  repentance  is 
by  no  means  perfect?  For  if  the  kings  of 
Israel  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  go  have  they  soon  turned  to  do 
evil,  like  Jehu.  And  likewise  the  kings  of 
Judah,  who  in  the  days  of  Josiah  did  that 
which  was  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
turned  again  to  do  evil  in  the  days  of  his 


son  and  son's  son."  Thus  he  reproves  them 
for  the  superficial  and  fleeting  character  of 
their  goodness.  The  participles  mashkim 
and  liolek  are  either  co-ordinated  asynde- 
tously,  thus:  "  coming  in  the  morning,  going 
away ; "  or  the  latter  is  subordinated  to  the 
former :  "  in  the  morning  passing  away." 
Kimchi  takes  the  former  word  as  a  noun 
after  the  form  of  mdkbir,  equivalent  to 
"abundance"  (Job  xxzvL  31);  the  right 
rendering  is,  "as  the  dew  early  going  away." 
A  somewhat  diflerent  rendering  is  proposed 
by  Wiinsche,  viz.  "  Your  goodness  goeth 
away  like  a  morning  cloud,  and  like  the 
de^v  in  the  morning ;  "  "  goodness  "  being  the 
subject,  "  goeth  away  "  the  predicate,  "  like 
morning  cloud  and  dew  "  nearer  definitions. 
Vers.  5,  6. — The  consequence  of  Israel's 
unsteadiness  and  inconstancy  is  here  stated. 
Because  of  the  fluctuating  and  formal 
nature  of  their  religiousness,  God  cut  them 
down  (instead  of  rearing  them  up)  through 
his  prophets  by  fierce  denunciations,  and 
slew  them  (instead  of  reviving  them)  by 
the  Divine  word.  The  judgment  of  Jehovah 
went  forth  as  the  lightning-flash,  or  was  as 
clear  and  conspicuous  for  justice  as  the  light 
of  day.  Neither  could  outward  services  ex- 
piate their  sins,  when  the  proper  feelings  and 
meet  fruits  were  absent.  I  have  hewed  th6m 
by  the  prophets ;  I  have  slain  them  by  the 
words  of  my  mouth.  The  language  is 
figurative — ^the  first  clause  seems  borrowed 
from  hewing  hard  wood  and  shaping  it  so 
as  to  assume  the  required  form ;  so  God 
dealt  with  Israel  to  bring  them  into  shape 
morally  symmetrical,  and  make  them 
correspond  to  the  character  of  a  holy  people. 
The  slaying  is  metaphorical,  and  consisted 
in  the  denunciation  of  death  and  destruc- 
tion to  the  impenitent ;  in  this  way  he 
killed,  but  did  not  make  alive.  A  different 
rendering  of  the  clause  is  given  by  the 
LXX.  and  also  by  Aben  Ezra;  the  former 
has,  "Therefore  have  I  mown  down  your 
prophets ;  I  have  slain  them  with  the  word 
of  my  mouth ; "  the  latter  has,  "  The  sense 
is  that  he  slew  some  of  the  prophets  who 
misled  the  people  so  that  they  did  not  turn 
(repent)."  But  6«  does  not  imply  his  hewing 
in  among  the  prophets ;  it  is  instrumental. 
And  thy  judgments  are  as  the  light  that 
goeth  forth.  The  judgments  here  spoken 
of  are  the  Divine  judgments  denounced 
against,  or  inflicted  on,  the  people.  Another 
reading  has  the  pronominal  suflBx  of  the 
first  person :  "  My  judgment  goeth  forth  as 
the  light ; "  to  which  the  Septuagint  cor- 
responds :  Kf>li).a.  fiov,  equivalent  to  "  my 
judgment."  /  desired  mercy  (or,  meroy  1 
delight  in)  .  .  .  and  the  knowledge  of  Ood 
more  than  burnt  offerings.  The  former  is 
the  right  state  of  the  life,  the  latter  the 
correct  condition  of  the  heart;  the  former 


CH.  VL  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK   OP  HOSEA, 


109 


manifests  itself  in  practice,  the  latter  em- 
braces the  proper  feelings  and  atfeutions; 
the  former  is  seen  in  works  of  charity  and 
benevolence,  the  latter  consists  in  right 
motives  and  the  right  relation  of  the  soul 
to  God.  The  Hebrew  form  of  speech  here 
used  denotes  inferior  importance,  not  the 
negation  of  importance.  A  similar  sen- 
timent occurs  in  ]  Sam.  xv.  22,  "  Hath  the 
Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt  offerings  and 
sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the  Toioe  of  the 
Lord  ?  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacri- 
fice, and  to  hearken  tlian  the  fat  of  rams." 
Parallel  statements  are  found  in  Isa.  i. 
11—17;  Ps.  xl.  7—9  and  1.  8;  also  in 
Micah  vi.  8.  Our  Lord  cites  the  first  clause 
of  ver.  6  twice — once  against  Pharisaic 
ceremonialism  (Matt.  ix.  13),  and  again 
against  rigorous  Sabbatarianism  (Matt.  xii. 
7) ;  while  there  is  an  allusion  to  it  in  Mark 
xii.  33,  where  love  to  God  and  to  one's 
nei^^hbour  is  declared  to  be  better,  or  "  more 
than,  whole  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices." 
Sacrifices  in  themselves,  and  when  ofiered 
at  the  proper  time  and  place,  and  as  the 
expressions  of  penitent  hearts  and  pure 
hands,  were  acceptable,  and  could  not  be 
otherwise,  for  God  himself  had  appointed 
them.  But  soulless  sacrifices  off'ered  by 
men  steeped  in  sin  were  an  abomination  to 
the  Lord ;  it  was  of  such  he  said,  "  I  cannot 
away  with  "  them.  It  is  to  such  that  the 
prophet  refers  here,  as  is  plain  from  the 
following  verse. 

Ver.  7. — But  they  like  men  (margin,  like 
Adam)  have  transgressed  the  covenant : 
there  have  they  dealt  treacherously  against 
me.  This  verse  is  variously  rendered.  (1) 
They  like  men  (that  is,  men  in  general,  or 
the  rest  of  mankind,  to  whom  they  are  in 
no  way  superior)  have  transgressed  the 
covenant.  (2)  They  are  like  men  who  trans- 
gress a  covenant ;  according  to  this  rendering 
the  word  m»  is  otiose,  or  adds  nothing,  nor  is 
indeed  required.  (H)  They  like  Adam  have 
transgretied  the  covenant;  this  rendering, 
supported  by  the  Vulgate,  Cyril,  Luther, 
Kosenmiiller,  and  Wiinsol'e,  is  decidedly 
preferable,  and  yields  a  suitable  sense. 
God  in  his  great  goodness  had  planted 
Adam  in  Paradise ;  but  Adam  violated  the 
commandment  which  prohibited  his  eating 
of  the  tree  of  knowledge,  and  thereby 
transgressed  the  covenant  of  his  God.  Loss 
of  fellowship  with  God  and  expulsion  from 
Eden  were  the  penal  consequences  that 
immediately  followed.  Israel,  like  Adam, 
had  been  settled  by  God  in  Palestine,  the 
glory  of  all  lands ;  but,  ungrateful  for  God's 
great  bounty  and  gracious  gift,  they  broke 
the  covenant  of  their  God,  the  condition  of 
which,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Adamio  cove- 
nant, was  obedience.  Thus  the  comparison 
prqjecta  the  shadow  of  a  coming  event  when 


Israel  would  lose  the  land  of  promise. 
There  is  still  the  word  "there"  to  be  accounted 
for.  It  cannot  well  be  rendered  "  therein," 
nor  taken  as  a  particle  of  time  equivalent  to 
"the,"  with  Cyril  and  others.  It  is  local,  and 
points  to  the  place  where  their  breach  of 
covenant  and  faithlessness  bad  occurred. 
Yet  this  local  sense  is  not  necessarily  bo 
limited  as  to  be  referred,  with  some,  to 
Bethel,  as  the  scene  of  their  apostasy  and 
idolatry.  "  There,  to  Israel,"  says  Pusey, 
"  was  not  only  Bethel,  or  Dan,  or  Gilgal,  or 
Mizpah,  or  Gilead,  or  any  or  all  of  the 
places  which  God  bad  hallowed  by  his 
mercies  and  they  had  defiled.  It  was  every 
high  hill,  each  idol-chapel,  each  field-altar, 
which  they  had  multiplied  to  their  idols. 
To  the  sinners  of  Israel  it  was  every  spot 
of  the  Lord's  land  which  they  had  defiled 
by  their  sin."  The  word  thus  acquires  a 
very  suggestive  significance,  reminding  Israel 
of  God's  goodness  on  the  one  hand,  and 
of  their  own  sinfulness  and  ingrdtitude  on 
the  other. 

Vers.  8,  9.  —  In  these  two  verses  the 
prophet  adduces  proof  of  that  faithless- 
ness with  which  he  had  just  charged  Israel. 
Gilead  is  a  city  of  them  that  work  iniquity, 
and  is  polluted  with  blood.  The  latter  clause 
is  more  literally  rendered,  foot-printed  or 
font-tracked  from  hlood.  Two  things  require 
consideration  here— ,the  place  and  its  pol- 
lution. Gilead  is  sometimes  a  mountain 
range,  and  sometimes  the  mountainous 
region  east  of  the  Jordan;  it  has  Bashan 
on  the  north,  the  Arabian  plateau  on  the 
east,  and  Moab  on  the  south.  It  stretches 
from  the  south  end  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee  to 
the  north  end  of  the  Dead  Sea— some  sixty 
miles  in  length  by  twenty  in  breadth.  The 
part  of  Gilead  between  the  Hieromax  and 
the  Jabbok  is  now  called  Jebel  Ajlun  ;  while 
the  section  south  of  the  Jabbok  forms  the 
province  of  Belka.  In  the  New  Testameul 
it  is  spoken  of  under  ti»e  name  of  Pereaa, 
or  beyond  Jordan.  Sometimes  the  whole 
trans- Jordanic  territory  belonging  to  Israel 
is  called  Gilead.  In  the  passage  before  us 
it  is  the  name  of  a  city,  though  some  take 
it  to  mean  the  whole  land  of  Gilead.  The 
men  of  Gilead  and  the  Gilcadites  in  general 
seem  to  have  been  fierce,  wild  mountaineers ; 
and  yet  they  are  represented  as  still  worse 
in  this  Scripture.  They  are  not  only  bar- 
barous and  wicked,  but  murderous  and  in- 
famous for  homicidal  atrocities.  As  evidence 
in  some  sort  of  the  justness  of  this  dark 
picture,  the  murder  of  Pekahiah  by  Fekah 
with  "fifty  men  of  the  Gileadites,"  as  re- 
corded in  2  Kings  xv.  25,  may  be  specified. 
The  word  nsipj;  is  taken  (1)  by  some  as  the 
feminine  of  the  adjective  3ipjr,  crafty,  cun- 
ning, wily;  thusBashi  explains  it:  ■'Gilead 


1T4 


DHE  BOOK  Ol'  flOSEA. 


[oh.  vl  1—11. 


is  full  of  people  who  lie  in  wait  for  murder ;" 
aud  Kimclii  likewise  has,  "  Gilead  is  a  city 
of  evil-doers,  who  are  crafty  to  muiJer  men." 
But  (2)  it  is  rather  the  Qal  Pual  participle 
feminine  from  3p}?,  to  seize  the  heel  of  any 
(ine,  hold,  tread  in  the  footsteps,  follow,  go 
after;  whioh  is  the  right  meaning,  viz. 
"  tracked,"  as  given  above.  We  retain  the 
Authorized  Version  of  the  first  clause  of 
ver.  9,  slightly  modified,  viz.  (1)  As  troops 
of  robbers  vrait  for  a  man,  so  is  the  company 
of  priests ;  '3n  equivalent  to  nan,  wait,  being 
an  anomalous  form  of  the  infinitive  Piel  for 
ni3n ;  thus  Kimchi  says,  "  The  yod  stands  in 
the  place  of  he,  and  the  form  is  the  in- 
finitive." Both  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi 
translate  the  first  clause  as  above ;  the 
former  has,  "  Tlie  sense  is.  As  robber-troops 
wait  for  a  man  who  is  to  pass  along  the 
way,  that  they  may  plunder  him,  so  is  (or 
so  does)  the  company  of  the  priests ; "  the 
latter  explains,  "As  troops  of  robbers  wait 
for  a  man  passing  along  the  way  to  plunder 
him,  BO  is  the  company  of  priests.  He 
means  to  say,  as  the  priests  of  the  high 
places  who  combine  to  plunder  those  who 
pass  along  the  way."  There  is  (2)  another 
translation,  which,  connecting  ish  taken 
collectively  with  g'dhudhim,  and  making  it 
the  subjective  genitive  of  the  infiuitive  3, 
is,  "  Like  the  lurking  of  the  men  of  the 
g.mgs  is  the  company  of  the  priests."  This 
first  clause  is  (3)  quite  misread  and  mis- 
rendered  by  the  LXX. :  Kal  ^  ia-jcis  aov 
avZphs  ireipaTOv'  ^Kpv\pay  hpeis  dS^f,  *•  And  thy 
strength  is  that  of  a  robber:  the  priests 
have  hid  the  way."  Instead  of  'snji  they 
read  -^ns,  and  for  mn  they  read  un  or  l^t3^. 
In  the  second  clause  we  prefer  decidedly  the 
translation  which  is  intimated  in  the  margin 
of  the  Authorized  Version  ;  thus :  Along  the 
way  they  murder  even  to  Shechem.  The  word 
derekh  is  an  adverbial  aocusalive  of  place; 
and  Sichem,  the  present  Nablus,  was  situated 
on  Mount  Ephraim  between  Ebal  and 
Gerizim.  It  was  a  Levitioal  city  and  a 
city  of  refuge;  it  thus  lay  on  the  west  as 
Gilead  on  tlie  east  of  Jordan,  and  both 
cities,  thus  perhaps  nearly  parallel  in  place 
on  opposite  sides  of  the  river,  were  equal  in 
crime  and  infamy.  The  prophet  does  not 
tell  us  who  the  wayfarers  were,  or  whither 
they  were  bound;  he  only  intimates  that 
they  fell  victims  to  certain  miscreant  priests 
located  in  these  quarters.  As  this  city  lay 
on  the  main  route  from  the  north  to  Jeru- 
salem, pilgrims  to  the  annual  feasts  passed 
along  this  way.  The  priests  of  the  calf- 
worship,  being  in  general  persons  taken 
from  the  dregs  of  the  people,  waylaid  those 
pilgrims,  whether  for  plunder,  or  through 
hostility  to  the  purer  worship  still  main- 
tained Ib  the  holy  city,  or  from  sheer  cruelty. 


Or  it  is  even  possible  that  the  wayfarers 
referred  to  may  have  been  persons  going 
from  Samaria,  the  northern  capital,  to  the 
idolatrous  worship  at  Bethel.  In  eitlier 
case,  on  the  way  to  their  destination  ut  on 
the  return  journey  they  were  set  upon  and 
robbed,  or,  in  the  event  of  resistance,  they 
were  murdered.  For  they  commit  lewdness ; 
rather,  yea,  they  have  committed  enormity. 
The  zimmah,  or  infamy,  here  mentioned  is 
referred  (1)  by  some  to  unnatural  wicked- 
ness (comp.  Lev.  xviii.  17 ;  zix.  29) ;  it  is 
rather  (2)  a  designation  of  wickedness  and 
abominations  in  general;  thus  Kiruchi  ex- 
plains it  of  "evU  and  abominable  work 
of  every  kind."  He  further  remarks: 
"The  prophet  says,  Not  this  alone  have 
they  done  ;  but  all  their  works  are  zimmah. 
And  perhaps  zimmah  may  be  explained  of 
thought,  as  if  he  said.  As  they  have  thought 
in  their  heart  so  they  have  acted."  On  this 
ver^e  generally  it  may  be  briefly  remarked 
(1)  that  "by  consent"  of  the  Authorized 
Version  would  requii-e  ins  to  be  joined  witli 
"  shoulder ; "  (2)  the  c^innection  of  the  first 
and  second  clauses  in  the  Autliorized  Ver- 
sion is  much  the  same  with  that  of  Ewald : 
"  And  as  troops  lie  in  wait  the  company  of 
priests  murder  along  the  way  to  Sichem." 
(3)  His  explanation  is  that  the  priests  mur- 
dered those  that  fled  by  the  way  before  they 
reached  the  refuge,  perhaps  at  the  command 
of  some  leading  persons  ill  disposed  towards 
them. 

Ver.  10. — I  have  seen  an  horrible  thing  in 
the  house  of  Israel :  there  is  the  whoredom 
of  Ephraim,  Israel  is  defiled.  The  house  of 
Israel  comprises  (1)  the  ten  tribes  of  the 
northern  kingdom,  according  to  some ;  it 
seems  more  correct  (2)  to  understand  it  of 
the  whole  nation,  inoluding  both  the  north- 
em  and  southern  kingdoms,  in  which  case 
the  remainder  of  the  verse  relates  to  the 
northern  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  the 
iuceeeding  verse  to  the  snuthern  kingdom 
of  the  two  tribes.  Further,  Israel  is  not 
synonymous  with  the  parallel  Ephraim,  as 
Keil  thinks;  the  latter  is  the  principal  tiibe 
which  led  the  way  in  Israel's  apostasy.  Tlie 
"  horrible  thing  "  comprehends  every  sort  of 
crime  and  abomination;  while  the " whore- 
dom," literal  or  spiritual,  is  specified  as  an 
example  thereof.  (For  the  explanation  uf 
"  there,"  see  on  ver.  7.) 

Ver.  11.— Also,  0  Judah,  he  hath  set  an 
harvest  for  thee.  The  subject  of  shath  is  the 
indeterminate  third  person,  like  the  French 
on,  and  our  "  they  "  or  "  one."  The  third 
person  singular  masculine,  the  third  person 
plural,  the  second  person  singular  masculine, 
and  the  passive  voice  are  all  used  in  this 
way.  So  here  it  is :  "  One  hath  appointed 
(set)  a  harvest  for  thee,"  or  "  a  harvest  is 
appointed  for  thee."    The  harvest  i*  either 


CH.  TL  1—11.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA, 


171 


recompense  or  retribution,  and  thus  it  is 
either  good  or  eTil,  for  as  a  man  sows  he 
reaps.  The  context  shows  that  the  reaping 
here  is  punishment,  Judahhad  sinned  like 
Israel ;  and,  in  the  case  of  both,  a  seed-time 
of  sin  produced  a  harvest  of  suffering  aud 
Borrow.  When  I  returned  (better,  return,  or, 
restore)  the  captivity  of  my  people.  The 
restoration  here  mentioned  is  tliought  (l)by 
some  to  be  the  bringing  back  of  the  captives ; 
but  (2j  Keil  and  others,  with  good  reason, 
understand  it  to  be  turning  of  the  captivity, 
and  that  figuratively,  that  is  to  say,  the 
restoration  of  li:,i  people's  well-being.  The 
thAhuth  is  the  misery  of  the  Hebrew  people ; 


the  fhubh  th'hhuth,  recovery  and  restoration 
of  them  to  their  true  destiny.  But;  this  ne- 
cessitates a  previous  purification  by  punish- 
ment; with  this  Judah,  as  well  as  Israel, 
shall  be  visited.  It  is  as  though  God  said. 
"  Let  not  Judah  claim  superiority  over 
Israel,  nor  expect  to  escape  Divine  judg- 
ment more  than  Isiael.  Each  reaps  what 
he  sows.  When  Israel  has  received  the 
deserved  chastisement,  Judah's  turn  shall 
thtn  come  also."  The  "  turning  of  captivity  " 
is  a  formula. denoting  the  restoration  of  the 
lost  fortune  or  well-being  of  a  people  or 
person ;  thus  Job  xlii.  10,  "  And  the  Lord 
turned  the  captivity  of  Job.*' 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 3. — Exhortation  and  encouragefnent  to  repentance.  Whether  the  opening 
words  of  this  chapter  be  those  which  the  penitents  address  mutually  to  each  other,  or 
whether  they  be  the  exhortation  of  the  prophet  encouraging  the  people  to  return  to 
God,  the  sentiment  they  contain  is  equally  important,  and  the  duty  enjoined  is  equally 
imperative. 

I.  The  ukqenct  or  this  appeal  is  striking.  From  whichever  of  the  sources 
indicated  this  appeal  proceeds,  its  urgency  is  unmistakable,  as  implied  in  the  cohor- 
tative  form  of  the  verb  "  return,"  as  also  in  the  hortatory  "  come  "  at  the  commence- 
ment. In  God's  dealings  with  mankind  we  find  now  reproofs  for  sin  and  thieatenings 
of  wrath,  again  invitations  to  repentance  and  promises  of  mercy.  We  are  warned  to 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  on  the  one  hand,  and  urged  to  return  unto  the  Lord  on  the 
other.  It  is  our  duty  to  exhort  one  another  with  earnestness,  and  even  affectionate 
importunity,  to  return  to  him  from  whom  we  have  wandered,  to  seek  him  whom  we 
have  slighted,  and,  Kke  the  prodigal  in  the  parable,  to  arise  and  go  to  our  Father  with 
confession  of  our  many  wanderings  of  heart  and  life  from  the  livitig  God. 

IL  The  soukob  whence  hbalino  comes.  They  had  tried  Assyria,  but  to  no  purpose ; 
they  had  sent  to  King  Jareb,  but  in  vain.  A  greater  power  than  that  of  Assyria,  great 
though  that  was,  was  needed ;  a  mightier  monarch  than  Jareb,  champion  sovereign  though 
he  was,  was  required  to  heal  the  disease  and  bind  up  the  wounds  of  Israel  at  this  time, 
or  indeed  at  any  time.  None  but  the  hand  that  tore  could  heal ;  none  other  than  he 
who  smote  could  bind  up.  Nay,  he  wounds  in  order  that  he  may  heal;  he  sends 
afBictive  providences  that  we  may  apply  to  him  for  the  restoration  of  prosiierity;  he 
produces  conviction  of  sin  before  that,  and  in  order  that,  he  may  impart  to  us  everlasting 
consolatious.  His  method  is  to  convince  us  in  order  that  he  may  comfort  us,  to  show 
us  our  sin  that  he  may  lead  us  to  the  Saviour,  to  show  us  our  ruin  and  then  apply  the 
remedy.  He  shows  us  our  danger  and  then  iirgesus  to  the  discharge  of  our  duty ;  he 
shows  us  our  fall  and  how  we  are  to  rise  again ;  in  short,  he  urges  us  to  repentance, 
showing  us  what  to  do  and  what  to  say,  and  encouraging  us  withal  by  God's  readiness 
to  receive  penitents. 

III.  Life  fbom  the  dead  in  God's  good  time.  The  guilt  of  sin  may  for  a  time 
overwhelm  us,  teiTors  of  conscience  alarm  us,  afflictions  of  various  kinds  crush  us  tu 
the  earth;  there  may  be  fightings  without  and  fears  within.  In  our  distressed  anil 
downcast  state  we  may  look  upon  ourselves,  and  be  looked  upon  by  others,  as  dying — 
almost  dead.  1.  In  this  deathlike  condition  the  sorrows  of  death  may  compass  us 
and  the  pains  of  hell  get  hold  on  us,  we  may  find  trouble  and  sorrow;  we  may  be  like 
those  that  go  down  into  the  pit.  All  this  may  continue  for  a  time,  and  the  time  may 
appear  long ;  yet  we  may  not  despair  nor  despond.  Rather  let  us  imitate  the  example 
of  the  psalmist,  who  in  his  distress  called  upon  the  Lord  and  cried  unto  his  God.  Nor 
did  he  cry  in  vain.  God  heard  his  voice  out  of  his  temple,  and  his  cry  came  before  him, 
even  into  his  ears.  In  like  circumstances  of  disaster  on  another  occasion  he  called  upon 
the  nam*  of  the  Lord  and  said,  "0  Lord.  I  beseech  thee,  deliver  my  soul;"  and  m 


172  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  vi.  1—11. 

usual  a  reply  and  relief  came.  "  I  was  brought  low,  and  he  helped  me ; "  "  He  delivered 
iny  soul  from  death,  mine  eyes  from  tears,  and  my  feet  from  falling."  Thus  God  deals 
with  his  people  still.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning." 
For  two  days — a  relatively  brief  period — the  sleep  or  sorrow  of  death  may  be  upon  us, 
but  he  will  then  restore  us  to  life,  revive  and  quicken  us ;  and  on  the  third  day,  when 
we  have  been  thus  restored  to  animation  and  vigour,  he  will  raise  us  up.  2.  The  words 
of  ver.  2  are,  no  doubt,  applicable  to  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord,  and  they 
have  been  so  understood  by  many  Christians  both  in  earlier  and  later  times.  "  The 
resurrection  of  Christ,"  says  Pusey,  "  and  our  resurrection  in  him  and  in  his  resurrection, 
could  not  be  more  plainly  foretold.  ...  It  was  not  the  prophet's  object  here,  nor  was 
it  so  direct  a  comfort  to  Israel,  to  speak  of  Christ's  resurrection  in  itself.  He  took  a 
nearer  way  to  their  hearts.  He  told  them, '  All  we  whf)  turn  to  the  Lord,  putting  our 
whole  trust  in  him,  and  committing  ourselves  wholly  to  him,  to  be  healed  of  our  wounds 
and  to  have  our  griefs  buund  up,  shall  receive  life  from  him,  shall  be  raised  up  by  him.' 
They  could  not  understand  then  how  he  would  do  this.  The  ' after  two  days'  and  '  on 
the  third  day '  remained  a  mystery  to  be  explained  by  the  event.  But  the  promise  itself 
was  not  the  less  distinct,  nor  the  less  full  of  hope,  nor  did  it  less  fulfil  all  cravings  for 
life  eternal  and  the  sight  of  God,  because  they  did  not  understand — how  shall  these  things 
bef"  3.  The  sequel  of  revival  and  resurrection  is  life  in  God's  sight,  or, "  before  his  face," 
according  to  the  literal  rendering.  The  face  of  man  is  the  index  of  the  mind  and  heart ; 
of  the  operations  and  various  workings  of  the  former,  and  of  the  feelings  and  emotions 
of  the  latter.  We  turn  away  the  face  in  sorrow  or  in  mirth ;  we  look  the  object  of  our 
love  or  satisfaction  full  in  the  face.  God  had  withdrawn  himself  and  turned  away  his 
face  until  they  acknowledged  their  offence  and  sought  his  face.  But  life  is  not  only 
restored;  it  is  life  in  God's  sight,  that  is.  before  his  face.  This  is  real  life — life  in  God's 
favour,  with  the  light  of  his  countenance  lifted  up  upon  us ;  with  his  eye  on  us  to 
guide  and  to  direct  us  as  well  as  to  guard  and  protect  us.  We  live  in  his  sight  when, 
whatever  we  do,  we  do  it  as  unto  the  Lord.  Every  duty  is  discharged  as  in  his  imme- 
diate presence  and  under  his  all-seeing  eye.  Our  thoughts,  our  purposes,  our  plans, 
our  feelings,  the  inmost  actings  of  our  spirit,  are  all  ordered  with  the  abiding  impression 
that  they  are  in  God's  sight,  open  and  naked  before  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do. 

IV.  The  knowlbdoe  of  God  and  growth  therein.  What  is  the  great  end  of 
man's  being  ?  What  is  the  thing  that  chiefly  concerns  him  ?  To  such  questions  various 
answers  will  be  returned  according  to  the  tastes,  or  habits,  or  capacity  of  the  individual. 
Some  will  answer  and  say  that  life  itself,  its  preservation  and  well-being,  is  the  great 
concern  of  man ;  or  that  health — health  of  mind  with  health  of  body,  a  sound  mind  in 
a  sound  body — is  chiefly  to  be  attended  to.  Others,  again,  will  reply  that  the  advance- 
ment of  one's  family  or  the  increase  of  one's  fortune  is  the  main  thing  to  be  sought  and 
attained.  Whatever  truth  may  be  in  any  of  these,  it  is  not  the  right  answer.  There  is 
something  higher  and  holier,  nobler  and  better,  than  any  of  the  things  specified.  The 
glory  of  the  Creator  and  the  good  of  the  creature  must  be  placed  above  everything  else. 
But  to  glorify  the  Creator,  and  thereby  and  therewith  to  attain  to  the  good  of  the 
creature,  we  must  know  God.  1.  Wherein  does  the  knowledge  of  God  consist  ?  What 
do  we  mean  by  the  knowledge  of  God?  It  is  to  know  God  as  he  has  made  himself 
known,  in  the  two  great  volumes  which  he  has  spread  out  before  us.  The  one  is  the 
volume  of  his  works,  open  to  the  eyes  of  all  men ;  but  that  volume  only  takes  us  a  short 
way.  We  get  the  knowledge  of  his  Godhead,  or  existence  as  God,  and  of  his  power ;  we 
learn  that  there  is  an  eteriial  Power  that  called  created  things  into  being,  and  that  that 
Power  is  neither  blind  physical  force  nor  the  pantheistic  spirit  of  the  universe,  but  a 
Divine  Person;  for  "  the  invisible  things  of  him  since  the  creation  are  clearly  seen,  being 
understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead;  so  that 
they  are  without  excuse."  The  other  volume  is  his  Wwrd,  in  which  he  has  fully  revealed 
his  will.  From  this  volume  we  know  his  various  attributes  and  infinite  perfections — 
his  holiness  in  hating  sin,  his  justice  in  punishing  it,  his  wisdom  in  devising  the  plan 
of  salvatinn,  his  love  in  sending  his  Son  to  work  it  out,  his  mercy  in  shedding  down  his 
Spirit  to  apply  it.  But,  over  and  above  all  this,  the  knowledge  of  God  must  be  perso"^l, 
exj  erimental,  and  practical.  We  need  to  know  God  as  our  God  through  Jesus  Ch''st 
oui  Lord ;  we  need  to  know  by  happy  experience  his  love  to  our  souls ;  we  neei  ta 


OH.  Ti.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  173 

know  the  duty  which  we  are  bound  to  render  to  him  in  gratitude  for  his  amazing 
loving-kindness,  and  in  love  to  him  who  first  loved  us.  2.  How  is  ihis  knowledge 
attained  ?  There  must  be  diligent,  prayerful  study  of  the  Divine  Word  under  the 
teaching  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  The  physician  never  dreams  of  saining  a  knowledge  of 
his  profession,  and  of  qualifying  himself  for  the  performance  of  its  responsible  duties, 
without  years  of  preparatory  study  in  order  to  grasp  its  principles  and  master  its  details ; 
nor  can  he  afford  to  abandon  that  study  even  after  he  has  entered  on  the  practice  of  his 
professional  labours — earnest  thought  and  unwearying  diligence  are  still  required.  The 
mercliant  who  would  succeed  in  mercantile  life  must  devote  much  attention  to  the 
principles  of  commerce  and  the  various  departments  of  trade ;  days  of  toil  and  nights 
of  close  application  to  business  are  indispensable.  The  agriculturist,  if  he  would  attain 
to  eminence  or  even  respectability  in  his  calling,  cannot  expect  to  do  so  without  suitable 
training  and  diligent  attention  in  order  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  proper  methods  of 
tillage.  Shall  men  willingly  devote  their  noblest  energies  and  highest  powers  and  best 
days  to  the  occupations  of  time,  and  yet  afford  only  some  brief  intervals  of  leisure,  or 
some  spare  hours,  and  very  slight  attention  to  attain  the  knowledge  of  that  God  who 
is  above  them,  and  to  prepare  for  thiit  eternity  that  is  before  them?  3.  By  what  means 
do  we  gain  increase  of  this  knowledge  ?  What  promotes  our  growth  at  once  in  grace 
and  the  knowledge  of  God  ?  The  answer  is  before  us.  We  are  to  follow  on,  hunt  after, 
strive  zealously  to  know  the  Lord.  There  must  be  continued  diligence,  constant  perse- 
verance; there  must  be  devout  and  daily  reading  of  God's  Word — some  time  every  day 
less  or  more  should  be  given  to  the  study  of  Holy  Scripture ;  there  must  be  fervent 
prayer  for  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit :  for  "  the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things 
of  the  Spirit  of  God;  they  are  foolishness  unto  him,  because  they  are  spiritually  dis- 
cerned." Have  we  already  acquired  some  knowledge  of  God,  not  merely  out  of  the 
volume  of  creation,  or  by  the  light  of  our  own  intellect,  or  from  the  teachings  of  others, 
but  from  this  Word  of  God,  which  is  brimful  of  the  knowledge  of  God ;  and  do  we  know 
God  to  be  a  just  God  and  yet  a  Saviour — our  God  and  Father  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord?  Then  we  must  beware  of  becoming  cold,  or  languid,  or  lifeless.  We  must 
avoid  everything  and  anything  that  would  turn  us  aside,  or  tempt  us  to  prefer  our 
secular  business  to  salvation,  or  to  set  the  trifles  of  time  in  the  place  of  the  realities  of 
eternity.  But  should  coldness  creep  over  us,  or  should  a  spirit  of  slumber  overtake  us 
as  the  virgins  in  the  parable,  or  should  our  little  progress  in  the  Divine  life  and  Divine 
things  discourage  us,  let  us  repair  at  once  to  the  mercy-seat  for  Divine  help  and  grace ; 
and  the  Spirit  of  truth  will  guide  us  into  all  truth.  Let  us  evei  bear  in  mind  that  we 
must  persevere  to  the  end  in  order  to  be  saved,  that  we  must  be  faithful  unto  death  if 
we  would  obtain  the  crown  of  life,  and  that  if,  after  having  put  our  hand  to  the  plough, 
we  turn  back,  the  Lord  will  have  no  pleasure  in  us.  Follow  on,  then,  as  the  runner  in 
the  race  to  win  the  prize,  as  the  warrior  in  the  conflict  to  gain  the  victory,  as  the  mariner 
steers  his  homeward-veering  bark  to  reach  his  native  shore. 

V.  The  blessedness  promised  to  those  who  persevere  in  the  knowledge  of 
God.  The  promised  blessing  is  here  presented  under  two  beautiful  figures— the  return- 
ing light  of  morning,  and  the  refreshing  rain.  1.  There  is  freshness  in  the  morning 
air,  there  is  beauty  in  the  morning .  light,  there  is  loveliness  in  natural  scenery  when 
the  light  of  morning  shines  on  it.  One  of  the  oldest  Greek  poets  often  speaks  of  morning, . 
and  usually  with  some  ejiithet  of  praise  or  admiration,  such  as  "  saffron-robed  Aurora,"  or 
"  Aurora,  daughter  of  the  dawn."  "  The  morning."  We  associate  morning  with  the  idea 
of  refreshment  and  relief.  If  you  have  been  laid  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  or  tossing  on 
a  bed  of  pain,  or  watching  by  the  bedside  of  one  dear  to  you  as  your  own  life,  how 
welcome  is  the  light  of  morning !  After  tossings  to  and  fro  till  the  dawning  of  the  day, 
the  morning  brings  some  measure  of  relief  or  relaxation.  Many  a  one  in  the  circum- 
stances supposed  is  crying  out,  "  Would  God  it  were  morning  1 "  or  sighing  out,  «  Oh  for 
the  lifht  of  morning,  to  shorten  the  weariness  of  the  night,  or  bring  some  alleviation ! " 
There"  again,  is  the  mariner  toiling  through  the  dreary  hours  of  a  stormy  winter  night, 
while  neither  moon  nor  stars  appear ;  how  he  wishes  and  longs  for  the  light  of  morning ! 
Or  a  traveller  has  been  overtaken  by  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  has  lost  his  way 
in  some  pathless  wilderness,  or  among  the  glades  of  a  mountain  forest ;  how  he  waits 
and  watches  for  the  first  gleam  of  morning  light  to  extricate  him  from  his  perplexity 
and  perill     In  all  these  cases  the  morning  is  looked  forward  to  for  relief;  nor  is  it  ever 


m  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vi.  1— It 

looked  for  In  vain,  for  morning  is  iwe  to  come.  It  may  seem  slow  in  coming,  and 
long  before  it  comes ;  or  the  weary  watcher  may  be  many  a  time  on  the  point  of  giving 
up  in  despair.  But  tlie  return  of  morning,  after  a  night  however  long,  or  dark,  or  painful, 
or  perilous,  is  certain  to  take  place ;  ite  return  is  prepared ;  it  is  a  fixed  ordinance  of 
nature.  So,  to  every  persevering  seeker  after  the  knowledge  of  &od,  the  Lord's  going 
forth  is  fixed  and  cannot  fail ;  it  is  sure  as  the  morning  sunrise.  To  every  afSicted, 
anguished  spirit,  to  every  weary  waiting  soul,  the  morning  dawn  shall  come  surely  as  the 
day  succeeds  the  night  and  the  light  alternates  with  darkness,  for  Q-od  has  established  this 
order  of  things.  The  Dayspring  from  on  high,  with  the  light  of  saving  knowledge  and 
spiritual  healthfulness,  shall  visit  all  who  patiently  wait  and  perseveringly  pursue  the 
knowledge  of  Gbd.  There  is  a  Joyousness  of  spirit,  a  buoyancy  of  feeling,  peculiar  to 
the  morning,  and  not  experienced  to  the  same  extent,  or  perhaps  at  all,  during  the 
remainder  of  the  day.  Delightful  as  Is  the  figure,  the  fact  represented  by  it  is  even 
more  so.  What  joyfulness  comes  with  morning  to  the  bewildered  wayfarer,  or  tempest- 
tossed  sailor,  or  sorely  afSicted  sufferer  I  Then  hope  takes  the  place  of  despair,  and 
joy  Butceeds  to  sorrow.  To  the  soul  that  waits  upon  the  Lord,  his  coming  is  as  sure 
as  the  return  of  the  morning  light;  and  brings  with  it  peace  and  joy  in  believing, 
favour  and  forgiveness.  To  Um  who  has  waited  long,  and  watched  with  patience  till 
hope  deferred  had  begun  to  make  the  heart  sick,  the  Lord's  going  forth  is  certain  as 
the  morning  dawn ;  and  simultaneously  therewith  the  light  of  his  countenance  is  lifted 
on  the  soul,  and  cheerfulness  is  imparted  to  the  spirit.  It  is  a  blessed  assurance  that 
none  ever  waited  upon  the  Lord  in  vain ;  no  one  ever  trusted  him  and  was  disappointed. 
Wait,  then,  for  his  going  forth.  It  may  tarry,  but  wait  for  it ;  for  at  last  it  will  come  and 
will  not  tarry ;  for  the  time  is  fixed,  and  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise  on  every 
patient  sonl  with  healing  under  his  wings.  Fortified  by  this  assurance,  the  psalmist 
says,  in  language  we  woiUd  do  well  to  adopt  and  act  on,  "  I  wait  for  the  Lord,  my  soul 
doth  wait,  and  in  his  Word  do  I  hope.  My  soul  waiteth  for  the  Lord  more  than  they 
that  watch  for  the  morning :  I  say,  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning."  2.  That 
the  Authorized  Version  is  inaccurate,  is  obvious  from  its  making  the  latter  rain  precede  the 
former,  The  reverse  is  the  natural  order  and  the  order  here  observed,  geshem  standing  for 
the  one  or  rather  for  "  plentiful  rain  "  in  general,  malqosh  for  the  other  or  "  latter  rain," 
and  roreh  not  a  noun  at  all.  This  beautiful  figure  is  specially  suitable  to  the  Orient, 
and  finds  its  most  striking  application  in  Eastern  lands;  it  is  also  more  or  less  appro- 
priate in  all  lands.  Not  only  so,  it  forms  a  fitting  counterpart  to  the  figure  which 
precedes,  and  with  which  it  is  so  intimately  connected — the  one  exhibiting  the  fact, 
the  other  the  fruit,  of  salvation ;  the  one  the  beginning  of  salvation,  the  other  its  benefits ; 
the  one  its  commencement,  the  other  its  consummation.  In  the  land  of  Israel,  as  well 
as  other  countries  of  the  East,  soon  after  seed-time,  when  the  seed  has  been  sown  in 
the  furrows,  comes  the  early  rain  to  make  the  seed  germinate  and  the  tender  blade 
spring  up ;  but  there  is  also  the  latter  rain  in  the  weeks  preceding  harvest,  to  fill  the 
ear  and  mature  the  growing  grain.  With  a  rich  Eastern  soil  below  and  a  warm  Eastern 
sun  above,  the  bene6cial  effects  of  the  former  and  latter  rain  are  obvious.  In  connection 
with  the  combined  action  of  sun  and  soil  and  shower,  there  are  first  the  blade,  then 
the  ear,  and  eventually  the  ripe  com  in  the  ear.  Thus  in  spiritual  husbandry,  the 
seed  of  Divine  and  saving  knowledge  has  been  no  sooner  cast  into  the  furrows  than  the 
rain-shower  of  Divine  grace  waters  it,  so  that  it  germinates  and  grows — ^blade  and  eai 
and  ripened  grain  as  in  the  natural  world ;  nor  are  showers  of  grace  withheld  before 
and  up  till  the  reaping-time,  so  that  even  in  old  age  there  is  abundant  frtiitfulness. 
"  They  shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age ;  they  shall  be  fiit  and  flourishing  [margin, 
'green'];"  and  when  the  time  of  the  end  comes  and  the  harvest  day  arrives,  they 
resemble  a  shock  of  com  in  its  season,  rich  with  golden  grain,  ripe  and  ready  to  be 
gathered  into  the  heavenly  garner.  Thus  shall  it  fare  with  the  soul  that  follows  on  to 
know  and  love  the  Lord.  Sure  as  the  dawn  brings  on  the  day ;  sure  as  the  sun  goeth 
forth  out  of  his  chamber,  and  rejoiceth  as  a  strong  man  to  run  his  race ;  sure  as  the 
alternation  of  day  and  night ;  sure  as  the  succession  of  the  seasons ;  sure  as  the  rain 
comes  down  from  heaven,  and  returns  not  thither  again  till  it  has  moistened  and  fructified 
the  earth  ; — God  shall  bless  that  soul  with  light  and  life  and  love.  Therefore  let  ui 
know,  let  us  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord ;  for  "  it  is  good  that  a  man  quietly  wait  and 
patiently  wait  for  the  salvation  of  Qod." 


cii.  VI,  1— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  17F 

Vers.  4 — ^9. — Israd's  inamstancy.  The  Lord  had  just  comforted  the  truly  godl> 
portion  of  the  people ;  he  now  turns  aside  and  expostulates  with  the  ungodly.  Judah 
as  well  as  Ephraim— the  two  tribes  and  the  ten— fell  far  short,  unspeakably  short,  of  the 
picture  of  penitence,  with  the  annexed  promises,  which  he  had  just  placed  before  them. 
Their  state  had  become  so  desperate  that  destruction  had  become  their  desert,  not  because 
of  his  severity,  but  their  own  sin,  themselves  being  judges. 

L  The  complaint  of  thbib  inconstahot.  1.  God  here  speaks  as  if  all  remedies 
had  proved  futile,  and  as  if  he  were  at  a  loss  to  know  how  to  deal  towards  them  or 
what  to  do  with  them.  Various  means  had  been  tried,  diverse  methods  resorted  to: 
be  had  sent  them  precious  promises  of  mercy  and  alarming  threatenings  of  wrath; 
means  and  expedients  had  been  exhansted ;  but  they  had  gone  from  bad  to  worse. 
And  now,  as  though  resourceless,  the  Almighty  puts  the  question  as  if  to  their  own 
conscience,  "0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee?  0  Judah,  what  shall  I  do  unto 
thee?"  2.  Or  perhaps  we  may  rather  understand  such  questions  as  a  lamentation  over 
their  case,  so  deplorable  had  it  become.  Thus  our  Lord  wept  over  Jerusalem  and  the 
desperate  stn  te  of  its  doomed  inhabitants.  Nor  was  it  a  few  tears  he  dropped  (4SdKpv<re), 
as  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus ;  his  eyes  brimmed  over  with  tears  (eK\avae),  while  his  lips 
uttered  the  touchingly  pathetic  words,  "  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in 
this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace !  but  now  they  are  hid  from 
thine  eyes,"  3.  The  picture  of  their  inconstancy  is  sadly  appropriate.  The  morning 
cloud  is  an  attractive  object  as  it  floats  sublimely  overhead  on  a  summer's  morning ; 
but  it  is  as  evanescent  as  conspicuous,  suddenly  fading  away  into  the  "  azure  deep  ol 
air."  Still  more  lovely  is  the  dew  which  lies  copiously  on  the  herbage  in  the  early 
morning,  glistening  on  every  blade  of  grass  and  flower  petal,  and  beautifying  with  its 
pearly  drops  the  lawns  and  pasture-grounds.  Soon,  however,  the  footstep  of  man  or 
beast  brushes  it  aside,  and  it  disappears ;  or  it  is  exhaled,  and  vanishes  by  the  heat  of 
the  advancing  day.  Thus  it  was  with  the  goodness  of  the  Hebrew  people,  both  north 
and  south,  at  the  time  referred  to.  Several  cases  of  reformation  had  taken  place  in 
Judah ;  revivals  of  religion  had  occurred,  as  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,  and  subsequently 
in  the  time  of  Josiah ;  and  even  in  Israel  we  read  of  the  humiliation  of  Ahab  and  the 
zeal  of  Jehu;  but  these  were  to  a  large  extent  transient  and  temporary.  So,  too,  it 
often  happens  in  times  of  awakening,  sorrow  for  sin  may  becloud  the  brow  of  the 
penitent  and  tears  of  contrition  bedew  his  eyes ;  but  ere  long  the  excitement  dies  away, 
and  that  sorrow  and  those  tears  have  passed  away,  and  all  serious  impressions  and 
gracious  influences  have  vanished  with  them. 

II.  Consequences  op  the  inconstancy  complained  of.  These  consequences  are 
enumerated  with  some  detail  in  vers.  6 — 7,  though  the  fifth  verse  is  differently  under- 
stood by  some,  as  though  it  contained  two  different  kinds  of  messages  sent  by  God  to 
Israel — messages  of  coming  wrath  to  arouse  and  awaken  them,  thus  hewing  them  by 
the  prophets  and  slaying  them  by  the  words  of  his  mouth ;  and  messages  of  mercy, 
bright  as  the  light  and  beautiful  as  the  sunbeams,  to  encourage  them,  thus  causing  his 
judgments  to  go  forth  as  the  light.    But  this  latter  sense  does  not  suit  the  context. 

1.  First  of  the  consequences  is  denunciation  of  wrath,  when  God  denouiiced  their 
destruction  with  severity  by  his  messengers  the  prophets,  and  the  words  of  his  mouth 
which  constituted  the  message  which  they  delivered ;  while  the  justice  of  the  judgments 
thus  visited  on  them  was  positively  demonstrated  and  plainly  proved,  so  that  it  was 
seen  to  be  and  must  have  appeared  even  to  the  guilty  sufferers  clear  as  the  light. 

2.  The  second  consequence  is  degeneracy  in  religion.  It  had  degenerated  into  mere 
formalism.  In  place  of  mercy  came  sacrifices,  and  for  the  knowledge  of  God  burnt 
offerings  were  substituted.  Outward  observances  took  the  place  of  inward  devotion. 
Instead  of  piety  towards  God  and  charity  to  man,  a  tedious  round  of  services  was 
performed.  Eitiialism  was  substituted  for  religion ;  ceremonialism  for  clean  hands  and 
a  pure  heart.  Obedience  to  the  commandments  of  God,  whether  prescriptive  or 
prohibitory,  was  iiegleoted;  morality  was  dissociated  from  religion;  mere  rites  sup- 
planted moral  or  religious  duties.  3.  But  a  thiid  consequence  was  dedeneion,  of 
spiritual  life  in  general ;  this  was  additional  evidence  of  the  religious  degeneracy  just 
referred  to.  Covenant-breaking  and  treacherous  dealing  we  specified.  Like  the  most 
reckless  of  men,  they  were  truce-breakers,  bound  by  no  compact,  and  regardless  of  the 
truth  of  promises.     Besides  being  thus  practically  dishonest,   A»f  were  altogether 


17«  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  Tt  1—11. 

UDTeliable  and  faithless.  Their  sin  in  this  respect,  though  declared  to  be  against  Ood, 
involved  a  fortiori  similar  conduct  in  relation  to  their  fellow-men. 

IIL  CoNFiBHATioKS  OF  Israel's  ouilt.  Two  places  are  specified  as  instances,  and 
their  inhabitants  singled  out  as  specimens  of  the  wickedness  of  the  times — Gilead  on 
the  east  and  Shechem  on  the  west  of  Jordan.  If  Gilead  be  a  city — Bamoth-gilead, 
perhaps — a  city  of  refuge  and  a  Levitical  city,  the  sin  of  its  inhabitants  was  something 
shocking.  When  men,  who  by  profession  should  be  an  example  and  pattern  to  others, 
descend  to  practices  directly  opposed  to  that  profession,  and  degrade  themselves  by 
crimiual  actions  of  the  worst  and  basest  kind,  religion  is  evil  spoken  of,  a  stumbling- 
block  is  cast  in  the  way  of  the  weak,  the  Master  himself  is  stabbed  in  the  house  of  his 
professed  friends.  The  people  of  this  highly  favoured  place  had  set  themselves  to  work 
iniquity,  and  that  of  no  ordinary  kind ;  the  blood  of  murdered  innocence  clave  to  their 
hands.  Shechem  was  even  worse  in  this  respect.  In  this  other  city  of  refuge  the 
privilege  of  asylum  was  profanedl  Either  guilty  persons  were  admitted  and  protected 
for  a  bribe,  when  they  should  have  been  delivered  up  to  death  ;  or,  in  addition  to  thus 
screening  the  guilty,  those  who  had  committed  homicide  unwittingly,  but  who  were 
too  poor  to  offer  bribes,  were  ruthlessly  given  up  to  the  blood-avenger ;  or,  worst  of  all 
and  vilest  of  all,  the  priests  who  had  got  settled  in  the  place  formed  themselves  into 
robber-gangs  or  common  banditti  to  rob,  and  in  case  of  resistance  murder,  the  travellers 
who  were  so  luckless  as  to  journey  that  way,  or  from  a  bloodthirsty  spirit  of  revenge 
they  waylaid  and  assassinated  the  objects  of  their  displeasure.  In  one  way  or  other 
blood  was  defiling  the  land  and  crying  to  Heaven  for  vengeance.  Long  before  a  bloody 
deed  had  been  done  in  this  very  place,  when  Simeon  and  Levi  in  cruel  wrathfulness 
put  the  defenceless  Shechemites  to  the  sword;  history  in  a  still  worse  form  now 
repeated  itself. 

lY.  CouMUKiTT  IK  OBiMB.  The  proverbial  expression  of  "  Like  priest,  like  people," 
was  fully  verified  in  the  case  before  us.  When  priests  perpetrated  such  atrocities,  what 
coidd  be  expected  from  the  populace?  When  religious  teachers  distinguished  them- 
selves as  ringleaders  in  wickedness,  what  could  be  hoped  for  among  the  less  privileged 
of  the  population?  There  was,  in  fact,  a  community  in  crime.  In  the  house  of  Israel, 
or  main  body  of  the  people  in  the  northern  kingdom,  there  was  wickedness  so  horrible 
ax  to  make  one  shudder  or  the  hair  stand  on  end.  However  men  might  attempt 
concealment,  God's  eye  detected  and  discovered  their  horrid  iniquity,  while  his  justice 
denounced  vengeance  against  it.  Ephraim  is  again  foremosi^  and  first  in  the  present 
iniquity,  as  previously  in  the  idolatrous  calf-worship  and  ori^nal  revolt.  Their 
whoredom,  whether  literal  or  figurative,  exercised  a  contaminating  effect  on  the  rest  of 
the  ten  tribes.  How  baneful  the  effects  of  evil  influence  1  How  great  the  responsi- 
bility connected  with  the  exercise  of  influence  1  JudaU  also,  from  whom  better  was  to 
be  expected,  vrith  the  ancient  sanctuary  among  them  and  a  purer  ritual,  had  been 
seduced  to  sin ;  the  example  and  influence  of  their  brethren  in  the  north  had,  no  doubt, 
helped  their  depravation,  evil  communications  corrupting  good  manners.  Be  this  as 
it  may,  they  had  sown  the  wind  and  must  in  consequence  reap  the  whirlwind.  As  they 
had  sown  and  what  they  had  sown,  they  must  by-and-by  reap.  The  general  judgment 
is  Ukened  to  harvest ;  so  also  are  special  judgments.  (For  the  time  specified,  see  Exposi- 
tion.) The  Judahites  who  had  been  made  captives  by  Israel  had  been  set  at  liberty 
through  the  interposition  of  the  prophet  Oded  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  8 — 16).  God  had  spared 
them  then,  but  set  them  a  harvest  at  another  time ;  as  it  has  been  remarked,  "  Preserva- 
tions from  present  judgments,  if  a  good  use  be  not  made  of  them,  are  but  reservations 
for  greater  judgment*." 

HOMILIES  BT  VABIOUB  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1^^. — Repentance  and  $avitig  knowledge.  We  view  these  verses  as  closely 
connected  with  the  last  verse  of  the  preceding  chapter.  There  the  Lord  has  said  that 
Ephraim  and  Judah,  when  they  shall  have  been  well  punished  for  their  apostasy,  will 
at  length  return  to  him.  Here,  accordingly,  he  anticipates  what  they  shall  say  to  one 
another  when  they  do  so.  "  In  their  afSiction  they  will  seek  me  early,  saying,  Come, 
and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord."    This  prediction,  doubtless,  has  already  once  and 


OH.  n.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  177 

again  lieeii  partially  fulfilled ;  but  its  complete  accomplishment  belongs  to  "  the  last 
things." 

I.  An  ENCOUSAOEMEMT  TO  QODLT  BBPENTAKOE.  fVers.  1,  2.)  The  Opening  clause 
of  ver.  1  consists  of  an  earnest  self-exhortation,  and  «iis  is  succeeded  in  the  remainder 
of  the  two  verses  by  arguments  in  support  of  it.  The  nerve-thought  of  these  is,  that 
restoration  to  the  Divine  favour  will  succeed  repentanoe.  The  expatriated  Hebrews,  in 
their  miserable  exile  and  God-forsakenness,  shall  have  a  profound  conviction  of  their 
guilt  wrought  within  their  hearts ;  and  they  shall  return  to  their  long-slighted  Lord  in 
the  confident  hope  of  a  favourable  reception.  Their  restoration,  they  are  persuaded, 
will  be:  1.  Certain.  The  words  of  vers.  1,2  evince  strong  faith.  There  is  in  them 
the  pulse-beat  of  a  firm  confidence.  He  who  tore  will  also  heal.  He  who  inflicted  the 
agony  will  bestow  the  joy.  True  penitence  is  always  accompanied  with  some  measure 
of  faith.  It  cherishes  the  hope  of  mercy.  It  lays  hold  of  the  truth  contained  in  that 
magnificent  proverb,  "  God  never  stakes  with  both  hands."  It  accepts  the  testimony 
of  the  Eternal,  that  be  "  dwells  with  him  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit." 
2.  Speedy,  The  definite  limits  of  time  here  mentioned  (ver.  2)  are  intended  to  assure 
us  that  the  restoration  of  Israel  shall  come  not  only  certainly,  but  quickly,  Jebovali 
is  slow  to  chide,  but  he  is  swift  to  bless.  It  may  seem  to  us  a  long  time  since  Israel's 
rejection  ;  it  is  now  nearly  two  thousand  years  since  the  Romans  destroyed  Jerusalem. 
But  "  one  day  is  with  the  Lord,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  8).  Many  commentators  have  judged 
that  Christ's  resurrection  "in  the  third  day"  is  indicated  here.  And  no  doubt  an 
analogy  is  traceable  between  the  events  of  Israel's  history  and  events  in  the  life  of  the 
Messiah  (cf.  ch.  xi.  1  and  Matt.  iL  15).  But  it  is  one  thing  to  apply  the  prophet's 
words  to  the  great  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection,  and  another  thing  to  conclude  that  that 
event  is  even  so  much  as  indirectly  foretold  by  this  language.  3.  Complete,  "  We 
shall  live  before  his  face  "  (ver.  2).  The  face  is  an  index  of  character.  It  reveals  the 
mind  and  heart.  A  man  naturally  turns  his  face  towards  the  person  whom  he  loves, 
and  turns  rt  away  from  one  whom  he  dislikes.  God  had  "  withdrawn  himself  from  " 
Israel  (ch.  v.  6,  15) ;  but  now  again,  in  the  day  of  their  revival,  he  shall "  cause  his  face 
to  shine  upon  them."  The  contrite  ones  live  in  the  open  smile  of  the  Divine  &Tour, 
and  enjoy  the  perpetual  sunshine  of  the  Divine  presence. 

II.  Ah  bnooubagbment  to  saving  knowledqb.  (Ver.  3.)  The  first  part  of  this 
verse  should  be  translated,  "  Then  let  us  know,  follow  on  to  know,  Jehovah."  This 
is  a  further  self-exhortation,  parallel  to  that  in  ver.  L  Jehovah  had  become  unknowu 
in  Israel  (ch,  iv.  1).  But  the  resolve  to  "  return "  to  him  involves  the  resolution  to 
"  know"  him,  and  to  grow  in  that  knowledge  continually.  Such  knowledge  has  a  very 
practical  aim.  It  is  a  life,  not  a  mere  science ;  an  experience,  not  a  speculation.  It 
leads  a  man  to  own  God  and  to  serve  him.  It  will  fill,  the  mind  with  brightness,  and 
the  life  with  fruitfulness.  We  sometimes  call  theology  "  the  queen  of  the  sciences;" 
but  this  heart-knowledge  of  God  is  more — it  is  "life  eternal "  (John  xvii.  3).  Two  very 
attractive  emblems  are  presented  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  for  our  encouragement 
in  the  pursuit  of  saving  knowledge.  With  the  ancient  Jewish  rabbins,  we  are  to  see 
in  these  an  anticipation  of  the  Redeemer  of  men.  Jehovah  comes  in  the  Person  of  his 
Son,  Jesus  Christ,  as  "  the  morning; "  and  he  comes  in  the  Spirit  of  his  Son,  as  "  the 
rain."  1.  "  The  morning."  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Aurora,  or  Dayspring  from  on 
high ; — the  Sun  of  righteousness,  who  has  arisen  with  healing  in  his  wings.  He  will  be 
welcomed  yet  as  such  by  the  entire  Hebrew  nation.  His  coming  has  flooded  the  world 
with  the  light  of  life.  "  His  going  forth,"  like  the  morning,  brings  brightness  and  Joy 
to  the  believer.  "  0  happy  day,  that  fixed  my  choice,"  etc.  It  brings  also  freshness  ; 
for  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  is  to  the  Christian  always  new,  and  full  of  infinite  variety. 
The  morning  is  'irresistible  in  its  coming ;  and  the  "  going  forth  "  of  Christ  "  is  prepared 
as  the  morning,"  ».e.  decreed  in  the  purposes  of  Jehovah's  love.  The  morning  comes 
increasingly ;  and  thus  also  the  believer  who  follows  on  to  know  the  Lord  shall  "  go 
from  strength  to  strength,"  from  the  dawning  light  "  unto  the  perfect  day  "  (Prov,  iv. 
18).  2.  "  Hie  rain."  In  Palestine,  the  two  rainy  seasons  here  referred  to  were  most 
necessary  and  precious.  The  "  former  rain,"  which  fell  in  October,  preceded  the  seed- 
time, and  prepared  the  earth  for  cultivation.  The  "  latter  rain,"  which  fell  in  April, 
filloii  the  ears  before  harvest,  and  perfected  the  fruit.  Now,  God  shall  come  to  Israel  in 
the  last  days— as  he  comes  to  his  people  in  every  age— by  his  Holy  Spirit,  «•  as  tlie 

HOBIA.  ■ 


178  THE  BOOK  OP  IIOSEA.  [oh.  ti.  1—11. 

rain."  The  rain  is  refreshing ;  and  so  the  knowledge  which  the  Spirit  imparts  com- 
forts the  hearts  of  young  converts,  and  matures  the  character  of  experienced  Christ ians. 
'I'he  rainfall  is  variable  j  and  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  varies  in  like  manner,  according 
to  God's  will  and  our  faith.  The  rain  is  trovMe-giiiing — it  comes  amid  shadow  and 
gloom,  sometimes  with  thunder  and  tempest;  and  so  the  Spirit  often  visits  the  soul 
by  means  of  deep  and  painful  heart-searchings  on  account  of  sin.  The  rain  is  fertilizing 
— its  absence  would  cause  dearth  and  barrenness;  so  the  knowledge  of  'lod  will  make 
those  hearts  fruitful  which  beforetime  yielded  only  thorns  and  briers  (Heb.  vi.  7,  8). 

Conclusion.  Although  we  in  this  age  do  not  live  in  the  last  days  of  Israel's  restora- 
tion, the  sweet  voice  of  this  mutual  appeal  is  for  us.  We  need  to  stir  up  our  own 
hearts  to  exercise  the  grace  of  repentance,  and  to  pursue  the  study  of  saving  knowledge. 
Some  of  us  perhaps  have  gone  astray  into  very  miry  f  iths,  and  have  been  sorely 
chastised  for  our  sin.  Oh  for  grace  to  respond  to  this  twofold  appeal,  that  we  may 
know  the  Lord  our  Saviour  as  the  bright  Morning  and  the  genial  Bain,  and  that  we 
may  "live  in  his  sight"! — 0.  J. 

Vers.  4,6. — Fugitive  piety.  A  thoughtful  reader  cannot  fail  to  observe  the  contrast 
here  suggested  between  the  constancy  of  Jehovah's  grace  (ver.  3)  and  the  inconstancy 
of  Israel's  piety  (ver.  4).  If  Israel  would  only  "  return,"  and  "  follow  on  to  know  the 
Lord  "  now,  all  would  yet  be  well.  But,  alas  1  the  twelve  tribes  are  as  fickle  as  he  is 
faithful. 

I.  Gop's  COMPLAINT  BEOARDiNa  THB  JEWISH  PEOPLE.  (Ver.  4.)  In  Eastem  lands  the 
sky  is  often  heavily  hung  with  clouds  at  early  dawn ;  buf,  so  soon  as  the  sun  rises,  he 
begins  to  suck  them  up— their  many-coloured  glory  quickly  fades,  and  in  an  hour's  time 
they  are  gone.  In  the  morning,  also,  the  dewdrops  adorn  the  herbage  like  myriads  of 
sparkling  diamonds ;  but  the  first  acts  of  radiation  after  sunrise  dissipate  all  the  jewellery, 
and  soon  leaf  and  blade  languish  in  the  heat.  Those  two  fip;ures  the  Lord  uses  in  this 
touching  expostulation.  Israel's  piety,  when  the  people  did  show  any,  was  similarly 
fascinating,  promising,  and  evanescent.  It  could  no  more  be  reckoned  upon  than  "  a 
morning  cloud."  It  was  short-lived  as  "  the  early  dew."  There  are  many  examples  in 
Scripture  of  such  fugitive  piety.  (1)  In  the  national  history  of  Israel.  At  Sinai  the 
people  promised  obedience,  and  then  made  the  golden  calf.  The  a,^e  of  the  Judges 
was  a  time  of  alternate  sinning  and  repenting,  and  repenting  and  sinning.  Each  of 
the  reformations  under  Jehu,  Elijah,  and  Hezekiah  turned  out  to  be  "  as  a  morning 
cloud."  (2)  In  the  lives  of  individuala.  It  is  enough  to  mention  such  cases  as  King 
Saul,  the  young  ruler  who  came  to  Jesus,  Felix,  Demas,  the  Galatian  professors  (Gal. 
V.  7).    We  meet  with  morning-cloud  religion  constantly  still.     It  is  frequently  found : 

1.  In  the  time  of  childhood.  "The  dew  of  youth"  is  always  beautiful ;  and  sometimes 
the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  in  it,  and  it  fertilizes.  '  The  morning  cloud  of  child- 
hood's faith  is  often  a  "  vision  splendid,"  for 

"  Trailing  clouds  of  glory  do  we  come 
From  God,  who  is  our  Home : 
Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy  I " 

(Wordsworth.) 

But  the  piety  of  childhood  does  not  always  bear  the  test.  It  sometimes  turns  out  to 
be  merely  emotional,  and  nothing  more.     In  the  hour  of  temptation  "  it  goeth  away." 

2.  In  the  season  of  affliction.  Many  a  man,  in  the  day  npon  which  some  storm  of 
sickness  or  bereavement  has  strewn  his  life  with  wreckage,  resolves  that  when  the 
clouds  are  removed  he  will  cultivate  the  friendship  of  God,  and  trust  in  his  providence, 
and  keep  his  Law.  But,  after  prosperity  has  returned,  he  does  not  "  pay  that  which  he 
has  vowed."  3.  As  the  result  of  common  grace.  Common  grace  is  that  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  more  or  less  granted  to  all  men.  In  connection  with  his 
operations  men  who  are  unregenerate  have  their  seasons  of  deep  conviction,  and  of 
anxious  thought  regarding  spiritual  things.  Sometimes  they  "receive  the  Word  with 
joy  "  (Matt.  xiii.  20),  and  are  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Heb.  vi.  4),  and 
b^n  to  lead  an  externally  religious  life.  But,  if  experiences  of  this  kind  are  not 
accompanied  by  a  real  change  of  heart,  they  pass  away  like  "a  morning  cloud."  Such 
fugitive  piety  is  fatally  defective.    It  is :  (1)  Unreal.    For,  •  characteristic  mark  of 


OH.  TI.1— U.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  179 

true  religion  Is iteadfastneas.  "The  path  of  the  just"  is  not "" as  a  morning  cloud," 
but  "as  the  morning"  itse]f,  "that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day" 
(Prov.  iv.  18).  (2)  tfnliappy.  Those  who  do  not  "  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord,"  but 
allow  themselves  to  be  hindered  hj  the  discouragements  and  sufferings  which  belong 
to  the  Christian  life,  come  to  identify  religion  only  with  these.  "  Pliable  "  associates 
piety  with  the  "  Slough  of  Despond,"  ','  Formalist  and  Hypocrisy  "  with  "  the  Hill 
Difiaculty,"  "Timorous  and  Mistrust"  with  "the  lions."  It  is  only  pilgrims  like 
"  Christian,"  who  endure  to  the  end,  that  shall  taste  the  joys  of  "  the  House  Beautiful," 
and  "  the  Delectable  Mountains,"  and  "  the  land  of  Beulah."  (3)  Unhopeful.  Those 
who  "  receive  the  Word  into  stuny  places,"  or  "  among  the  thorns,"  become  a  very 
hopeless  class.  The  habit  of  taking  sudden  fits  of  goodness,  each  of  which  is  followed 
by  a  relapse  into  sin,  is  very  hardening  to  the  heart. 

II.  God's  method  with  the  people.  (Ver.  5.)  The  Lord  speaks  as  if  he  has  been 
at  his  wit's  end  to  know  what  measures  to  adopt  in  oider  to  win  the  nation  back  to 
godliness.  His  words  are,  "  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee?"  "  What  could  have  been 
done  more  to  my  vineyard  tliat  I  have  not  done  in  it?  "  (Isa.  v.  4).  His  wisdom  can 
devise  no  new  expedient.  His  policy  hitherto  has  been  one  of  mingled  goodness  and 
severity,  and  all  that  he  can  do  is  to  continue  that  policy  still.  So :  1.  He  sends  his 
prophets  to  "  hew."  The  figure  here  is  taken  from  the  art  of  the  statuary.  Human 
souls  are  like  blocks  of  martile,  and  God  is  the  great  Sculptor.  He  sent  the  Hebrew 
prophe.ts  to  cut  and  carve  Israel  into  the  Divine  image ;  for,  while  the  nation's  piety 
was  thin  as  vapour,  its  heart  was  hard  as  adamant.  This  metaphor  has  a  lesson  in  it 
regarding  the  ChristiMn  ministry.  A  large  part  of  the  preacher's  work  is  to  prick 
slumbering  consciences,  and  to  hammer  stony  hearts.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that  the 
New  Testament  message  is  emphatically  "  the  gospel ; "  yet  the  background  of  the 
"good  news"  is  necessarily  the  bad  news  of  guilt  and  sin  and  wrath.  Christian 
sermons  addressed  to  the  natural  man  cannot  avoid  being  denunciatory.  Our  pulpit 
teaching,  both  in  matter  and  manner,  should  reflect  as  clearly  as  possible  the  teaching 
of  the  New  Testament.  In  delivering  the  message  of  condemnation  especially,  the 
speaker  should  take  care  to  he  not  only  faithful  but  tender.  2.  He  uses  his  Law  to 
"slay."  "The  words  of  G"d's  mouth"  are  fitted  to  produce  the  recognition  of  sin  in 
its  true  nature  and  consequences.  The  ministry  of  the  Law  convicts  and  condemns. 
God's  word  "  slays "  when  it  convinces  of  guilt  and  pollution,  and  produces  thereby 
self-condemnation  and  remorse.  A  man  must  be  thus  slain  in  relation  to  sin  before 
his  heart  can  be  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel.  "Is  not  my  Word  like  as  a 
fire?  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  29).  "  The  Word  of  God  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  etc.  (Heb.  iv.  12).  3.  He  comes  in  a  morning  of 
judgment.  "  Thy  judgments  "  we  take  to  mean  the  judgments  inflicted  on  thee,  i.e.  on 
the  Jewish  people.  God  will  prepare  for  them  such  a  morning  as  they  do  not  desiie 
to  see  at  all.  He  will  come  "as  the  light"  to  manifest  their  sins,  and  to  punish  them. 
The  judgments  shall  be  palpable  to  every  eye,  and  shall  be  manifestly  just,  Jehovah 
shall  be  "  clear  when  he  judges." 

Conclusion.  These  two  verses  remind  us  (1)  that  God's  compassions  fail  not,  but 
(2)  that  persistent  sinfulness  on  man's  part  will  shut  him  out  from  the  enjoyment  of 
the  Divine  mercy.— C.  J. 

Vers.  6 — 11. — Beligion  and  irrdigion.  In  the  verse  immediately  preceding,  God 
has  spoken  of  sending  his  prophets  to  "  hew,"  and  his  words  to  "  slay,"  and  of  visiting 
the  nation  with  a  sunrise  of  judgment.  And  now,  in  the  remainder  of  the  chapter,  he 
proceeds  to  justify  these  threatenings  by  setting  forth  the  reason  why  he  felt  compelled 
to  deal  with  the  Hebrews  in  this  fashion. 

1.  Thb  nature  op  true  religion.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  It  is  described  here  in  a  twofold 
manner.  1.  Faithfulness  to  the  covenant  of  grace.  (Ver.  7.)  The  covenant  of  grace 
has  been  made  by  God  with  his  elect  people,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  being  Mediator  in 
their  behalf.  It  rests  upon  the  covenant  of  redemption  which  was  formed  from  eternity 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  The  promise  of  the  covenant  of  grace  is  spiritual  and 
eternal  life;  and  faith  in  Christ  is  the  condition  of  it.  This  covenant  has  been  the 
same  under  all  dispensations ;  but,  as  made  with  the  Hebrews  in  the  time  of  Moses,  it 
is  presented  in  ihree  aspects :  (1)  national   and  political ;  (2)  legal,  as  seen  in  the 


180  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  toH-Ttl— IL 

moral  and  ceremonial  law8 ;  (3)  evangelical,  for  all  the  Mosaic  institutions  pointed  to 
Chriat.  Tinder  every  economy,  also,  religion  has  consisted  in  acceptance  of  this 
covenant  and  fidelity  to  its  obligations.  In  every  age  faith  in  God  has  been  the  bond 
of  living  fellowship  with  him.  2.  The  offering  of  the  worship  of  a  holy  life,  (Ver.  6.) 
Keligion  must  have  a  form  in  order  to  its  manifestation.  Piety  has  an  outward  side  as 
well  as  an  inward.  Where  there  is  wine,  there  must  also  be  bottles  in  which  to  hold 
it  (Matt.  ix.  17).  Among  the  Jews  this  outward  expression  of  piety  was  to  take  the 
form  of  "  sacrifice  "  and  "  burnt  offerings."  But  religion  itself  is  a  spirit.  It  consists 
in  "  mercy  "  towards  man,  and  in  the  experimental  "knowledge  of  God."  Jehovah  says 
here  that  holiness  in  the  life  is  the  test  of  sincerity  in  the  observance  of  ritual.  He 
does  not  reject  sacrifices  in  themselves;  indeed,  he  had  himself  instituted  them.  But 
he  will  not  accept  heartless  oblations.  He  thinks  of  sacrifice  without  mercy  as  being 
like  a  body  from  which  the  spirit  has  fled.  All  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament 
asserted  the  superiority  of  ethical  over  ceremonial  laws.  And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
on  two  different  occasions  quoted  the  words  before  us, "  Mercy,  and  not  sacrifice  "  (Matt, 
ix.  13;  xlL  7),  in  support  of  the  position  that  the  righteousness  of  forms  is  not  the 
righteousness  of  faith,  and  that  it  is  the  discharge  of  moral  duties  rather  than  the 
observance  of  positive  institutions  that  makes  the  true  life  of  religion.  Such  also  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  apostles ;  e.g.  James  says  in  his  Epistle  that  the  ritual  of  Christianity 
consists  in  a  life  of  personal  purity  and  active  benevolence  (Jas.  i.  27). 

II.  The  ibbelioion  op  Israel.  (Vers.  7 — 11.)  The  entire  Hebrew  nation,  and 
both  of  the  kingdoms  into  which  it  was  divided,  had  failed  to  maintain  any  appreciable 
measure  of  religious  life.  (1)  ITiey  had  heen  faithless  to  the  covenant.  (Ver.  7.)  In 
this  respect  they  were  "  like  Adam  "  (margin),  i.e.  they  had  "  sinned  after  the  similitude 
of  Adam's  transgression."  They  had  violated  the  covenant  alike  under  all  its  aspects 
— national,  legal,  and  evangelical.  (2)  Their  worship  was  an  insincere  formalism. 
(Ver.  6.)  "  There  "  (ver.  7),  even  at  Bethel,  whither  they  went  "  with  their  fiocks  and 
with  their  herds  to  seek  Jehovah  "  (ch.  v.  6),  they  in  so  doing  " dealt  treacherously 
against  him."  For  they  brought  "  sacrifice,"  but  showed  not  "  mercy ; "  they  presented 
"  burnt  offerings,"  but  had  lost  "  the  knowledge  of  Qod."  Hosea,  in  the  remainder  of 
the  chapter,  adduces  one  or  two  illustrations  of  the  deep  and  universal  apostasy. 
1.  Sacred  places  had  become  polluted,  (Ver.  8.)  "  Gilead  "  perhaps  means  Bamoth- 
gilead,  a  famous  city  in  Gad,  and  the  centre  of  the  mountainous  region  called  Gilead. 
Moses  appointed  it  for  one  of  the  cities  of  refuge.  The  place  seems  to  have  had  now  a 
bad  eminence  in  crime.  Many  homicides  were  there,  not  of  the  class  alone  for  which 
the  cities  of  refuge  were  intended,  but  also  many  culpable  homicides  and  murderers. 
Gilead  was  "  tracked  with  blood,"  2.  A  sacred  office  had  hecome  infamous.  (Ver.  9.) 
The  priests  of  the  northern  kingdom  belonged  to  "  the  lowest  of  the  people,"  and  they 
were  now  giving  themselves  over  to  perpetrate  the  grossest  wickedness.  They  "  did 
evil  with  both  hands  earnestly."  One  "  enormity  "  which  the  sacerdotal  guild  committed 
was  actually  that  of  lying  in  wait  for  the  pilgrims  from  the  north  who  were  "  in  the 
way  to  Shechem  "  ^margin),  perhaps  en  route  for  Bethel — to  demand,  like  robbers,  their 
money  or  their  life]  3.  The  sacred  nation  itself  had  hecome  abominahle.  (Vers.  10, 
11.)  (1)  Israel's  apostasy  was  "  a  horrible  thing ; "  a  godly  mind  could  o'nly  contem- 
plate it  with  a  shudder.  The  sin  of  the  ten  tribes  was  «  whoredom,"  both  spiritual  and 
literal.  But  is  not  that  of  our  own  Christian  land  the  same  ?  There  is  doubtless  a 
large  portion  of  the  British  people  who  love  and  follow  purity,  and  thus  far  as  a  nation 
we  are  morally  better  than  Ephraim ;  but  those  who  study  our  national  life  upon  its 
seamy  side  "  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abominations  that  are  done  in  the  midst  thereof." 
(2)  Judah  also  has  sown  the  bad  seed  of  sin,  and  therefore  cannot  escape  reaping  "  a 
harvest "  of  wrath.  Already,  in  fact,  the  southern  kingdom  is  almost  ripe  for  destruc- 
tion. It  is  to  be  carried  into  "captivity."  Only  as  the  result  of  such  a  process  of 
judgment  shall  Jehovah  purge  out  the  wickedness  of  his  people,  and  restore  them  again 
to  his  favour.  In  the  closing  words  of  the  chapter  the  dark  clouds  break  a  little,  and 
there  appears  just  for  a  moment  a  glimpse  of  blue  sky.  The  Jewish  nation,  says 
Jihovah,  is  still  "my  people,"  and  one  day  "I  will  return  their  captivity."  This 
anticipation  shall  be  fully  realized  only  when  at  last  Israel  shall  be  converted  as  a  nation 
to  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Lebboni.    1.  The  right  relation  of  the  form  and  the  spirit  in  reli^on  (ver.  6).   2.  The 


cat.  VI.  1— llj  THE  BOOK.  QJ"  HOSBA,  l8l 

appalling  wickedness  and  shamefulnesa  of  sin  (vera.  7,  10,  H).  (8)  When  man 
prostitutes  the  best  institution!  from  their  proper  uses,  they  often  become  the  worst 
things  (vers.  8,  9). — 0.  J. 

Ver.  1. — On  returning  to  the  Lord.  The  graciousness  of  God  is  seen  In  nothing  more 
conspicuously  than  in  his  willingness  to  receive  those  who  come  to  him  under  the 
influence  of  sorrow.  In  all  ages  he  has  condescended  t6  use  afflictions  to  bring  men  and 
nations  to  an  acknowledgment  of  their  need  of  him.  This  was  always  a  feature  of 
his  dealings  with  Israel.  The  growing  tyranny  of  the  taskmasters  in  Egypt  aroused 
the  cry  of  the  Israelites  for  Divine  interposition,  without  which  they  never  could  have 
become  a  separated  and  theocratic  nation.  In  the  wilderness,  the  scarcity  of  water,  the 
defeat  at  Ai,  etc.,  brought  those  who  had  forgotten  God  to  a  confession  of  sin.  So  was 
it  in  the  subsequent  history  of  that  people,  who  constituted  an  abiding  exemplification 
of  God's  method  of  dealing  vrith  other  nations.  From  the  lives  of  individuals  also, 
illustrations  of  the  same  principle  may  be  drawn.  Hagar  found  that  God  was  more  to 
her  when  she  and  her  child  were  dying  in  the  wilderness  than  he  had  ever  been  in 
Abraham's  tent.  Jacob  was  smitten  with  sorrow,  homesick,  fearful,  destitute,  when  he 
saw  the  ladder  the  top  of  which  reached  to  heaven.  In  the  New  Testament  we  find 
crowds  around  the  Saviour,  and  of  whom  did  they  consist  ?  Chiefly  of  those  whose 
sadness  made  them  yearn  for  him.  Blind  men  groped  their  way,  lepers  ventured  near, 
the  palsied  besought  their  friends  to  lay  them  at  his  feet,  the  bereaved  sent  to  tell  him 
of  their  grief,  and  the  broken-hearted  dnner  washed  his  feet  with  her  tears.  During 
his  ministry  it  was  as  if  om:  text  had  sounded  over  the  world,  "  Come,  and  let  us 
return  unto  the  Lord :  for  he  bath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he 
will  bind  us  up."    Three  considerations  should  lead  to  obedience  to  this  exhortation. 

I.  The  wickedness  ov  soul-wandbbino.  The  exhortation  to  "return"  implies 
previous  estrangement.  1,  To  whom  laere  these  words  spoken  t  Not  to  the  heathen, 
but  to  those  who  considered  themselves  the  people  of  God.  They  knew  and  could 
recite  the  requirements  of  the  Law ;  they  took  part  in  religious  observances ;  they 
boasted  of  a  pious  ancestry.  Now,  therefore,  the  words  may  fairly  be  applied  to  those 
who  belong  to  a  Christian  nation,  who  are  familiar  with  Divine  truth,  but  who  know 
that  they  have  not  personally  returned  unto  the  Lord.  2.  Bow  does  this  wandering 
reveal  itself  1  There  is  an  estrangemenfr  from  God  which  is  easily  recognized.  One 
wanders  from  holiness  into  corrupt  imaginations,  evil  associations,  gross  habits,  till  all 
manly  virtue  or  womanly  grace  is  gone,  and  parents'  tears  or  kindly  words  avail 
nothing.  Another  wanders  from  truth  and  righteousness,  turning  his  back  on  these, 
because  they  seem  opposed  to  present  interests,  and  so  he  gets  entangled  in  crooked 
policy  and  tortuous  expedients.  Another  wanders  from  love,  till  there  is  discord  in 
the  home,  suspicion  and  enmity  in  the  heart.  All  would  admit  that  as  God  is  holy 
and  true  and  loving,  those  who  turn  from  these  virtues  show  that  they  are  turning  from 
him,  and  in  the  woes  that  follow  such  sins  a  voice  is  heard,  saying,  "  Come,  and  let 
us  return,"  etc  3.  Is  there  no  soul-ioandering  which  does  not  outwardly  reveal  itself  i 
We  are  more  concerned  about  some  who  are  guilty  of  sin,  but  not  of  crime  ;  who  are 
Irreligious,  but  not  immoral.  Their  condition  is  more  perilous,  because  less  likely  to 
cause  them  alarm ;  yet  what  more  lamentable  in  God's  sight  than  •  prayerless,  god- 
less man  ?  Illustrate  it  by  the  relation  between  father  and  child  in  a  human  home. 
Imagine  your  son  being  to  you  what  the  godless  man  is  to  God.  Tou  watched  over  his 
infancy,  sacrificed  yourself  for  his  comfort,  etc.  You  expect  to  reap  the  fruit  of  all  this 
in  bis  love,  to  be  glad  in  his  success,  to  live  over  again  in  him.  But  he  becomes  a 
man,  and  has  no  thought  or  care  for  you.  Cheerful  in  the  society  of  others,  he  never 
gives  his  father  a  look  or  a  smile.  Is  there  no  wrong  in  that,  even  though  he  may 
lulfil  his  duties  to  his  neighbours  and  his  country  ?  But  by-and-by  he  breaks  down  in 
his  schemes ;  his  brilliant  course  is  run,  his  friends  forsake  him ;  then,  poor  and  broken, 
he  comes  back  to  you,  and  in  your  pardon  and  kindness  he  feels  and  knows  what  you 
are,  and  how  true  all  along  your  love  has  been.  On  his  past  negligence  all  the  world 
would  cry  "  Shame  I "  Yet  what  has  he  done  that  the  moral,  respected,  yet  godless  man 
is  not  drfng  every  day  of  his  life  ?  To  such  the  message  is  sent,  "  Come,  and  let  us 
-etum  onto  the  Lord." 

II.  The  pukpose  of  soul-ohabtenino.    Qoi  is  spoken  of  hero  m  the  Wounder  of 


182  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  vi.  1—11. 


men.  This  would  be  a  strange  declaration  if  all  life  was  limited  to  this  world  by  tha 
abyss  of  the  grave.  Then  it  would  seem  as  if  we  were  created  for  suffering,  and  that 
the  assurance,  "  God  is  love,"  was  a  mockery.  But  we  are  destined  to  dwell  near  God 
eternally,  to  do  in  his  presence  a  service  for  which  we  are  here  being  prepared;  and 
anything  which  reminds  us  of  that  and  fits  us  for  it  is  to  be  received  tliank  fully.  A 
schoolboy  does  not  see  the  good  of  his  lessons.  Some  will  be  of  no  practiciJ  value,  but 
they  serve  the  purpose  of  mental  discipline ;  and  he  is  wise  who  learns  them  all,  for  he 
is  not  fit  to  discriminate  for  himself.  "  We  know  not  what  we  shall  be,"  but  we  do 
know  that  "all  things  work  together  for  good."  If  we  see  an  artist  begirining  his  work  on 
the  canvas,  we  can  make  nothing  of  the  first  streaks  of  colour ;  but  a  glance  at  the  fair 
scene  before  him  helps  us  to  know  what  he  is  aiming  at.  So  are  we  to  look  off  from 
our  troubles  to  our  Lord,  who  "  learned  obedience  by  the  things  that  he  suffered,"  and 
there  find  God's  ideal  for  us.  The  cross  of  Calvary  is  the  interpretation  of  the  mystery 
of  suffering.  It  we  were  told  that  griefs  and  joys  were  distributed  pruiuiscuously,  that 
we  must  merely  brace  ourselves  to  bear  "  the  slings  and  arrows  of  outrageous  fortune," 
we  should  gain  no  moral  good  from  obedience.  If  we  believed  that  sorrow  was  to  avenge 
sin,  that  it  was  the  beginning  of  punishment  from  a  vindictive  God,  we  should  have  no 
hope.  But  we  are  assured  that  the  griefs  and  los.ses  of  life  come  to  us  from  him  who 
"  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son"  to  redeem  it  from  sin;  and  so 
we  believe  that  their  design  is  in  harmony  with  that  great  puri  ose.  This  which  is  true 
of  the  Christian  life  in  its  couise  is  true  of  Christian  life  in  its  commencement.  The 
misery  of  shame,  the  agony  of  penitence,  constitute  the  broken  heart  and  contrite  spirit 
which  is  the  pledge  of  God's  love,  the  creation  of  God's  Spirit.  "  Ht  hath  torn,  and  he 
will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up." 

in.  The  promise  of  80DI.-hkalino.  (Text.)  When  Telephus  was  defending  his 
country  against  the  Greeks,  he  was  wounded  by  the  spear  of  Achilles.  The  Delphic 
oracle  declared  that  the  hurt  could  only  be  cured  by  a  touch  of  the  weapon  which  caused 
it.  The  oracle  was  obeyed.  Telephus  humbled  himself  to  his  foe,  and  by  the  spear's 
touch  he  was  healed.  To  those  stricken-hearted  by  the  thought  of  sin,  this  text  comes 
with  a  message  more  worthy  of  trust  than  any  from  Delphi ;  declaring  that  the  wound 
was  made,  not  in  wrath,  but  in  love ;  urging  return,  not  to  a  foe,  but  to  a  Friend — even  to 
"  Jehovali  Ropbi,"  the  Lord  that  healeth.  Let  us  turn  to  no  one  else,  lest  we  perish. 
If  a  surgeon  were  obliged  to  operate,  his  patient  might  flinch,  and  bid  him  hold  his 
hand  ;  but  true  wisdom  teaches  him  to  trust,  for  he  says  to  himself, "  He  has  wounded, 
and  he  alone  can  heal."  The  troubled  Christian  comes  to  God  in  prayer,  and  has  the 
deep,  sweet  assurance  that  his  Father  is  duing  all  things  well,  and  straightway  the 
bitterness  goes  out  of  his  grief.  The  sorrowing  sinner  goes  to  Jesus'  feet,  and  there  is 
made  glad  by  the  declaration,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."    Adduce  other  examples. 

Conclusion.  In  conclusion,  let  us  lay  stress  on  the  exhortation,  "  Return  unto  the 
Lord."  This  must  be  a  personal  and  deliberate  resolve  on  the  part  of  each.  Trouble 
has  no  magical  effect.  It  only  gives  opportunity  and  inclination  for  thouglit  and  prayer. 
It  does  not  of  necessity  turn  us  to  G.d.  The  sun  melts  the  wax,  but  it  hardens  the 
clay.  The  rain  blesses  some  things,  but  destroys  others.  A  child  may  be  chastised, 
and  yet  be  made  stubborn,  not  penitent,  by  the  discipline.  So  with  God-sent  griefs, 
inward  or  outward.  You  may  forget  them  in  gaiety,  in  work,  in  companionship,  and 
never  turn  to  God  at  all.  You  may  be  influenced  for  a  time,  but,  like  Bphraim,  your 
goodness  may  vanish  like  the  morning  dew  or  the  passing  cloud.  Think,  therefore,  of 
your  present  and  pressing  responsibility,  lest  your  sorrow  lead  to  the  despair  of  Judas, 
and  not  to  the  penitence  of  Peter.  Your  outward  sorrows,  your  inward  griefs,  are  from 
him  who  loves  you.  "  Come,"  then,  "  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord :  for  he  hath  torn, 
and  he  will  heal  us  ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up." — A.  B. 

Vers,  2,  3  (first  clause), — The  promised  Dayspring.  It  is  a  happy  thing  that  God's 
love  always  comes  forth  to  meet  man's  longings.  In  the  preceding  verse  Hosea  had  been 
urging  the  people  to  return  to  ihe  Lord,  but  the  exhortation  would  have  been  useles'< 
had  he  not  been  able  to  add  the  promise  in  the  text.  If  the  soul  of  man  had  to  struggle 
unaided  to  the  throne  of  God  and  to  win  a  revelation  for  itself,  the  task  would  have 
been  hopeless.  But  it  is  not  so.  We  are  not  like  the  idolaters  who,  on  Mount  Carmel, 
cut  themselves  with  knives  and  lancets,  aaii  cried  again  and  again, "  O  Baal,  hear  us  I " 


OH.  VL 1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  183 

while  from  the  brazen  sky  there  came  "  no  voice,  nor  any  that  answered ; "  but  we  speak 
to  the  Father  who  sees  in  secret,  till  the  sweet  sense  of  his  pardoning  love  sinks  deep 
into  our  hearts.  The  penitent  is  not  like  the  heathen  on  pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  shrine, 
who  sometimes  measures  the  whole  length  of  his  journey  by  prostrations  of  his  own 
body  on  the  hot,  dusty  road,  and  only  arrives  at  last  before  an  idol  too  deaf  to  hear,  too 
dumb  to  speak ;  but  he  resembles,  as  Christ  tells  us,  the  prodigal  who  starts  on  Ms  way 
home,  weary,  ragged,  and  heart-sick,  whose  father  sees  him  when  a  great  way  off,  and 
has  compassion  on  him,  and  runs  to  meet  him,  and  falls  on  his  neck  and  kisses  him. 
Such  is  the  thought  stirred  in  our  minds  by  the  promise  of  the  text  following  on  the 
exhortation  in  the  verse  preceding  it.     Here  we  have  a  threefold  assurance. 

1.  The  pbomise  op  new  life.  (Ver.  2.)  (For  the  different  interpretations  given  to 
these  words,  see  Exposition.)  The  obscurity  is  caused  by  the  seeming  definiteness  of  the 
words.  Too  much  stress,  however,  must  not  be  laid  on  the  actual  numbers,  any  more 
than  in  the  following  passages :  Job  v.  19 ;  Prov.  vi.  16 ;  Amos  i.  3.  The  main  idea 
is  that  in  a  very  short  time,  and  that  already  determined  in  the  counsel  of  God,  there 
should  come  certain  revival ;  and  that  this  should  be  when  to  onlookers  all  seemed  most 
hopeless,  as  to  Mary  and  Martha  when  Lazarus  ha'l  been  in  the  grave  "  four  days" 
already  (John  xi.  6,  17,  39).  No  doubt  all  spiritual  quickening  finds  its  centre  in  the 
resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  so  far  the  text  has  reference  to  that;  but  mainly  to 
the  revival  of  the  spiritually  duad,  that  they  may  live  in  Qoi'a  sight,  and  walk  all  day 
in  the  light  of  his  countenance.  Point  out  the  analogy,  so  often  alluded  to  in  the  New 
Testament,  between  rising  from  the  corruption  of  death,  and  the  uplifting  of  the  soul 
by  God's  Spirit  above  the  degradation  of  sin,  the  darkness  of  despair,  the  hopelessness 
of  doubt,  etc.  Indicate  the  first  si^ns  of  such  revival,  that  they  may  be  gratefully 
welcomed.  Insist  on  such  verses  as  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ,"  etc.  (Col.  iii.  1 ; 
iu  12,  13 ;  Eph.  iii.  1).  Show  the  fulfilment  of  the  text  in  Christ's  assurance :  "  I 
am  the  Besur^-ection,  and  the  Life  :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet 
shall  he  live  "  (John  xi.  25,  26). 

JL  The  hope  of  the  highest  knowlbikji!.  "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow 
i.n  to  know  the  Lord,"  Much  and  varied  knowledge  is  eagerly  sought  for  in  our  day. 
1 1  is  a  new  national  ambition  to  be  an  "  educated  "  people.  With  all  its  advantages, 
this  is  not  without  its  perils.  The  strain  of  competitive  examinations  may  divert  from 
the  culture  of  character.  Knowledge  of  God's  works  may  supersede  knowledge  of  God. 
The  skilful  use  of  material  and  mechanical  resources  may  lead  to  forgetfulness  of  spiritual 
forces — righteousness,  truth,  prayer,  etc.  It  is  the  highest  knowledge  of  which  we  are 
capable  promised  here.  1.  This  does  not  come  instantaneously,  as  in  the  flash  of  light 
to  Saul  of  Tarsus  ;  but  gradually,  as  in  the  three  years  of  his  waiting  in  Arabia.  The 
knowledge  that  God  is  in  Christ  may  be  given  suddenly ;  but  after  that  revelation  we 
are  to  "grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
'Z.  In  following  on  to  know  the  Lord,  the  whole  man  must  be  absorbed  in  the  pursuit. 
We  learn  a  problem  of  Euclid  by  mere  intellectual  effort.  We  know  the  sweetness  of 
human  love  by  loving  a  child  or  friend.  We  have  the  enjoyment  of  appetite  by 
ministering  to  it ;  and  so  forth.  But  as  God  is  the  Sum  of  all  good,  all  our  capacities, 
the  perception  of  truth,  the  love  of  his  Law,  the  submission  of  our  will,  the  obedience  of 
our  life,  must  be  absorbed  in  knowing  him.  The  light  which  shows  us  Christ  leads  us 
to  love  him,  and  loving  brings  us  more  light.  Knowing  God's  will  prompts  us  to  do  it, 
so  as  to  embody  knowledge  in  action ;  and  this,  again,  helps  to  deeper  knowledge.  "  If 
any  man  will  do  bis  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine."  In  obedience,  as  well  as  in 
pr.iyer  and  thought,  we  "  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord ;  "  and  though  as  yet  we  only 
linow  in  part,  that  which  is  perfect  shall  come,  and  "  then  shall  we  know." 

III.  The  cbbtaintt  or  Divine  intebposition.  "  His  going  forth  is  prepared  as 
the  morning  "  (literally, "  is  fixed  as  the  morning  dawn").  To  those  seeking  and  needing 
the  Lord,  he  will  reveal  himself  as  certainly  as  the  sun  rises.  Nothing  that  man 
can  do  is  able  to  impede  the  breaking  of  the  day.  Imagine  wicked  men  engaged  in 
some  conspiracy  or  burglary,  hoping  the  darkness  may  last  till  their  enterprise  is 
complete.  A  streak  of  light  comes  over  the  eastern  hills,  the  darkness  fades,  men  will 
soon  be  stirring;  yet  how  powerless  the  wroug-doers  are  to  hinder  the  change.  So 
resistlessly  did  the  Lord  appear  for  Israel  in  Egypt,  for  the  Jews  in  exile,  and  for  the 
soul  oppressed  by  the  powers  of  darUuess.     Show  the  appUcatiou  of  this  to  th«  coming 


184  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vi.  l-ll. 

of  Ood  in  Christ  Jems.  The  world  wag  in  gross  darkness.  Corruptions  prevailed 
wbich  are  described  by  profane  historians,  and  alluded  to  by  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to 
Borne.  When  things  were  at  their  worst,  the  angels'  song,  which  told  of  peace  and  good 
will,  was  heard  by  the  shepherds,  and  soon  the  authem  rang  over  all  the  world.  The 
great  light  which  illumined  the  fields  at  Bethlehem  was  hut  the  type  of  that  light  which 
now  "  lighteneth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world."  Christ's  going  forth  from 
the  Father  was  "  prepared  as  the  morning."  Show  from  the  present  condition  of  the 
world  the  need  for  some  Divine  interposition.  Allude,  for  example,  to  the  wars  that 
prevail;  to  the  standing  armies,  which  are  crushing  Christendom  by  taxation,  and 
weakening  it  by  the  withdrawal  from  productive  labour  of  its  manly  strength;  to 
the  conflicts  between  capital  and  labour;  to  the  unrest  in  the  minds  of  those  who 
are  asking,  "Is  life  worth  hving?"  etc.  Show  how  all  these  call  for  the  fulfilment 
ijf  the  text.  Because  it  will  be  fulfilled  we  may  be  hopeiul  of  the  future,  and 
believe  that  the  power  of  God  will  be  yet  so  manifest  that  it  shall  be  as  the  dawn  of 
a  new  day  to  a  dark  and  saddened  world.  Already  to  the  Church  the  summons  is 
lient :  "  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon 
thee."— A.  R. 

Ter.  3  (last  clanse). — Heavenly  blessings  for  weary  souls.  This  clause,  read  in  the 
light  of  the  context,  evidently  refers  to  the  outpouring  of  Divine  influence — in  other 
words,  to  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  As  the  earth  waits  for  the  rain,  so  the  Church 
waits  for  the  Spirit.  The  appropriateness  of  the  figure  will  be  seen  in  a  fair  considera- 
tion of  the  comiug  and  the  effects  of  the  descending  rains. 

I.  CoNSiDEB  THK  BLESSING  IN  ITS  coiiiNa.  1.  lioin  is  given  in  the  sovereign  bounty 
of  Ood.  Few  things  are  less  subject  to  the  control  of  man,  who  at  most  can  foretell  its 
fall.  Human  merit,  human  skill,  and  human  puwer  have  nothing  to  do  in  ruling  it. 
If  God  pleased  he  could,  by  a  comparatively  slight  change  in  physical  laws,  so  alter 
the  conditiun  of  the  world  that  the  clouds  would  no  longer  float  in  the  sky,  and  the 
verdure  no  longer  beautify  the  earth.  Our  home  might  be  transformed  into  a  world  like 
the  moon,  with  Its  awful  crevasses  and  stupendous  mountains  ungladdened  either  by 
rain  or  dew.  But  in  the  tender  mercy  of  God  lain  still  falls,  and  under  its  influence 
ferns  uncurl  in  the  woods,  and  the  cups  of  forgotten  flowers  run  over  with  blessing.  It 
is  God  who  "  so  clothes  the  grass  of  the  field."  He  only  can  transform  the  moral 
wilderness^  into  a  paradise,  and  lie  does  "  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him." 
2.  Sain  falls  generously.  Suppose  you  were  at  variance  with  your  neighbour,  and  shut 
yourself  off  from  him  by  a  lofty  wall,  so  that  you  could  not  see  his  garden  nor  he 
yours.  When  a  shower  fell  from  heaven  it  would  disregard  that  distinction,  and  bless 
alike  the  seeds  you  both  had  sown ;  nor  would  it  matter  whether  his  was  the  splendid 
park,  or  only  the  tiny  garden  where  a  few  flowers  made  the  soil  look  beautiful.  So 
generously  does  the  Spirit  come  down  on  all  assemblies  of  Christian  worshippers; 
whether  they  meet  in  the  home  or  in  the  church  ;  amidst  the  uncouth  expressions  of 
prayer  and  song,  or  the  splendours  of  an  ornate  ritual.  In  them  all  God  sees  tender 
flowers  of  joy  and  peace  whose  fragrance  is  sweet  to  him,  and  he  comes  down  on  tliem 
as  the  rain.  3.  liain  falls  seasonably.  "  As  the  latter  and  former  rain  upon  the 
earth."  in  Palestine,  where  the  steep  hillsides  were  cultivated  in  terraces,  the  soil 
would  suffer  readily  from  drought.  "  The  former,"  or  autumn  rain,  fell  in  September, 
blessing  the  seed-time,  and  making  the  earth  soft  with  showers.  "  The  latter  rain," 
falling  in  March  and  April,  filled  out  the  ears  of  corn  before  the  harvest.  So  that  to  a 
Jew  there  was  special  significance  in  the  promise,  "  I  will  cause  the  rain  to  come  down 
in  his  season."  If  either  of  the  rains  were  withheld  the  harvest  would  fail.  The  spiritual 
life  of  man  is  ever  needing  the  nourishment  of  Divine  influence,  Christ  is  "  the  Author 
and  the  Finisher  "  of  our  faith.  He  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  Christian  life.  The 
old  Christian  cannot  rest  in  past  experience,  nor  the  working  Christian  in  service ;  but 
each  must  ever  he  looking  out  of  and  above  himself.  Nor  can  we  trust  to  organizations 
and  Titual  for  revival.  It  is  wise  to  dig  canals,  and  build  tanks,  and  provide  means  for 
directing  the  rills  to  the  gardens  which  need  them ;  but  of  what  avail  are  these,  if  the 
rain  does  not  come?  We  may  use  our  watering-pot  during  a  drought;  but  how  small 
the  patch  affected,  how  poor  and  unsatisfactory  our  work,  compared  with  that  day  when 
God  visits  the  earth  and  waters  itl 


oH.n.1— Uj  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  186 

*  Diffuse,  0  God,  those  copions  showen, 
That  earth  ite  fruit  may  yield; 
And  change  this  barren  wildernesi 
To  Carmers  flowery  field." 

n.  OoMBiDEB  TH?  BLESSING  IN  ITS  EFFECTS.  1.  The  revival  of  drooptng  life.  Describa 
a  corn-field  in  spring-time  after  a  time  of  drought  Contrast  its  condition  after  a  week's 
rain.  Apply  these  pictures  to  the  moral  condition  of  the  Christian  Church.  Take  as  a 
typical  instance  the  condition  of  the  disciples  before  and  after  the  day  of  Pentecost.  It 
was  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  gave  them  new  tongues,  and  emboldened  them 
to  face  and  to  rebuke  a  hostile  world,  till  those  who  had  crucified  the  Lord  were  pricked 
in  their  hearts,  and  cried,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  2.  The  attractive- 
ness of  fragrant  life.  Nothing  is  more  beautiful  in  appearance,  more  pleasant  in 
fragrance,  than  the  garden  just  blessed  by  a  shower.  The  rain  has  brought  nourishment 
to  all  the  life  that  is  in  it;  but  each  plant  has  transformed  the  nourishment  into  its 
own  kind  of  beauty,  so  that  it  is  white  in  the  lily,  green  in  the  grass,  fragrance  in  the 
violet,  strength  in  the  oak.  A  Pentecostal  blessing  would  not  make  all  Christians 
alike,  but  would  increase  the  beauty  and  the  strength  of  each.  Indicate  the  different 
expressions  of  revived  life — in  the  increase  of  integrity,  self-sacrifice,  gentleness, 
devontness,  joy,  etc.  The  Church  should  be  attractive  to  the  world,  and  so  fiill 
of  life  as  to  possess  healing  power.  She  should  be  like  the  Lord,  around  whom  the 
sin-sick  and  sad  gathered,  and  virtue  went  out  of  him  even  to  the  skirts  of  his  gar- 
ments, and  "  as  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly  whole."  3.  2%e  blessedness  of 
a  useful  life.  The  Church,  represented  by  the  growing  grass,  exists  as  grass  does  for 
the  world's  sake.  The  grass  is  not  merely  the  pleasant  background  on  which  Nature 
may  weave  her  gorgeous  colours ;  but  it  is  also  the  fundamental  life  by  means  of  whicli 
other  things  and  beings  live.  Directly  by  his  use  of  com,  indirectly  through  eating 
the  flesh  of  animals  fed  on  grass,  man  is  absolutely  dependent  upon  grass  as  it  is  on 
the  rain.  So  through  ihe  Church,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  world  lives;  and 
in  this  is  found  her  highest  honour,  because  in  it  she  is  like  unto  her  Lord,  who  "  came 
not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many." 

Application.  1.  To  those  outside  the  Ohurch.  "  Break  up  your  fallow  ground :  for 
it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord,  till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you"  (ch.  x.  12). 
2.  2V>  those  within  the  Ghureh.  Be  like  Elijah  after  his  conflict  on  Carmel.  Let  the 
yearning  cry  arise  to  heaven,  and  let  your  hopes  go  up  often  to  catch  the  first  sign  of  the 
coming  blessing ;  and  we  shall "  hear  the  sound  of  abundance  of  rain,"  whereby  Qod 
will  refresh  his  inheritance  when  it  is  weary. — A.  B. 

Ver.  4, — Ood's  grief  over  evanescent  goodness.  There  are  times  in  a  man's  life  when 
he  begins  to  fear  that  he  is  too  impotent  or  too  sinful  for  the  notice  of  God.  In  the 
activity  of  the  day  he  may  be  free  from  such  a  thought ;  but  in  the  solemn  night,  when 
he  looks  up  to  the  vast  canopy  above  him  and  thinks  how  those  same  stars  have  been 
brooding  over  the  earth  amidst  all  its  changes,  there  comes  to  him  the  thought  of  David, 
"  When  I  consider  thy  heavens,"  etc.  Still  more-  is  he  oppressed  by  the  sense  of  the 
moral  distance  between  himself  and  God  which  has  been  created  by  sin.  If  only  infi- 
nite knowledge  can  reach  him  in  his  insignificance,  only  infinite  mercy  can  reach  him 
in  his  degradation!  Of  both  these  attributes  we  have  an  explicit  assurance  in 
the  tez(t 

"  Thou  art  as  mnoh  his  oare^  as  if  beside 
Nor  man  nor  angel  were  in  all  the  world." 

God  would  save  the  world  even  at  the  cost  of  his  Son ;  nor  will  he  give  np  the  sinner 
till  the  last  hope  of  saving  him  is  gone,  destroyed  by  the  sinner's  own  hand.  Our  text 
is  the  sob  of  a  Father's  heart  after  all  means  of  reclaiming  the  prodigal  had  failed. 

L  That  God  lonos  fob  the  salvation  of  men,  and  seeks  in  evebt  way  to 
EFFECT  it.  1.  This  kos  been  revealed  to  the  world.  Even  under  the  old  dispensation  it 
was  expressly  declared.  If  Moses  would  know  the  name  or  character  of  God,  the  Lord 
passed  by  before  him,  declaring  himself  to  be  "  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and 
abundant  is  goodness  and  truth  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).    Daniel  (ix.  9)  was  bold  ia  his 


186  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA,  [oh.  vl  1—11. 

prayer,  because  he  could  say,  "  To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  rorgivenesses, 
though  we  have  rebelled  against  him"  (see  also  Mioah  vii.  18;  Ezek.  xviil.  32, etc.). 
In  the  fulness  of  time  God  sent  his  Son,  that  men  might  know  his  love,  that  it 
might  be  "  commended"  to  them ;  yet  even  the  Son  of  God  was  cast  out  and  crucified. 
Illustrate  by  the  parable  of  the  wicked  husbandmen.  The  question  in  our  text  was 
answered  in  the  cross.  Beyond  that,  as  the  means  of  pardon  and  the  centre  of  attraction, 
God  can  do  no  more.  If  there  be  any  question  unsolved  respecting  the  absolute,  infinite, 
and  perfect  God,  we  find  its  only  answer  for  us  in  Christ — the  Embodiment  of  love,  the 
Fount  of  mercy,  to  all  who  come  to  him.  Give  examples  of  those  who  came  during  Christ's 
ministry.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father,  but  the  Son ;  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  shall 
reveal  him."  Compare  the  text  with  the  words  of  Christ  on  Olivet  (Matt,  xxiii.  37). 
2,  This  has  heen  proved  in  human  experience.  It  is  one  thing  to  feel  compassion,  another 
thing  to  show  it.  Much  seutimentalism  is  in  the  world  (stirred  by  fiction)  which  finds 
no  outlet  in  benevolence.  But  the  thought  and  act  of  God  are  one.  He  is  recalling 
here  what  he  had  done  for  Israel,  ai  well  as  what  he  had  /elt  towards  Israel,  when  he 
asked,  "  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee?"  Deliverance  from  Egypt,  help  in  the  wilderness, 
settlement  in  Canaan,  might  have  been  cords  to  bind  them  to  Jehovah ;  but  "  they 
soon  forgat  his  works."  Wealth,  success,  victory,  were  ascribed  to  political  skill  or 
warlike  prowess,  and  not  to  him  who  "gave  power  to  get  wealth."  Examples  can  be 
given  in  modern  history  of  nations  losing  sobriety,  self-restraint,  modesty,  thrift,  equity, 
etc.,  by  the  very  blessings  which  were  designed  to  keep  them  near  God.  Thus  is  it  with 
individvxds.  Their  lives  are  unwearied  by  pain  and  their  minds  uataioted  by  disease ; 
they  have  bad  no  heritage  of  evil  habit,  or  of  gross  shame  from  their  parents ;  in  their 
homes  they  are  encircled  by  love  and  baptized  by  prayer.  Whence  and  why  all  this  ? 
Is  it  that  strength  may  be  wasted  in  pleasure,  that  thought  may  feed  itself  on  the 
husks  of  Positivism,  that  success  may  generate  self-confidence,  that  men  may  be 
enchained  more  lastingly  to  earth?  "Knowestthou  not,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  that  the 
goodness  of  God  leadeth  to  repentance  ?  "  "  We  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by 
the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  (Text.)  Besides  all 
this,  sorrow  and  disappointment  have  spoken  unmistakably.  The  scheme  has  broken 
down  and  left  you  penniless ;  illness  has  swept  you  from  daily  work,  leaving  you  like 
driftwood  on  the  shore;  death  has  crossed  the  threshold, and  said,  "  Kternity  is  near ! " 
What  more  can  God  do  to  arouse  to  repentance?  Words  of  man,  inspired  as  messages 
from  God,  have  borne  witness.  Pew  in  this  Christian  land  can  say,  "  I  was  never 
warned  against  sin,  and  never  knew  that '  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself.' "  Bemembering  all  the  pleading  and  warning  sent  through  the  Churcli 
and  the  Word  and  the  home  to  conscience,  may  not  the  text  be  uttered  by  Jehovah 
over  many  ? 

II.  That  the  meaits  employed  to  bbino  kkn  to  bepentanoe  sometiuks  fah. 
TO  DO  MORE  THAN  AROUSE  teansient  fbelino.  "  Your  gooducss  is  as  the 
morning  cloud,"  etc.  Nothing  is  more  mysterious  than  the  struggle  of  Gh>d's 
Spirit  with  man's  soul.  Gh>d  created  free  men  and  accepted  all  the  responsibilities 
of  doing  so,  foreseeing  the  possibiUties  of  their  development.  Laying  aside  his 
power  to  rule  by  decree,  and  watch  the  work  of  automatons,  he  endued  man  with 
liberty,  so  that  it  could  be  said  to  the  impenitent,  "  Ye  do  always  rests*  the  Holy 
Ghost."  If  we  perish,  it  is  in  defiance  of  him.  It  was  by  fighting  against  God  that 
the  good  feeling  aroused  in  Israel  was  dissipated  like  the  morning  cloud,  1.  Examples 
of  this  transient  goodness  abound.  Hosea  saw  hearers  moved  to  tears,  knew  their 
resolves  to  have  done  with  the  idols  and  return  to  Jehovah;  yet  all  this  came  to 
nothing.  In  our  day,  some  visited  in  illness  vow  that  they  will  live  a  different  life ;  yet 
with  returning  health  comes  returning  indifference.  Others,  in  the  hour  of  temptation, 
are  delivered  by  the  uprising  of  tender  memories;  but  these  are  not  abiding.  In  brief, 
no  one  has  been  condemned  who  could  not  recall  good  resolves.  The  past  is  strewn 
with  their  fragments.  2.  The  illustration  of  transient  goodness  in  the  text  is  suggestive- 
Few  things  are  more  beautiful  than  the  cloud  tinged  with  the  rosy  light  of  dawn.  In  an 
Eastern  land  it  would  be  full  of  promise  too.  It  might  prove  like  that  over  which  Elijah 
rejoiced,  only  as  a  man's  hand  in  itself,  but  the  precursor  of  hosts  of  rain-laden  clouds 
which  would  deluge  the  world  with  blessing.  But  imperceptibly  it  vanishes;  and  once 
^une,  no  power  ou  earth  can  recall  it.   The  "  early  dew  "  is  exquisite  in  beauty,  scattered 


OH.  vt  1-11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  BOSSA.  117 


like  flaslilng  jewels  over  things  unsightly  and  base,  as  well  as  tipping  each  blade  of 
grass  and  filling  the  cups  of  the  flowers.  But  whea  the  sun  has  risen  the  dew  is  gone, 
and  soon  the  herbage  is  parched,  Huw  fitting  are  these  illustrations  of  tears,  feelings, 
resolves,  which  cause  hope  to  the  onlooker,  though  they  leave  the  life  unchanged  1  In 
the  irreligious  home,  amid  the  evil  companionship,  under  the  influence  of  the  sceptical 
writer,  through  the  business  of  life,  etc.,  these,  like  the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew, 
pass  away.  3.  The  peril  ofswih  transient  goodness  may  be  shown  by :  (1)  Its  gradual 
and  unnoticed  departure.  It  is  difScult  to  fix  the  mument  when  the  dew  disappeared, 
and  equally  hard  to  judge  of  the  time  when  religious  impressions  really  fade.  Probably 
Judas  had  no  expectation  of  earning  the  execration  of  men  and  the  curse  of  God.  His 
heart  must  often  have  been  touched  by  the  words  and  love  of  Christ,  yet,  resisting  these, 
at  last  he  imbrued  his  hands  in  the  Saviour's  blood.  (2)  The  woefulneas  of  having  such 
feding  gone  for  ever.  No  road  is  worse  than  that  which  has  been  often  thawed  and 
often  frozen ;  no  curse  worse  than  to  have  conscience  seared,  and  capacity  for  feeling 
gone.  Still  to  the  undecided  does  our  merciful  Father  say,  "  0  E^hraim,  what  shall  I 
donntothee?"— A.  B. 

Ver.  1. — The  Divine  EeaJer,  In  this  book  of  prophecy  we  find,  side  by  side,  the 
sternest  reproaches  and  denunciations  of  the  idolatrous  and  apostate,  and  the  most 
tender  and  gracious  assurances  of  compassion  for  the  penitent. 

L  Chastisement  has  been  inflicted  fob  sin.  The  language  used  is  very  vigorous, 
almost  rough.  God  is  represented  as  having  torn  his  people  as  a  lion  tears  his  prey,  as 
having  smitten  his  people  as  a  master  smites  his  slave.  At  the  same  time  there  is  no 
resistance,  no  resentment;  but  submission  and  an  implicit  acknowledgment  of  the 
justice  of  the  infliction. 

II.  The  afflicted  resolve  to  seek  the  Divine  favour.  1.  There  is  a  mutual 
admonition:  "Come."  What  is  not  easy  to  do  alone,  men  will  sometimes  do  with  the 
countenance  of  their  fellows.  2.  The  act  is  one  appropriate  in  itself.  If  it  is  wrong 
to  turn  away  from  the  Lord,  it  is  right  to  return  unto  him — to  seek  him  while  he  may 
be  found.  3  To  return  to  God  evinces  the  sinner's  faith;  it  proves  that  the  admoni- 
tions have  not  been  received  in  vain,  but  are  bringing  forth  their  fruit. 

III.  The  penitents  cherish  expectations  of  Divine  favour.  "  He  will  heal ; " 
"  He  will  bind  us  up."  1.  This  God  alone  can  do;  the  wounds  which  he  has  inflicted 
none  but  he  can  cure.  2.  This  God  is  willing  to  do.  His  chastisement  is  not  wanton ; 
it  affords  him  no  pleasure ;  the  end  of  it  is  answered  when  the  chastised  are  brought  in 
lowly  penitence  to  supplicate  »  restoration  of  favour,  a  renewal  of  blessing. — T, 

Ver.  2. — Spiritual  revival.  The  bold  and  daring  figure  of  this  passage  is  suited  to 
the  circumstances  which  call  forth  the  exclamation  and  the  assurance  of  repenting 
Israel,  as  it  is  in  harmony  with  the  vigorous  style  of  the  prophet. 

I.  Spiritual  insensibility  and  apostasy  are  spiritual  death.  There  is  a  moral 
death,  and  it  is  into  this  that  uno;odly  individuals  and  URtions  plunge,  as  into  a  black 
sea  of  unfathomable  depth.  It  is  trifling  with  sinners  to  tell  them  that  they  are  not 
quite. all  that  they  might  be.  The  Hebrew  prophets  spoke  plainly  and  faithfully,  and 
addressed  them  as  "  the  dead." 

IL  From  this  death  the  Lord  of  life  alone  can  quicken  and  deliver.  The 
prophet  does  not  profess  to  raise  the  dead,  nor  does  he  send  them  to  any  human  helper 
or  physician.  He  alone,  who  first  breathed  the  breath  of  life  into  the  soul,  can  rekindle 
the  expiring  flame.  By  his  death  and  resurrection  the  Divine  Saviour  interposed  upon 
the  behalf  of  a  dead  humanity.  In  him  was  life;  and  he  himself  has  foretold  that  all 
who  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  come  forth,  i.e.  to  a 
new,  a  spiritual,  an  eternal  life. 

HI.  This  work  of  quickening  shall  not  only  be  commenced;  rr  shall  be  pbb- 
FEOTED.  Kevival  shall  be  followed  by  raising  up,  and  that  by  life  unto  God.  Christ 
came  that  we  might  have  life,  and  that  we  might  have  it  more  abundantly.  In  his 
miracles  of  raising  the  dead,  we  notice  the  successive  stages  by  which  the  reality  of 
the  work  was  evidenced.  And  corresponding  with  these  stages  are  the  advances  in 
spiritual  vitality  and  all  its  proofs  and  signs  made  by  those  in  whom  there  dwells  that 
Spirit  who  is  "  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  life." 


188  THE  BOOK  OT  HOSEA.  [clvlI— 11. 

IV.  DimDENOB  EXPECTS  DlbAT  VK  THIS  PB0CES8  OT  QUIOKBNIKa,  WHICH  TBI  JJYIS0 

LoBD  DIBFBN8ES  WITH.  How  natural  is  the  shamefaced,  modest  hope  1  "  Not  perhaps 
yet,  hut  soon,  it  may  be  after,  a  delay  of  two  days ;  then  on  the  third  day  the  Lord  will 
revive  us."  But  the  word  goes  forth,  "  Breathe  upon  these  slain,  that  they  may  live  I  " 
and  lo  I  the  breath  cornea  from  the  four  wind*  without  delay,  and  the  deftd  bones  Uto, 
and  the  Lord  of  life  is  glorified. — ^T. 

Yer.  3. — ITie  guest  of  Divine  knovikdgt.  In  the  Old  Testament  prominence  is  given 
to  the  intellectual  as  well  as  to  the  practical  side  of  religion.  To  the  Hebrew,  religion  was 
no  mere  matter  of  routine  and  ceremony;  it  consisted  in  an  acquaintance  with  the 
character  and  will  of  the  Supreme,  and  in  a  practical  obedience.  In  this  the  authority  of 
Uld  Testament  Scripture  is  very  apparent.  True  religion  as  distinguished  fiom  human 
superstition  is  based  upon  an  appeal  to  the  intelligence. 

I.  The  AIM.  This  is,  "  to  know  the  Lord."  Such  knowledge  was  opposed  to  the 
idolatry  into  which  Israel  had  been  tempted ;  it  involved  recovery  to  the  worship  and 
service  of  Jehovah.  Bevelation  has  made  an  extended  knowledge  of  God  possible  to 
man.  And  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  our  heavenly  Fi^ther  has  made  himself  more  fully 
known  than  even  by  the  Law  and  the  prophets.  We  may  know  God  by  the  way  of 
discovery,  by  the  way  of  experimental  acquaintance,  and  still  more  fully  by  the  way 
of  voluntary  conformity. 

II.  The  ueanb.  This  ii  by  "  following  on,"  an  expression  which  implies  that  it  is 
not  by  a  single  effort,  but  by  sustained  endeavour,  that  we  are  to  come  to  the  know- 
ledge of  our  God  and  Saviour.  This  quest  of  Divine  knowledge  must  be  undertaken 
and  carried  on  urgently  and  strenuously,  in  the  right  direction,  under  Divine  guidance, 
pei'severingly  and  persistently,  and  without  discouragement, 

III.  The  fbouise.  "  Then  shall  we  know."  Or,  if  this  be  not  an  exact  translation, 
it  may  be  said  to  represent  the  spirit  and  tenor  of  the  passage.  "  Let  ns  know,"  t.e. 
we  may  if  we  will,  and  if  we  will  aright.  In  the  quest  of  other  kinds  of  knowledge 
we  may  be  disappointed.  It  may  be  too  high  for  us ;  onr  powers  may  be  too  feeble. 
In  the  pursuit  of  some  knowledge  success  may  be  a  curse.  But  this  is  a  sure,  a  precious, 
a  gracious  promise.  For  "  this  is  life  eternal,  to  know  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  he  has  sent." — ^T. 

Yer.  3. — Morning  and  thowers.  A  beautiful  description  of  the  privileges  and  joys 
appointed  for  such  as  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord.  His  gracious  visitation  is  compared 
to  the  brightness  of  the  daybreak,  to  the  falling  of  the  refreshing  and  fertilizing 
showers.  The  language  is  doubly  applicable  to  those  who  receive  the  gospel  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

L  A  BUGOESTION  OF  HUMAN  HEED.  It  is  implied  that  our  state  in  sin  and  ignorance 
is  a  state  of  darkness  and  of  drought.  1.  Absence  of  Divine  knowledge  and  favour 
are  as  darkness  covering  the  soul  with  gloom,  and  society  with  moral  night.  2.  The 
same  privation  is  as  drought  to  the  thirsty  land.  Where  no  water  is,  there  is  barrenness 
and  death.    An  emblem  of  those  who  are  without  God. 

II.  A  BEFBESENTATioN  OF  DiviKE  PROVISION.  1.  Ohrist  Is  the  Light  of  the  world,  the 
Morning  at  whose  presence  darkness  flees  away.  He  brings  daylight  and  healing  on 
his  wings.  Where  he  comes,  he  scatters  the  night  of  error,  ignorance,  and  sin ;  he 
sheds  the  light  of  truth  and  purity.  2.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  as  the  rain  which  falls  upon 
and  fertilizes  the  soil — as  "  the  latter  and  former  rain."  The  Spirit  of  Gtod  was  given 
in  Pentecostal  showers,  and  his  influences  are  diffused  throughout  the  Church.  These 
influences  are  like  the  rain — heavenly  in  origin,  silent  in  operation,  free  and  full  in 
measure,  yet  individual  in  appropriation. 

IIL  An  ANTICIPATION  OF  spiBirnAii  bescltbw  As  the  sunlight  and  the  showers 
co-operate  to  evoke  and  sustain  and  perfect  life,  and  to  produce  fruitfulness  and 
abundance,  so  is  it  with  the  provision  made  under  the  gospel.  Where  Christ  is 
preached,  and  where  his  Spirit  works,  there  life  abounds  and  spiritual  fertility  is 
apparent. 

Application.  1.  Acknowledge  the  Source  of  true  blessing.  2.  Come  under  the 
range  of  spiritual  influence.  3.  Seek  the  diffusion  throughout  humanity  of  these 
priceless  blessings. — T. 


cu.  TL  1—11.]  THB  BOOS  or  HOSKA.  '  IM 

Ver.  8. — The  rain.  The  climate  of  Palestine  differa  from  our  own.  Then  are 
"early "rains  at  sowing-time.  Eain  continues  from  autumn  until  spring.  That  which 
swells  the  com  and  prepares  for  harvest  is  the  "  latter "  rain.  Deficiency  of  rain  is 
fatal  to  the  hopes  of  the  husbandman ;  regular  and  abundant  rains  ensure  his  crops. 
Accordingly  these  rains  serve  as  figures  of  the  spiritual  influences  of  Gud  in  producing 
and  perfecting  spiritual  life  and  fruitfulness.  The  appropriateness  is  evident  of  the 
application  of  this  figurative  language  to  the  spiritual  economy  beneath  which  we  are 
privileged  to  live.  The  Holy  Spirit's  influences  resemble  the  latter  and  the  former  rain, 
inasmuch  as  they  are — 

I.  Heavenly  in  orioin. 

II.  Seasonable  in  bestowmemt. 

III.  Copions  in  measube. 

IV.  Unfailing  in  supply. 
v.  Refreshino  in  effects. 

VI.   QniCKENINO  TO   THB   LIFELESS. 

Vir.    PeRTILIZINO  in   ULTIMATE   RESULTS. 

Application.  1.  Recognize  an  historical  fact  in  the  Divine  outpouring.  2.  Believe 
a  faithful  promise  of  mercy  and  blessing.  3.  Act  upon  an  encouragemeut  to  earnest 
prayer. — T. 

Ver.  4. — Transitory  goodness.  The  climate  of  Palestine  is  dry,  and  accordingly  dew 
is  especially  precious.  Hence  it  is  a  natural  figure  of  welcome  blessings.  "  I  will  be 
dew  unto  Israel ; "  "As  the  dew  on  Hermon."  Bain,  too,  is  now  and  again  infrequent, 
and  is  therefore  longed  for  and  prized.  "  He  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown 
grass."  Both  dew  and  rain  are  necessary  for  vegetation  and  life,  and  are  appropriate 
emblems  of  highest  good.  And  as  a  light  dew  is  too  soon  scorched  up,  and  as  a  passing 
rain-cloud.disappoints  the  expectations  of  the  husbandman,  these  serve  to  set  forth  such 
good  signs  and  omens  as  are  not  fulfilled  and  realized.  So  they  were  used  by  Hosea 
with  reference  to  Israel ;  and  such  a  purpose  they  may  subserve  in  fixing  attention  upon 
superficial  and  transitory  goodness  wherever  it  is  found. 

L  A  CERTAIN  KIND  OF  GOODNESS  IS  ADMITTED.  The  case  is  that  of  an  irreligious 
man  who  by  some  means  is  led  to  give  attention  to  spiritual  teacliing,  and  to  take 
interest  and  even  pleasure  in  it.  One  hitherto  impenitent  now  sheds  tears  of  sorrow 
because  of  his  sin.  One  formerly  unrighteous  now  makes  efforts  after  justice  and  holi- 
ness, and  the  reformation  of  his  conduct  is  obvious  and  undeniable.  Among  the  young 
we  often  meet  with  cases  corresponding  with  the  figurative  language  of  the  text.  Deep 
impressions  seem  to  be  made,  if  we  may  judge  by  the  outward  and  unmistakable 
appearances. 

IL  Various  causes  account  fob  this  kind  of  goodness.  Events  which  have  happened 
in  the  order  of  God's  providence,  some  striking  calamity  or  bereavement,  some  faithful 
admonition  of  parent  or  teacher,  some  impressive  sermon,  or  some  startling  word  from 
Holy  Writ,  the  example  of  decided  piety  presented  by  some  one  near  and  dear, — any  of 
these  may  well  account  for  the  kind  of  goodness  described  in  the  figurative  language 
of  the  text. 

III.  This  kind  op  goodness  is  often  transitory.  As  the  dew  of  the  morning 
dries  up  in  the  blazing  heat  of  the  sun ;  as  the  gathering  cloud  disperses  and  vanishes 
away ;  as  the  blossom  of  spring  is  blasted  and  issues  in  no  fruit ;  as  the  splendid  sun- 
rise is  followed  by  an  unsettled,  dreary,  or  stormy  day; — so  the  promise  put  fcrth  by 
the  young,  the  ardent,  the  impreasible,  is  often  doomed  to  issue  in  disappointment. 
This  may  be  owing  to  natural  levity  and  fickleness,  to  the  influence  of  worldly  society, 
to  violent  temptations,  or  to  the  mere  lapse  of  time.  But  one  thing  is  indisputable, 
and  that  is  the  contrast  between  the  promise  and  the  fulfilment. 

IV.  This  kind  or  goodness  is  very  misohibvods.  And  this  in  many  ways. 
Spiritual  dryness  and  barrenness  return,  and  are  worse  than  before.  A  reproach  accrues 
to  the  religion  of  Ohrist,  and  a  discouragement  falls  upon  the  ministers  of  Christ.  Such 
cases  act  as  a  dissuasive  from  a  religious  profession,  and  they  are  destructive  of  the 
spiritual  prospects  of  the  unhappy  persons  who  experience  the  transitory  change. 

V.  The  fbelinos  with  which  God  contemplates  this  kind  of  goodness.  He 
i«  her*  represented  as  asking,  "  What  shall  I,  what  can  I,  do?  "    Such  an  inquiry  is  a 


190  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  ti  1— 11. 

reretetlon  of  deep  intereat)  of  willingnesa  to  nse  every  method  to  create  a  more  perma- 
nent impresBion,  of  grief  that  all  which  has  hitherto  heen  done  has,  alas  I  been  done  in 
vain.    What  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  heart ! 

VL  The  feelings  with  which  those  to  whom  this  description  applies  should 
BEOABD  THEMSELVES.  Such  should  ask,  "  How  is  our  superficial  character,  our  incon- 
sistent conduct,  regarded  by  God  ?  "  Taking  a  profoundly  serious  view  of  their  conduct 
and  state,  they  should  repent,  and  humbly  seek  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that 
their  bearta  may  be  as  goiod  soil,  bearing  much  fruit. — T. 

Ver.  6. — Mercy  tetter  than  taeriJUse.  This  is  one  of  those  sublime  declarations  ol 
Scripture  which  taken  together  are  a  proof  of  its  inspiration ;  one  ot  those 

"Jewels  five  words  long. 
That  on  the  stretch'd  forefinger  of  all  time 
Sparkle  for  ever." 

L  This  ntiNciPLE  is  contbart  to  thk  oustouabt  belikfs  bkoabdino  belioion. 
There  is  a  tendency  in  human  nature  to  degrade  religion  into  a  matter  of  ceremony. 
Beligions  which  in  their  beginnings  enunciate  great  spiritual  truths  often  sink  into 
schemes  of  ritual,  transactions  between  devotee  and  priest,  a  routine  of  sacrifices  and 
formal  observances.  Even  the  best  religions — ^those  which  originate  in  the  Divine 
wisdom — are  not  superior  to  the  debasing  influence  of  this  tendency. 

II.  This  principle  is  sanctioned  by  the  whole  tbachino  and  tbnob  of  Sobip- 
TURB.  It  was  grandly  expressed  by  Samuel  the  seer,  whose  spiritual  intuitions  were 
never  more  strikingly  evident  than  in  its  enunciation  in  the  memorable  words,  "  To 
obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."  It  was  repeated  by 
the  great  Teacher  himself,  "  Go  ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy, 
and  not  sacrifice."  And  when  the  scribe  summed  up  morality  and  religion  in  the 
memorable  saying,  "  To  love  God  .  .  .  and  his  neighbour ...  is  more  than  all  whole  burnt 
offerings  and  sacrifices,"  this  judgment  was  stamped  at  once  with  the  approval  and 
commendation  of  the  Lord. 

III.  This  principle  is  in  harmony  with  an  ehevatbd  and  just  view  of  the 
CHABACTEB  OF  GoD.  The  deitics  imagined  by  the  heathen  were  in  many  cases  of  such  a 
character  that  they  may  have  been  well  supposed  to  take  pleasure  rather  in  offerings 
than  in  virtue,  in  justice,  and  benevolence.  But  the  God  who  is  himself  all  holy, 
and  who  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  must  needs  detest  the  hypocrisy  that  is  scrupulous 
in  all  outward  observances,  but  neglects  the  weightier  matter^  of  the  Law. 

IV.  The  pRiNciPLB  is  one  the  practical  adoption  op  which  must  pbomotb  the 
TRUE  WELFARE  OF  HAN.  It  Is  Well  known  that  the  ceremonial  system  of  religion  which 
is  consistent  with  a  low  standard  of  morality,  debases  society ;  whilst,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  who  cultivate  an  intelligent  religion,  based  on  "  the  knowledge  of  God,"  and 
a  practical  religion  displayed  in  the  exercise  of  mercy,  are  the  very  salt  of  society. 
The  practice  of  thoughtful  inquiry  and  of  virtuous  living  gives  a  depth  to  piety,  and 
renders  a  profession  of  religion,  which  otherwise  would  become  a  laughing-stock, 
honourable  and  estimable  in  the  view  of  men.— T. 

Ver.  6. — Knovjledge  and  iMrey.  This  verse  may  be  regarded  as  embodying  true 
religion.     This  consists  in — 

I.  Knowledge  of  God.  There  is  a  presumption  here :  1.  That  man  has  a  nature 
capable  of  knowing  God.  2.  That  God  has  so  revealed  himself  as  that  he  may  be 
known.    3.  That  God  desires  that  men  shcjld  know  him. 

II.  Mercy  to  man.  This  is  the  human  side  of  religion.  The  laws  of  civil  society 
enjoin  justice,  without  which  communities  could  not  hold  together,  1.  The  exercise  of 
mercy  towards  man  springs  from  a  sense  of  mercy  received  from  God.  2.  It  is  prompted 
by  the  example  of  Christ's  merciful  life.  8.  It  is  performed  with  willing  cheerfulness. — T, 

Ver.  1. — Man's  highest  social  action.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord :  for 
he  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal  us ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up."  These 
words  are  to  be  regarded  as  an  address  by  the  prophet,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  to 


CH.  VI.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA,  191 


those  who  had  been  imitten  or  sent  into  exile.  They  mean :  let  us  go  no  more  to  the 
Assyrians  nor  to  any  other  incapable  deliverer,  but  "  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord ; "  put 
away  all  confidence  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  renounce  all  idolatries.  Take  the  words  as  indi- 
cating maa's  highest  KcUd  action.  Man,  as  a  member  of  society,  has  much  to  do  with 
his  fellow-men ;  he  should  contribute  to  the  advancement  of  general  knowledge,  to  the 
progress  of  political  purity  and  freedom,  and  to  the  augmentation  of  the  general  health 
and  comfort  of  the  kingdom.  But  there  is  a  higher  work  than  this  for  him  in  society ; 
it  is  that  of  sHmulating  the  community  to  which  he  belongs  to  "  return  unto  the  Lord," 
to  bring  them  into  fellowship  with  the  infinite  Father.  "  Come,  and  let  us  return 
unto  the  Lord."    Taking  the  words  in  this  application,  what  do  they  imply  ? 

L  That  booiett  U  awat  from  Gk>D.  Kot  locally,  of  course— for  the  great  Spirit 
is  with  all  and  in  all — ^but  morally.  Society  is  away  from  him  in  its  thoughts :  it  prac- 
tically ignores  his  existence  and  his  claims.  Away  fi:om  him  in  its  sympathies :  its 
heart  is  on  those  things  that  are  repugnant  to  his  holy  nature.  Away  from  him  in  its 
pursuits :  its  pursuits  are  those  of  selfish  and  carnal  gratifications  and  aggrandizements. 
Far  gone,  in  truth,  is  society  from  its  trua  Centre — Qod.  It  is  like  the  prodigal,  in  a 
"  far  country." 

U.  That  estranoehbnt  fboh  Ood  is  thi  boubck  of  all  its  tbialb.  Because 
the  prodigal  left  his  father's  home  he  got  reduced  to  the  utmost  infamy  and  wretched- 
ness. Moral  separation  from  God  is  ruin.  Cut  the  branch  from  the  root  and  it 
withers;  the  river  from  its  source,  and  its  dries  up;  the  planet  from  the  sun,  and  it 
rushes  into  ruin.  Society  has  left  Chxi— its  Boot,  Source,  Centre— hence  the  terrible  evil 
with  which  he  by  his  goy«mment "  hath  torn  "  it.  Ifothing  will  remove  the  evils  under 
which  society  is  groaning  but  a  return  unto  Qoi.  Legislation,  commerce,  science,  litera- 
ture, art,  none  of  these  will  help  it  much  so  long  as  it  continues  away  from  him. 

III.  That  betdrn  to  hih  is  a  possible  wobe.  Were  it  not  so  there  would  be 
no  moaning  in  the  language,  "  Come,  and  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord."  With  some 
estranged  spirits  in  the  universe  a  return  may  be  impossible  for  ever;  not  so  with 
human  spirits  on  this  earth.  There  is  a  way,  a  true  and  living  way,  by  which  all  may 
return — return  by  repentance  towards  Ood,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ.    "  Ood  is  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself." 

CoiroLcsioN.  Who  are  the  greatest  social  benefactors  ?  Those  who  are  the  most  suc- 
cessful in  exciting  and  stimulating  their  fellow-men  to  come  back  to  Ood,  to  return 
home  to  the  great  Father  of  love  who  awaits  their  return.  He  says, "  Come  now,  and  let 
us  reason  together,"  etc.  To  bring  society  back  to  Ood  is  pre-eminently  the  work  of 
the  gospel  minister ;  to  this  he  consecrates  his  power,  his  time,  his  all. — ^D.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Man  Ood-ward,  and  Ood  man-ward.  "  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow 
on  to  know  the  Lord :  his  going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning ;  and  he  shall  come 
unto  us  as  the  rain,  as  the  latter  and  former  rtun  unto  the  earth."  "  Let  us  therefore 
know — hunt  after  the  knowledge  of  Jehovah;  his  rising  is  fixed  like  the  morning 
dawn,  that  he  may  come  to  us  like  rain,  and  moisten  the  earth  like  the  latter  rain  " 
(Eeil  and  Delitzsch).  There  ar«  two  pursuits  in  this  passage — man  pursuing  Ood, "  fol- 
lowing on  to  know  him,"  and  Gh>d  as  a  consequence  pursuing  men.  ^  He  shall  come 
unto  us  as  the  rain."    Observe^ 

L  Mak  in  a  Ooo-wabd  dibbotiov.  '*Then  shall  we  know,  if  we  follow  on  to  know 
the  Lord."  The  particle  if  is  not  in  the  original,  although  it  is  certain  that  a  know- 
ledge of  Jehovah  depends  on  searching  after  it.  Two  things  are  here  implied.  1.  That 
a  knowledge  of  Ood  is  the  essence  tf  spiritual  goodness.  This  is  clear  from  reason,  and 
is  everywhere  taught  in  the  Bible.  By  a  knowledge  of  him,  however,  we  do  not  mean 
a  Mcientiflc  acquaintance  with  his  attributes,  relations,  and  works ;  but  a  sympathetic 
experience — an  experience  of  those  sentiments  of  justice,  truttifulness,  love,  and  mercy, 
which  are  the  inspiration,  the  moral  life  of  God  himself.  Philosophically,  we  can  only 
know  a  man  as  we  sympathize  with  the  leading  principles  of  the  man's  heart ;  and  it  is 
only  thus  we  can  know  Ood.  2.  That  a  knowledge  of  Ood  can  only  be  attained  hy 
earnest  searching.  We  shaU  know  if  we  "  follow  on,"  if  we  "  hunt  after."  Intellectually, 
whatever  may  be  the  amount  of  earnest  searching,  we  shall  never  know  him.  "  Who 
hy  searching  can  find  out  Ood?"  But  with  the  heart  we  may  know  him  whom  to 
know  is  "  life  eternaL"    Every  day  by  study  we  may  get  new  ideas  of  him,  every  day 


193  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  vl  1— 11. 

we  may  translate  those  ideas  into  emotions,  and  every  day  we  may  cherish  those 
emotions  into  dominant  forces  of  the  soul.  All  this  requires  the  most  resolute  and 
persistent  effort. 

n.  God  in  a  man-wakd  dieeotion.  The  man  who  goes  forth  in  search  of  a  heart- 
acquaintance  with  Jehovah  will  meet  with  him  in  the  way.  "  His  [that  is,  Jehovah's] 
going  forth  is  prepared  as  the  morning."  God  comes  forth  to  all  men,  hut  he  comes 
forth  in  a  special  way  to  all  those  who  are  pressing  after  an  acquaintance  wit^h  himself. 
1.  He  comes  to  them  full  of  promise.  "  As  the  morning."  What  a  delij^htful  season 
is  the  morning :  it  rings  the  knell  of  the  dark  night,  and  heralds  the  beauties  and 
brightness  of  the  coming  day  1  How  the  sufferer  in  his  midnight  agonies,  the  mariner 
in  his  nocturnal  tempest,  hail  the  first  grey  beams  of  the  morning  1  Tiie  night  of  guilt 
and  dark  foreboding  is  broken  by  the  morning  of  God's  manifestations  of  love.  We 
could  not  bear  God  to  come  to  us  as  the  high  noon — ^his  effulgence  would  burn  us  up ; 
hence  he  comes  as  the  morning.  2.  He  comes  to  them  full  of  refreshing  influence. 
"  He  shall  come  unto  us  as  the  rain."  What  a  glorious  change  seasonable  showers 
produce  on  the  parched  earth  1  They  touch  every  part  into  life  and  beauty.  Such  is 
the  influence  of  God  upon  the  heart  of  the  devout  inquirer. 

Conclusion.  How  sublime  the  destiny  of  the  truly  good  man  I  He  goes  forth  in 
search  of  a  knowledge,  not  of  the  creation,  but  of  the  Creator  himself;  and  the  Creator 
appears  to  him  full  of  the  promise  of  the  morning  and  of  the  influence  of  refreshing 
showeHi    What  i*  the  world  to  him?    Whilst  worldly  men 

"  Things  terrestrial  worship  as  Divine^ 
His  hopes  immortal  blow  them  by,  as  dust 
That  dims  his  sight,  and  shortens  his  survenr, 
Which  longs,  in  infinite,  to  lose  all  bounds." 

(Dr.  Toong.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  ^j—A  UKreefold  theme,  "0  Bphraim,  what  shall  I  do  onto  thee?  0  Judah, 
what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  for  your  goodness  is  as  a  morning  olond,  and  as  the  early 
dew  it  goeth  away." 

•What  shall  I  do  to  thee,  0  EphraimI 
'Whnt  shall  I  do  to  thee,  O  Judah ! 
For  your  goodness  is  like  the  morning  cloud, 
And  like  the  dew  which  early  departeth." 

(Henderson.) 

Here  we  have  a  threefold  theme  of  thought. 

L  Divine  solicitude.  Here  the  Inflnite  condescends  to  speak  after  the  manner 
of  men,  that  men  may  appreciate  him.  The  language  seems  to  imply ;  1.  I  have  done 
mtich  for  thee.  It  has  the  sound  of  another  utterance,  "  What  more  could  I  have  done 
to  my  vineyard  that  has  not  been  done  in  it?"  (Isa.  v.  4).  God  has  done  much  for 
Bphraim  and  Judah.  He  had  given  them  emancipators,  lawgivers,  priests,  prophets ; 
granted  to  them  for  ages  many  signal  and  merciful  manifestations  of  himself.  2.  /  am 
ready  to  do  more.  My  heart  overflows  with  compassion.  Your  rebellions  and  your 
iniquities  have  not  exhausted  my  love.  I  am  still  ready  to  show  you  mercy.  3.  I  am 
fettered  in  my  actions.  I  know  not  what  to  do;  I  am  nonplussed.  The  Infinite  has 
limits  of  action ;  Almightiness  has  restrictions.  All  things  are  not  possible  with  God. 
It  is  not  possible  for  him  to  tell  a  lie,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  be  immoral,  it  is  not 
possible  for  him  to  make  moral  intelligences  virtuous  and  happy  contrary  to  tlioir  will. 
Christ  said  to  the  men  of  Jerusalem,  "  I  would,  but  ye  would  not."  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  " 
What  wonderful  language  this  for  the  Infinite  to  employ  I  His  incapacity  at  this  point 
is  his  glory.     It  is  his  glory  that  he  will  not  outrage  moral  minds. 

II.  Human  pbbversitt.  The  right  answer  to  this  appeal,  "  What  shall  I  do  unto 
thee  ?  "  would  have  been,  "  Whatever  thou  wiliest,  Lord ; "  "  Not  our  will,  but  thiue,  be 
done."  We  cordially  submit  to  thine  authority,  we  loyally  acquiesce  in  thy  arrange- 
ments, we  lovingly  yield  to  thy  operations.  This  is  the  language  of  heaven,  hence  God 
knows  no  restrictions  in  his  operaiions  there;  all  go  with  him^  and  be  pours  forth  his 


OH.  VL  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  193 

love  freely  and  without  restraint.  On  earth  it  is  not  bo.  Men  Bet  their  willg  In  hostility 
to  his.  Tiieir  language  is,  "  We  will  not  have  thee  to  reign  over  us."  They  are  rebels, 
and  will  not  lay  down  their  arms  of  hostility  and  become  loyal  subjectB,  hence  they 
must  be  crushed ;  they  are  diseased,  and  will  not  accept  the  means  he  has  prescribed 
for  tlieir  restoiation ;  they  are  captives,  and  will  not  leave  their  cells  though  he  has 
thrown  their  doors  wide  open  ;  they  are  paupers  dying  of  starvation,  but  will  not  take 
from  him  the  Bread  of  life  wbich  he  offers  to  them  without  money  and  .without  price. 
Hence  he  sayB,  "  What  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ?  "  I  can  reverse  the  laws  of  nature,  I  qan 
break  up  old  universes  and  create  new  ones ;  but  I  cannot  make  beings  whom  I  have 
endowed  with  the  power  of  freedom  virtuous  and  happy  contrary  to  their  own  will. 
"Why  will  ye  die?" 

III.  Evanescent  goodness.  "  Your  goodness  is  as  a  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early 
dew  it  goeth  away."  Whether  the  goodness  here  refers  exclusively  to  human  kindness 
or  includes  some  amount  of  pious  sentiment,  it  matters  not ;  it  was  so  evanescent  that 
it  was  of  no  worth.  It  was  like  the  cloud,  empty,  fickle,  disappointing.  When  it 
appeared  first,  men  thought  it  had  in  it  the  refreshing  element,  and  they  expected  a 
shower  to  come  down  on  the  parched  earth ;  but  a  gust  of  wind  came  and  swept  it 
out  of  sight.  Like  the  "  early  dew,"  it  sparkles  as  diamolids  on  the  greenswanl  for 
a  short  liour,  but  is  Boon  exhaled  by  the  summer  beams.  Evanescent  goodness  is 
worthless.  Most  men  have  some  amount  of  goodness  in  them,  which  continues  for  a 
time  and  tlwn  pssass  away.  Goodness  is  of  no  worth  to  any  being  until  it  becomes 
suprerM  and  yer^cncnJ. 

Conclusion.  Thank  3t)d  for  endowing  thee  with  freedom ;  it  is  a  fearful  ^wer.  It 
gives  to  men  a  widely  different  destiss./  -sf  ;&  here. 

"  From  ti«  B*ai»  cradle's  side, 

From  the  same  mother's  Imee, 
One  to  long  darkness  and  the  frozen  tide^ 

One  to  the  peaceful  sea  I " 

But  a  destiny  in  eternity  infinitely  more  dissimilar.  It  leads  some  to  God's  heights  of 
blessedness,  others  to  the  deepest  depths  of  perdition. — D.  T. 

yer.Q.^Bighteousness  wnd  ritualism.  "For  I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice; 
and  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offerings."  We  shall  take  "  mercy  "  and 
"  knowledge  of  God  "  here  as  including  spiritual  excellence,  and  "  sacrifice ''  and  "  burnt 
offerings "  as  representing  religious  ritualism ;  and  the  idea  is  that  Jehovah  desires 
from  man  one  rather  than  the  other.  The  same  idea  is  given  in  the  following  passages ; 
"  Hath  tlie  Lord  as  great  delight  in  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  ?  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of 
rams  "  (1  Sam.  xv.  22 ;  Matt.  xii.  7)  ;  "  What  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do 
justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ?  "  (Micah  vi.  8) ;  "  Go 
ye  and  learn  what  that  meaneth,  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice :  for  I  am  not 
come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance  "  (Matt.  ix.  13) ;  "  To  do  justice 
and  judgment  is  more  acceptable  to  the  Lord  than  sacrifice  "  (Prov.  xxi.  3) ;  "  To  love 
him  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the  understanding,  and  with  all  the  soul,  and  with 
all  the  strength,  and  to  love  his  neighbour  as  himself,  is  more  than  all  whole  burnt 
offerings  and  sacrifices"  (Mark  xii.  83).  Why  is  moral  righteousness  preferable  to 
religious  ritualism  ? 

I.  Because  ritualism  at  its  best,  apart  feom  niaHTEOusNESS,  is  worthless.  We 
are  not  of  those  who  thunder  unqualified  denunciations  at  all  rites  and  ceremonies  in 
connection  with  religion.  Principles  to  show  themselves  must  always  have  forms,  and 
we  would  have  the  forms  ever  the  most  graceful  and  appropriate.  Science  is  the  ritual 
of  the  philosophic,  art  is  the  ritual  of  the  aesthetic,  tuneful  verse  is  the  ritual  of  poetry, 
Nature  is  the  ritual  of  God;  through  its  countless  forms  of  life  and  beauty  his  invisible 
things  reveal  themselves.  But  ritualism,  in  connection  with  the  religion  of  man,  must 
be  (he  effect,  the  expression,  and  the  medium  of  inner  righteousness.  Without  "  mercy  " 
and  the  "  knowledge  of  God  "  in  the  soul  all  ritual  observances  are  as  worthless  and  as 
revolting  as  the  motions  of  a  galvanized  corpse.  "  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ; 
incense  is  an  abomination  unto  me;    the  new  moons  and  sabbaths,  the  calling  of 

HOSEA.  0 


191  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  ti.  1-11 . 

asgembUeB,  I  cannot  away  with ;  It  is  Iniquity,  even  the  solemn  meeting.  Totir  new 
moons  and  your  appointed  feasts  my  soul  hateth  :  they  are  a  trouble  unto  me  ;  I  am 
weary  to  bear  them.  And  when  ye  spread  forth  your  hands,  I  will  hide  miue  eyes 
from  you:  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers,  I  will  not  hear  "  (Isa.  L  13—15). 

II.  Beoausu  righteousness,  apart  from  the  best  bitualism,  is  absolutely  valu- 
able. Spiritual  excellence,  whether  it  shows  itself  or  not,  is  essentially  good ;  it  is 
Ooti-like.  Like  electricity  in  the  material  system,  it  is  the  subtle  element  which  binds 
the  moral  universe  into  unity  aud  tunes  it  into  music.  Ritualism,  at  its  best,  has  only 
a  eircumstantial,  local,  and  temporary  worth;  hut  the  value  of  spiritual  excellence  is 
absolute,  universal,  and  eternal. 

Conclusion,    Beware  of  mere  formality  in  religious  worship. 

"  A  man  may  cry  '  Church !  Olmrch  I '  at  every  woti. 
With  no  more  piety  than  other  people, 
A  daw's  not  reckoned  a  religious  bird 

Because  it  keeps  a-cawing  from  a  steepla. 
The  temple  is  a  good,  a  holy  place, 

15ut  quacldng  only  gives  it  an  ill  savour ; 

Vhile  saintly  raouutebanks  the  porch  disgraee, 

And  bring  religion  itself  into  diiifavour." 

(Thomas  Hood,) 

D.T. 

Ver.  8. — DMm  institutioni  corrupted.  "Gilead  is  a  city  of  them  that  work 
Iniquity,  and  is  polluted  with  blood,"  It  is  supposed  that  Gilead  here  means  Ramoth- 
gilead,  the  metropolis  of  the  mountainous  region  beyond  Jordan  and  south  of  the 
river  jabbok,  known  by  the  name  of  Gilead  (Josh.  xxi.  28 ;  1  Eiogs  vi.  18).  It  was 
here  that  Jacob  and  Laban  entered  into  a  sacred  covenant  with  each  other.  It  was  once 
a  very  sacred  place ;  it  was  one  of  the  celebrated  cities  of  refuge  (Deut.  xx.  23 ;  Josh, 
xxiii.  28).  The  place,  which  was  once  a  city  of  refuge,  an  institution  of  the  God  of 
heaven,  had  now  been  desecrated  by  wicked  men,  and  become  the  scene  of  "  iniquity  " 
and  "  blood."    Observe  two  things — 

L  That  Divine  institutions,  specially  designed  for  man's  good,  abb  ofteu  oorbupted 
BT  HIM.  Gilead,  as  a  city  of  refuge,  was  of  Divine  ordinance,  designed  for  special  good. 
It  was  set  apart  for  protecting  men  from  the  injustice  of  being  put  to  death  as  murderers 
where  the  motive  to  murder  did  not  exist,  and  thus  preventing  the  shedding  of  innocent 
blood.  But  this  very  place  for  justi'ce  had  now  become  the  scene  to  "  work  iniquity," 
the  place  of  mercy  the  scene  that  was  now  "  polluted  with  blood,"  Thus  men  may — 
nay,  they  have  done  and  still  do — corrupt  God's  special  ordinances  for  good.  We  say 
special  ordinances,  for  all  Gods  ordinances  are  for  good.  Whilst  all  places  on  earth 
are  for  the  good  of  man,  Gilead  had  a  specific  appointment.  1.  The  Bible  is  a  special 
ordinance  of  God  for  good.  Men  have  corrupted  that.  They  do  so  sometimes  by 
denying  its  truth  altogether,  but  oftener  by  perverting  its  doctrines.  2.  The  gospel 
ministry  is  a  special  ordinance  of  God  for  good.  From  the  beginning  almost  God  set 
apart  men  for  the  special  work  of  indoctrinating  their  fellow-men  with  the  principles 
of  everlasting  rectitude  and  the  doctrines  of  redemptive  mercy— prophets,  apostles, 
evangelists,  pastors,  etc.  But  men  have  sadly  corrupted  this  Divine  institution ;  few' 
things  on  earih  have  been  more  corrupted  by  man  than  the  ministry. 

IL  That  Divine  institutions  specially  designed  fur  man's  good,  when  corrupted, 
become  the  worst  or  all  evils.  Holy  Gilead,  once  the  scene  of  Divine  mercy,  was 
now  filled  with  "  iniquity "  and  "  blood."  1.  A  corrupted  Bible  is  the  worst  of  all 
looks.  It  does  more  mischief  than  any  infidel  productions.  Political  tyrannies 
slaveries,  wars,  persecutions,  have  all  been  sanctioned  and  encouraged  by  a  corrupted 
IMble.  Alas!  the  millions  of  Christendom  hate  the  Bible— not  the  Bible  that  God 
gave,  but  man's  corrupted  version  of  that  Bible.  2.  A  corrupted  pulpit  is  the  worst  of 
all  ministries.  Popes,  archbishops,  bishops,  and  the  clergy  in  every  grade  in  aU 
Churches,  have  been  found  amongst  the  most  intolerant  despots  and  the  most  bloody 
persecutors  of  all  times.  They  consecrate  the  banners  of  the  warriors,  they  advocate 
the  cause  of  shivery,  they  have  ever  been  the  prime  obstructors  to  the  promotion  ol 
liberty  and  the  advancement  of  the  universal  rights  of  man.   An  old  expositor  has  nii 


OLtLl— 11.]  TflE  BOOK  OS"  aoSEA  IM 

"  The  clergy,  when  wicked,  are  the  worst  of  all  men ;  none  so  cruel  and  bloody."  It  is 
time  for  the  people  to  be  taught  that  a  pulpit  is  not  necessarily  a  Christian  or  a  useful 
thing.  It  may  be — alas  1  it  sometimes  is — the  corruptest  and  the  most  pernicious  thing 
ill  the  neighbourhood  in  which  it  has  a  place.  A  man  is  not  a  saint  because  be  calls 
himself  a  Christian;  a  building  is  not  the  "house  of  God"  because  it  is  called  a 
church,  a  chapel,  or  a  tabernacle ;  a  forum  is  not  sacred  to  the  utterance  of  gospel  truth 
because  it  is  called  a  pulpit.  Things  called  "sermons"  may  sometimes  have  more 
wickedness  in  them  than  infidel  tracts ;  places  called  the  "  houses  of  Gbd  "  may  some- 
times serve  more  efTectually  the  cause  of  the  devil  than  the  theatres  of  pleasure-seekers 
or  lecture-halls  of  sceptics;  Mere  names  must  not  rule  our  judgment.  It  is  the  policy 
of  the  devil  in  these  days  to  baptize  his  instruments  with  Christian  titles.  He  is  never 
more  powerful  than  when  he  occupies  the  sacred  desk,  writes  religious  books,  and 
quotes  the  Word  of  God.  There  are  wolves  in  sheep^s  clothing,  and  falsa  prophets 
now  u  ever. — D.  T. 

Ver.  11. — Naturalneu  of  retribution.  "  Also,  0  Judah,  he  hath  set  an  harvest 
for  thee."  Dr.  Henderson  ends  the  chapter  with  this  clause  and  begins  the  next 
chapter  with  the  latter  clause  of  this  verse.  Some  regard  the  harvest  here  as  need  in 
a  good  sense,  as  pointing  to  the  ingathering  of  the  people  of  God,  But  such  a  view  is 
scarcely  admissible.  It  evidently  refers  to  punishment,  and  some  suppose  to  that 
terrible  punishment  that  fell  on  Judah  as  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxvi.  6 — 9.  Divine 
punishment  for  sin  is  elsewhere  spoken  of  as  a  harvest :  "  Put  ye  in  the  sickle,  for  the 
harvest  is  ripe:  come,  get  you  down;  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow;  for 
their  wickedness  is  great."  "  Another  angel  came  oat  of  the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud 
voice  to  him  that  sat  on  the  cloud.  Thrust  in  thy  sickle,  and  reap :  for  the  time  is  come 
for  thee  to  reap;  for  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  ripe."    The  imagery  suggests— 

L  That  retribution  is  natural  in  its  seasoh.  There  are  the  "appointed  weeks  of 
harvest."  These  weeks  come  round  with  an  undeviating  regularity,  and  they  comn 
because  the  immutable-One  has  decreed  their  advent.  "  Seed-time  and  harvest  shall 
not  fail."  Punishment  comes  to  the  sinner  naturally,  so  far  as  the  proper  time  is  eon- 
cerned.  In  this  life  the  sinner  has  many  harvests.  Every  transgression  is  a  seed,  and  the 
seed  sometimes  grows  rapidly  and  ripens  fast.  In  truth,  to  some  extent  man  reaps  to-day 
morally  what  he  sowed  yesterday ;  not  the  wJu>le  crop,  it  is  true,  for  every  sin  is  awfully 
prolific,  but  some  portion.  The  law  of  memory,  habit,  causation,  render  this  constant 
reaping  inevitable.  No  man  can  do  a  wrong  thing  anywhere  or  anywhen,  witliont  its 
bringing  to  him  sooner  or  later  a  harvest,  even  in  this  life.  But  in  the  after-world  there 
is  a  full  and  complete  h&rvest.  All  the  sins  committed  are  there  ripened  into  crops  of 
corresponding  miseries.  Yonder  is  the  harvest ;  there  is  the  reaping — ^reaping — reap- 
ing, and  little  else  than  reaping  for  ever.  The  wicked  there  reap  "  the  fruit  of  their 
own  doings." 

II.  That  retribution  is  natural  in  its  bebults.  In  harvest,  the  man  reaps  <ke  kind 
of  seed  he  has  sown,  whatever  it  may  be,  barley  or  wheat.  Also  as  a  rule  the  mmount. 
If  he  has  sown  sparingly,  he  reaps  sparingly ;  if  with  abundance,  he  will  reap  abundantly. 
He  gets  what  he  wrought  for.  It  is  just  so  in  the  retributive  ministry  of  God.  "What- 
soever'a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  The  cheat  shall  be  cheated,  the  omressor 
shall  be  oppressed,  the  malicious  shall  be  hated.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall 
he  measured  to  you  again."  The  sinner  in  every  pang  of  suffering  will  recognize  the 
fruit  of  some  sinful  act  of  his.  He  will  feel  evermore  that  his  misery  has  grown  out  of 
such  a  sin,  and  this  out  of  that,  and  so  on.  Hence  he  will  never  be  able  to  blame  either 
God  or  his  creation  for  his  wretched  destiny ;  he  reaps  "  the  fruit  of  his  own  doings." 

III.  That  retribution  is  natural  in  its  appboacb.  As  soon  as  the  seed  Is  sown  and 
germination  begins,  it  proceeds  slowly  and  silently  firom  day  to  day,  week  to  week, 
and  month  to  month,  towards  maturition,  its  harvest  state.  It  is  just  so  with  sin ;  it 
proceeds  naturally  to  work  out  its  results.  "  Lust,  when  it  is  conceived,  bringeth  forth 
sin ;  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Punishment  for  sin  does  not 
require  the  positive  and  direct  interposition  of  eternal  justice ;  it  comes — comes  as  the 
harvest  comes — comes  by  the  established  laws  of  the  moral  universe.  In  truth,  sin  is 
more  certain  to  ripen  than  the  seed  of  the  husbandman.  Ungenial  soil,  foni  weather, 
nipping  frosts,  scorching  rays,  destructive  insects,  may  destroy  the  seed  in  the  ground, 


18*  tflE  BOOK  OF  ttOSEA.  tea.  tl1-11. 

■0  th»t  it  may  never  spring  even  to  blade.  But  sin,  unless  uprooted  by  God's  rederaii- 
tive  hand,  cannot  be  destroyed,  must  grow,  and  ripen  into  a  harvest  of  misery.  "  Be 
sura  your  sins  will  find  you  out." 

"  Though  the  mills  of  Ood  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small ; 
nioagh  with  patience  he  stands  waiting,  with  exactness  grinds  he  alL" 

(Longfellow.) 

D.  T. 

Vera.  1 — 3. — Returning  to  Ood,  AfSiction  is  represented  as  having  at  length 
accomplished  its  work.  In  the  far  country  the  prodigal  bethinks  himself  of  his 
father's  house.  He  comes  to  himself.  He  says,  "I  will  arise,"  etc.  (Luke  xv.  18). 
Thus  shall  Israel  at  last  take  with  them  words,  and  turn  to  the  Lord  (ch.  xiv.  2). 
The  words  stand  as  a  form  for  Israel  to  take  up  whenever  their  hearts  shall  turn  to 
the  Lord  (2  Cor.  iii.  16). 

I.  Retubn  to  God  eesolvbd  upon.  (Ver.  1.)  The  people  incite  one  another  to 
return  to  God,  as  formerly  they  had  encouraged  one  another  in  wickedness.  They 
strengthen  each  other's  good  resolves.  This  is  as  it  should  be.  Their  languag;e  is  that 
of  true  wisdom.  It  shows :  1.  That  they  rightly  understand  the  Source  of  their  afflie- 
tion,  "  Let  us  return  unto  the  Lord :  for  he  hath  torn,"  etc.  They  see  God's  hand  in 
what  has  befallen  them.  They  recognize  him  as  their  Ohastener.  They  own  the 
justice  of  what  he  has  done.  They  acknowledge  their  sufferings  to  be  a  just  punishment 
for  their  sins.  The  penitent  justifies  God  and  condemns  himself  (Ps.  li.  4).  2.  That 
they  recognize  God's  beneficent  hand  in  their  affliction,  "He  hath  torn,  and  he  will 
heal  us,"  etc.  They  no  longer  upbraid  God  because  he  has  dealt  thus  hardly  with 
them.  They  feel  that  they  deserved  it  all  and  more.  They  perceive,  too,  what  his  end 
has  been  in  the  tribulation  through  which  he  has  caused  them  to  pass,  viz.  to  subdue 
their  rebelliousness,  and  bring  them  to  repentance,  that  he  might  heal  them.  God's  rod 
has  always  kindness  hidden  behind  it.  The  true  penitent  owns  this.  3.  That  they 
have  confidence  in  Oods  power  and  willingness  to  restore  them.  They  argue  from  his 
power  to  smite  what  his  power  must  be  to  heal.  His  power  to  destroy  is  the  measure 
of  his  power  to  save.  Nor  do  they  doubt— perceiving  as  they  do  his  hand  in  afflicting 
them — that  if  they  return  they  will  be  graciously  received  (ch.  xiv.  2,  4).  The  sinner 
may  always  have  this  confidence  towards  God.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  afflicting.  He 
desires  only  to  lead  to  repentance.  When  the  sinner  returns,  lie  may  rely  on  a  warm 
welcome.  The  wounds  made  by  his  Law  or  his  judgments  God  will  heal ;  his  smiting 
will  prove  to  have  been  in  love. 

n.  Israel's  hope  in  return  to  God,  (Ver.  2.)  Returning  to  God,  the  people 
are  confident  that  God  will  "  revive"  them,  will  "raise  them  up."  The  terms  include 
both  national  restoration  and  spiritual  quickening.  1.  Revived  implies  a  previous  state 
of  death.  So  Israel,  in  her  banishment,  was  as  it  were  dead  to  God.  The  nation  is 
still  sunk  in  the  moral  death  of  unbelief.  Its  recovery  will  be  as  "  life  from  the  dead  " 
(Kom.  xi.  15).  The  soul,  in  its  natural  condition,  is  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins" 
(Eph.  ii.  1).  2.  Revival  is  an  act  of  Divine  power.  An  act  even  of  omnipotence 
(Eph,  i.  19).  Only  Omnipotence  can  "  open  the  graves  *  of  scattered  and  rejected  Israel 
(Ezek.  xxxvii.  11 — 14).  Omnipotence  is  required  for  all  resurrection  (Matt.  xxii.  29)— 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  20),  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  soul  (John  v.  25), 
the  resurrection  of  the  body  (John  v.  28,  29 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  35 — 58).  Only  almighty 
power  can  revive  the  Church  when  life  is  gone,  or  is  going,  out  of  it.  3.  Revival 
follows  speedily  on  penitent  return.  "  After  two  days  will  he  revive  us :  in  the  third 
day  he  will  raise  us  up."  The  words  indicate  a  short  period.  Israel  would  not  be  kept 
waiting  at  the  door  of  mercy.  God  hastens  to  meet  the  returning  sinner  with  his 
mercies.  David  was  forgiven  the  instant  he  confessed  (Ps.  xxxii.  5).  The  prodigal 
was  without  delay  reinstated  in  his  place  as  son  (Luke  xv.  22 — 24).  4.  Revival  is 
through  Christ.  His  resurrection  is  the  pattern  and  ground  of  every  other  (Eph.  i.  19, 20). 
Israel's  history  in  a  manner  recapitulated  itself  in  him.  His  rejection  and  death  was 
for  her  sins,  and  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  In  his  cross  the  judgment  of  God  on  sin 
culminated     Hi*  resurrection,  in  like  maaner,  conditions  «U  revival,    It  is  thercfrjio 


oa.  •n.l— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  197 

to  say  the  least,  signiRcant  that  words  should  be  used  here  so  exactly  descriptive  of  the 
period  during  which  Christ  remained  under  the  power  of  death.  There  is  probably 
a  glance  Christ-wards  in  the  passage,  5.  The  end  of  revival  is  that  we  may  live  tmto 
Ood.  "  And  we  shall  live  in  his  sight."  See  this  thought  developed  in  Rom.  vi  10, 11 ; 
2  Cor.  V.  15.    The  new  life,  having  God  as  its  Source,  has  God  also  as  its  End. 

III.  The  aspects  of  God's  gback  to  Israel.  (Ver.  8.)  What  God  wills  to  be  to  his 
people,  he  cannot  discover  to  them  all  at  once.  There  is  greater  fulness  in  him  than 
they  can  at  once  apprehend.  His  coming  is  like  the  daum — progressive,  brightening  by 
degrees  till  it  culminates  at  noon ;  and  like  the  rain,  falling  in  repeated  and  seasonable 
showers.  WouM  Israel,  therefore,  know  all  that  Qoi  is,  she  must  "  follow  on  "—must 
persevere  in  her  new  way.  God  would  open  himself  up  to  her  in  new  manifestations 
of  grace,  suited  to  each  step  in  her  advance.  "  Dawn  "  and  "  rain  "  are  influences.  (1) 
Heavenly;  (2)  gentle;  (3)  beneficent;  yet  (4)  distinct  in  their  effects.  1.  The  dawn 
is  primarily  enlightening;  the  rain  fructifying.  2.  The  dawn  gladdens;  the  rain 
refreshes.  3.  The  peculiar  effects  of  the  dawn  are  those  of  contrast;  the  rain  gives 
heightened  beauty  to  effects  already  existing. — J.  O. 

Ver,  4. — The  day-dawn  and  the  rain.  The  Jewish  doctors  found  in  these  words  a 
prophecy  of  Christ.  We  Christians  cannot  do  less.  It  is  Christ  whom  onr  faith  must 
grasp  under  these  two  figures — the  day-dawn  and  the  rain.  There  is  a  twofold  coming 
of  the  Son  of  God — the  first  in  his  own  Person  to  establish  and  confirm  the  gospel ;  the 
second  in  his  Holy  Spirit  to  apply  it  to  the  heart.  The  one  of  these  may  be  very  fitly 
compared  to  the  morning,  the  other  to  the  rain. 

I,  There  abe  poiktb  in  which  the  dat-daws  and  the  bain  bebehble  each  other. 
1.  They  have  the  same  manifest  origin.  They  come  from  heaven.  They  are  not  of 
man's  making  and  ordering,  but  of  God's.  It  is  not  less  so  with  the  gospel  and  Spirit 
of  Christ.  Man  neither  invented  nor  discovered  them.  They  carry  their  evidence  with 
them,  like  Heaven's  sun  and  Heaven's  rain.  2.  They  have  the  same  mode  of  operation 
on  the  part  of  Ood.  The  mode  of  operation  is  soft  and  silent.  What  so  gentle  as  the 
day-dawn  ?  What  more  soft  than  the  spring's  falling  rain  ?  And  like  to  these  in  their 
operations  are  the  gospel  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  When  the  Saviour  came  into  the 
world  it  was  silently  and  alone.  His  kingdom  came  not  with  observation.  The  Spirit's 
great  work  is  not  in  the  earthquake,  or  the  mighty  rushing  wind,  but  in  the  still  small 
voice.  3.  They  have  the  same  mode  of  approach  to  tu — in  perfect  fulness  and  freeness. 
They  are,  like  God's  great  gifts,  without  money  and  without  price,  and  they  come  with 
an  overflowing  plenty.  In  this  they  are  fit  and  blessed  emblems  of  the  way  in  which 
Christ  approaches  us,  both  with  his  gospel  and  his  Spirit.  4  They  have  the  same  ot^ect 
and  end.  It  is  the  transformation  of  death  into  life,  and  the  raising  of  that  which  lives 
into  higher  and  fairer  form.  The  gospel  and  Spirit  of  Christ  have  the  same  aim — life 
and  revival.     Christ  is  no  less  earnest  for  our  eternal  life  in  the  one  than  in  the  other. 

II.  There  are  points  of  distinction  between  the  day-dawn  and  thk  bain.  1. 
Christ's  approach  to  men  has  a  general  a/nd  yet  a  special  aspect.  The  sun  comes  every 
morning  with  a  broad,  unbroken  look,  shining  for  all  and  singling  out  none.  But  the 
rain,  as  it  descends,  breaks  into  drops,  and  hangs  with  its  globules  on  every  blade. 
There  is  a  wonderful  individualizing  power  in  the  rain.  There  is  a  similar  twofold  aspect 
in  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  gospel  enters  the  world  with  the  broad  universal  look  of 
daylight.  It  singles  out  none,  that  it  may  exclude  none.  But  Christ  comes  after  another 
manner  in  the  Spirit,  Here  no  man  can  tell  how  God  is  dealing  with  another.  He 
approaches  the  door  of  the  single  heart  and  speaks  to  itself.  2,  Christ's  coming  is 
conttant,  yet  variable.  He  visits  men  in  his  gospel,  steady  and  unchanging  as  the  sun. 
But  with  the  Holy  Spirit  it  is  otherwise.  For  the  rain  man  knows  no  fixed  rule.  It 
may  come  soon  or  late,  in  scanty  showers  or  plentiful  floods.  The  gift  of  Qod's  Spirit 
is  no  doubt  regulated  also  by  laws,  but  these  laws  are  hidden  from  us  in  their  final 
ground.  The  emblems  show  us  in  God's  working  the  two  great  features  of  law  and 
freedom.  3.  Christ's  coming  may  be  with  gladness,  and  yet  also  with  trouble.  What 
more  joyful  than  the  returning  sun?  But  God  comes  also  in  the  cloud,  and  there  is  a 
shade  over  the  face  of  nature — sometimes  in  the  thunder-cloud,  dark  and  threatming. 
There  is  gladness  in  the  gospel,  there  is  trouble  in  the  conviction  by  the  Spirit,  But 
Chri«t  comes  in  both.    4.  CSirist's  coming  in  his  gospel  and  his  coming  in  the  Spirit 


198  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  vl  1—11. 

tend  to  a  final  and  perfect  union.  They  are  indispensable  to  each  other.  The  gospel 
without  the  Spirit  would  be  the  snn  shining  on  a  rainless  waste.  The  Spirit  without 
the  gospel  would  be  the  rain  falling  in  a  starless  night.  Christians  need  both.  Some 
have  a  very  distinct  perception  of  the  gospel  in  its  freeness  and  fulness,  but  they  lack 
the  life  of  the  Spirit.  They  need  the  rain.  Some  experience  the  workings  of  the  Spirit 
in  conviction,  etc.,  but  they  have  only  a  small  portion  of  the  sunlight  and  the  joy.  Our 
souls  can  only  live  and  grow  when  the  sun  and  the  ihowera  intermingle.  (Adapted  from 
Dr.  John  Ker.)— J.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Evanishing  goodness.  So  froward,  heedless,  fickle,  and  incorrigible  had 
Ephraim  proved,  that  God  did  not  know  what  more  he  could  do  with  him.  The  same 
was  true  of  Judah.  The  tender  mode  of  speech,  "  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto 
thee?  0  Judah,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee?"  shows  how  loth  God  is  to  pass  from 
mercy  to  judgment.    His  heart  yearns  for  the  conversion  of  the  objects  of  his  solicitude. 

I.  Piety  valxjelbss,  if  evanbsobkt.  (Ver.  4.)  Ephraim  and  Judah  had  fits  of  piety 
— of  goodness ;  but  they  did  not  last.  They  are  compared  here  to  the  "  morning 
cloud" — the  vapour  which  the  heat  of  the  sun  sucks  up  as  the  day  advances ;  and  to  the 
"early  dew,"  thick  and  fresh  at  dawn,  but  soon  carried  off  by  evaporation.  Such  an 
instance  of  momentary  goodness  we  have  in  Bphraim  in  the  reign  of  Pekah,  when, 
rebuked  by  Oded  the  prophet,  "certain  of  the  heads  of  the  children  of  Ephraim"  com- 
pelled the  return  of  the  captives  from  Judah  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  12, 13) ;  and  there  would 
probably  be  instances  of  the  same  kind  under  the  preaching  of  Hosea  himself.  Note :  1. 
Hie  defect  of  this  kind  of  piety.  It  lacked  root  It  had  no  depth  of  earth.  It  promised 
well,  but  brought  forth  no  practical  fruit  of  righteousness.  The  nature  was  superficially 
moved,  but  there  was  neither  genuine  conviction  of  sin  nor  true  turning  of  the  heart  to 
God.  2.  The  manifestation  of  this  defect.  The  impressions  did  not  endure.  They 
hardly  "  dured  "  even  "  for  a  while,"  but  as  soon  as  "  the  sun  "  was  "  risen  with  a  burn- 
ing heat "  (Jas.  i.  2),  they  "  were  scorched  "  and  "  withered  away"  (Matt.  xiii.  6).  The 
test  of  real  piety  is  its  enduringness.  No  pie^  is  worth  having  which  will  not  endure 
the  heat  of  the  daytime — the  test  applied  to  it  by  the  everyday  work,  trials,  engross- 
ments, and  temptations  of  life.  Yet  many  have  known  no  otlier  piety  than  that  which 
consists  in  passing  convictions,  in  weak  desires,  in  good  resolutions  that  come  to  nothing, 
in  vague  and  easily  frustrated  efforts  after  amendment. 

II.  Judgment  inevitable,  if  kepbntanob  is  not  sinoerk.  (Ver.  6.)  "  Therefore," 
God  says ;  that  is,  (1)  because  of  the  failure  of  milder  measures  to  bring  Ephraim  to 
repentance ;  (2)  because  of  this  evanishing  goodness,  which  showed  the  necessity  for 
something  that  would  reach  the  depths  of  the  nature ;  (3)  because  of  the  sin  that 
waited  for  punishment,  and  now  must  be  punished,  seeing  that  the  people  so  utterly 
refused  to  turn  from  it; — " therefore  "  he  is  compelled  by  his  prophets  to  denounce 
judgments  against  them.  The  words  of  the  prophets  are  said  to  do  that  which  the 
judgments  themselves  will  accomplish — "hew,"  "slay" — to  indicate  the  certainty  of 
the  result.  The  thing  is  as  good  as  done  when  God  says  it.  Certainty  of  fulfilment  is 
a  characteristic  of  God's  Word.  His  judgments  would  be  "  as  the  light  that  goeth  forth," 
i.e. :  1.  Majestic.  2.  Obeying  a  law  (sunrise).  3.  Sudden :  the  lightning  (Matt.  xxiv. 
27).  4.  Bevealing  :  God's  judgments  reveal  the  sin  against  which  they  are  directed 
(ch.  viL  1),  If  the  reading  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "thy  judgments,"  be  retained, 
it  is  still  Gh)d's  judgments  that  are  referred  to.  They  belonged  to  Ephraim  m  falling 
upon  him. 

III.  SAORinoK  U8ELK8S,  IP  WITHOUT  LOTS.  (Ver.  6.)  "Meroy,"orloTeto  man,  is  the 
obverse  of  "  knowledge  of  God,"  and  the  proof  of  its  existence.  The  Law  is  summed 
up  in  love.  It  is  love  God  looks  for  as  the  reality  of  religion.  1.  Love  to  man  shows 
itself  in  kind  deeds.  It  is  not  a  thing  of  "  word"  or  of  "  tongue,"  but  of  "  deed  "-and 
of  "  truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18).  It  proves  its  reality  by  the  acts  in  which  it  embodies  itself 
(1  John  iiL  17).  This  love  is  the  substance  of  piety.  It  is  the  true  ritual.  "  Pure 
and  undefiled  religion  before  God  and  the  Father  is  this,  To  visit  the  fatherless,"  etc. 
(Jas.  i.  27).  It  is  this  class  of  deeds  Christ  looks  to  (Matt  x.  42 ;  xxT.  35,  36).  No 
one  ever  laid  such  great  stress  on  kind  deeds,  or  so  entirely  embodied  the  law  of  love  in 
his  own  life,  as  Christ  did.  2.  The  aisence  of  love  shores  itself  in  wicked  deeds — ^in 
injOBtice,  robbery,  violence^  ate.    These  M-e  the  orimei  here  charf^  against  Ephiaiip 


OH.  rn.  1—18.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  ROSEA. 


199 


(vers.  8 — ^10).  3.  Without  love  no  outward  service  i»  of  any  use.  No  sacrifices,  atms- 
giying,  prayers,  new  moons,  or  fasts  (Isa.  L  13—15 ;  Iviil.  3—8 ;  Matt.  ix.  13).  In 
vain  do  we  keep  sabbaths,  practise  austerities,  uphold  orthodoxy,  wait  on  religious 
ordinances,  and  engage  in  outward  works  of  piety,  if  this,  the  one  thing  needful,  is 
wanting  (1  Cor.  xiii.). — J.  0. 

Vers.  7 — 11. — JTle  &ro%en  covenant,  Israel  had  broken  covenant  with  God,  In  the 
rupture  of  this  bond  was  ruptured  also  the  bond  which  bound  society  together.  Fearful 
wickedness  was  the  result. 

L  The  BOND  BROKEN  WITH  God.  (Ver.  7.)  1.  77ie primal  sin.  "They,  like  Adam, 
have  transgressed  the  covenant."  Our  first  parents  were  placed  under  arrangements 
involving  in  them  the  essentials  of  a  covenant.  Through  breach  of  this  covenant  came 
"death  into  our  world,  and  all  our  woe."  2.  Israel's  sin.  God  made  a  covenant  with 
Israel  at  Sinai.  It  was  a  covenant  of  Law,  yet  it  had  mercy  in  the  heart  of  it.  It 
required  obedienee,  but  it  embraced  provision  for  the  removal  of  guilt.  It  asked  from 
Israel  only  the  pure  will  and  the  steadfast  heart.  It  conveyed  to  them  the  highest 
privileges,, and  conferred  on  them  the  greatest  blessings.  Yet  they  shamefully  broke  it. 
They  trampled  their  compact  underfoot.  They  traversed  in  every  direction  the  Law 
which  God  had  given  them.  8.  Owr  own  sin.  God  has  a  covenant  made  with  us  in 
the  very  constitution  of  our  nature.  There  is  that  within  us  which  binds  us  to  God 
and  to  the  practice  of  goodness.  We  find  ourselves  within  the  bond  of  this  covenant. 
Its  obligations  be  upon  us.  Yet  we  have  broken  it.  We  have  gone  astray.  Sin  is  the 
breach  of  this  covenant.  In  committing  sin,  we  know  that  we,  violating  law,  are 
guilty  of  unfaithfulness  to  God,  and  are  doing  violence  to  our  own  nature. 

II.  The  bond  broken  with  man.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  The  result  of  breach  of  covenant  with 
God  is  seen  in  the  open  throwing  off  of  all  regard  from  ordinary  moral  obligations.  The 
principle  of  love  being  dethroned — and  love  soon  dies  out  in  the  soul  that  has  cast  out 
love  to  God — self-will,  egoism,  greed,  evil  principles  of  various  kinds,  usurp  its  place, 
and  rule  the  conduct.  These  verses,  accordingly,  hold  up  a  picture  of  utter  lawlessness 
and  disorder.  Violence  filled  the  cities;  the  very  priests  took  part  in  highway 
robberies  and  murders.  Society  without  God  is  like  an  arch  from  which  the  keystone 
is  removed.  It  falls  in  ruins.  It  is  like  a  system  of  planets  without  a  central  sun — 
unable  to  maintain  its  independence.    It  becomes  a  scene  of  confusion,  a  chaos, 

III.  Iniquity  most  shameful  among  those  who  have  known  God.  (Ver.  10.)  This 
was  the  aggravation  of  Israel's  sin.  They  had  known  God,  yet  «rere  now  in  this  deplorable 
and  desperate  condition.  Their  knowledge  of  God  made  their  sin  "  an  horrible  thing  " 
— ^"an  abomination."  Specially  hateful  to  God  were  the  impurities  of  their  worship. 
He  would  punish  them  with  special  severity  on  account  of  their  special  relation  to  him 
(cf.  Amos  ill.  2).    Judgment  shall  begin  at  the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17). 

IV.  A  SIDE-WORD  TO  JuDAH.  (Ver.  11.)  In  the  judgments  that  were  about  to  fall — 
having,  however,  for  their  object,  not  Israel's  destruction,  but  her  salvation ;  the  turning 
of  her  captivity — Judah  might  be  sure  that  she  would  not  escape.  God  had  set  a 
harvest  for  hei  also.    What  applies  to  one  sinner  applies  mutatis  mutandis  to  another. 

-J.  a 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

This  chapter  may  be  divided  into  three 
sections.  In  the  first  section,  including 
vera.  1 — 7,  the  prophet  reproves  with  much 
but  deserved  severity  the  depraved  morals 
of  king  and  princes.  In  the  second  section, 
oonsisting  of  vers.  8—11,  he  rebukes  their 
sinfulness,  silliness,  pride,  and  stupid  ob- 
■tinaoy,  notwithstanding  the  many  manifest 


tokens  of  decay.  Otherwise  the  first  section 
deals  with  the  internal  corruption  of  the 
northern  kingdom,  and  the  second  exposes 
their  sinful  and  harmful  foreign  policy. 
The  third  section,  continuing  &om  the 
twelfth  verse  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  that 
is,  vers.  12 — 16,  threatens  the  infliction  of 
punishment  incurred  by  their  gross  wicl:ed- 
ness  and  base  ingratitude  to  Gkid. 
Vers.  1 — 8. — WhsB,  I  would  have  neaUi 


200 


THE  BOOK  OF  flOSEA. 


[CH.  VII.  1 16. 


Israel.  We  may,  with  some,  understand  this 
healing  of  those  CI)  piophetio  admonitions 
and  rebukes  by  which  God  designed  to 
cure  the  transgressions  and  heal  the  baok- 
slidings  of  his  people.  (2)  It  is  more  pro- 
bable, however,  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
partial  restoration  of  the  national  prosperity 
in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  II.,  who  "  restored 
the  coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of 
Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain."  (3) 
Jerome's  exposition  is  nnt  so  natural  when 
he  says,  "  The  sense  is :  When  I  wished  to 
blot  out  the  old  sins  of  my  people,  on 
account  of  ancient  idolatry,  Bphraim  and 
Samaria  discovered  new  idols ; "  the  old 
sins  and  ancient  idolatry  he  refers  to  the 
making  and  worshipping  of  the  golden  calf 
in  the  wilderness,  while  the  new  idols  were 
the  calf-worship  which  Jeroboam  of  the 
tribe  of  Ephiaim  institated,  and  the  people 
of  the  capital,  Samaria,  adopted.  Wlien 
God  would  heal,  or  as  often  as  he  proceeded 
to  heal,  Israel,  the  evils  broke  out  afresh,  or 
came  more  fully  to  light,  just  like  a  wound 
the  dangerous  nature  of  which  is  discovered 
by  the  surgeon's  probe  in  the  effort  to  heal 
it.  Then  the  iniqnity  of  Ephraim  was  dis- 
oovered,  and  the  wickedness  of  Samaria, 
The  sin  of  the  northern  kingdom  manifested 
itself  in  high  quarters — in  the  premier  tribe 
of  Israel,  and  in  the  capital  city  of  Samaria. 
"  Because,"  says  Aben  Ezra,  in  his  comment, 
"  they  said.  He  hath  torn,  and  he  will  heal 
us,  he  says,  When  I  was  disposed  to  heal 
them,  the  wickedness  concealed  in  their 
heart  stood  before  my  face,  which  they 
have  not  left  off  until  the  present  time,  for 
they  practise  falsehood;  by  night  they  steal, 
and  by  day  troops  (of  bandits)  spread  them- 
selves outside  the  cities."  Similarly,  Bashi 
explains :  "  When  I  was  willing  to  help 
and  to  heal  them,  their  iniquities  manifested 
themselves  before  me,  for  tliey  practised 
lying  constantly;  while  thieves  of  their 
number  entered  in  continually,  and  stole 
the  wealth  of  their  companions,  and  even 
their  gangs  spread  themselves  for  robberies 
to  rob  men."  For  they  commit  falsehood ; 
and  the  thief  oometh  in,  and  the  troop  of 
robbers  spoileth  (margin,  etrippeth)  without. 
Here  follows  an  enumeration  of  the  crimes 
of  which  they  were  guilty.  There  was 
falsehood,  or  fraud,  or  deception  generally, 
and  that,  not  only  in  words,  but  in  works ; 
next  comes  dishonesty,  both  in  public  and 
in  private.  The  thief  privately  entered  the 
liouses,  and  committed  burglary ;  gangs  of 
highwaymen  publicly  infested  the  roads, 
spoiling  the  passers-by,  or  rather  roamed  or 
spread  themselves  abroad  for  plunder,  since 
it  is  the  causative  conjugation  of  pashat 
that  has  the  signification  of  stripping  or 
■polling  others.  The  thief  witiiin,  the 
robber  mhs  without 


Yer.  2. — And  they  consider  not  in  their 
hearts  (margin,  say  not  to  their  heart)  that  I 
remember  all  their  wickedness.  Between 
the  common  reading  libravken  and  hilravken 
found  In  several  manuscripts  by  Kennicott 
and  De  Bossi,  there  is  a  not  unimportant  dif- 
fereiice.  The  latter,  equivalent  to  saying  "(» 
their  heart,"  which  is  the  usual  expression, 
denotes  one's  inward  thoughts  or  reasonings 
with  himself;  the  former,  equivalent  to  say- 
ing "  to  their  heart,"  is  an  address  to,  or  re- 
monstrance with,  the  heart  with  the  view  01 
restraining  its  evil  purposes.  God's  remem- 
brance of  wickedness  imports  its  punishment. 
Now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about. 
Their  doings  (I)  have  become  evident  or 
conspicuous  as  a  robe  or  garment  with 
which  a  man  is  surrounded,  or  a  troop  of 
body-guards  placed  about  him.  Or  (2)  the 
terrors  and  penal  consequences  of  their  sina 
have  surrounded  them  like  a  garment,  as 
we  elsewhere  read,  "  He  clothed  himself 
with  cursing  like  as  with  his  garment."  In 
this  latter  sense  the  iigure  is  rather  taken 
from  enemies  besieging  a  town  or  city,  and 
beleaguering  it  closely  all  around,  or  from 
lictors,  (.a.  officers  of  the  law  surrounding 
them,  or  even  witnesses  confronting  them 
on  every  side.  Kimchi  explains  the  sense 
as  follows :  "  Now  their  evil  deeds  surround 
them,  which  were  before  my  face  and  were 
not  hidden  from  me;  and,  while  they  receive 
the  punishment,  they  will  remember  that  I 
know  all  the  whole,  and  that  it  is  I  who 
return  their  reward  upon  their  head."  They 
are  before  my  face,  in  the  last  clause,  has  a 
striking  and  awe-inspiring  parallel  in  the 
ninetieth  psalm :  "  Thou  hast  set  our  ini- 
quities before  thee,  our  secret  sins  in  the 
light  of  thy  countenance."  Aben  Ezra's  ex- 
position is  somewhat  obscure ;  it  is  as  follows : 
"  They  think  that  I  do  not  see  them,  and 
they  do  not  observe  that  their  actions 
encircle  them,  as  they  are  before  my  face." 

Yer.  3. — ^They  make  the  king  glad  with 
their  wickedness,  and  the  princes  with  their 
lies.  The  moral  corruption  and  depravity 
of  Israel  were  extreme  and  universal.  They 
reached  from  the  rabble  to  royalty,  from  the 
common  people  to  the  princes  of  the  court. 
The  king  and  princes  were  in  full  accord 
with  fellows  of  the  basest  sort,  taking 
pleasure  in  their  wickedness  and  applauding 
their  lies.  (1)  Bosenmiiller  quotes  the  ex- 
planation of  Abarbauel  to  the  following 
purport :  "  He  (the  prophet)  means  to  say 
that  the  violent  men  of  that  age  were  ao- 
oustomed  to  narrate  their  atrocities  to  their 
kings,  that  the  latter  might  thence  derive 
entertainment."  It  is  much  the  same 
whether  the  king  and  princes  of  that  time 
took  pleasure  in  the  villanies  which  were 
perpetrated,  or  in  the  narratives  of  those 
villanies  to  which  they  listened.     (8)  A 


oa.  vn.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  flOSEA. 


201 


somewhat  difieieut  rendering,  and  conse- 
quently different  exposition,  have  much  to 
recommend  them :  "  In  their  wiokednesa 
they  make  the  king  merry,  and  in  their 
feigning  the  princes ; "  tlieir  wickedness 
was  their  diaholical  design  to  assassinute 
king  and  princes ;  with  this  object  in  view 
tliey  make  the  king  merry  with  wine  so 
that  he  might  fall  an  easy  and  unsuspecting 
victim ;  their  feigning  was  their  fell  purpose 
of  assassination  under  the  profossion  of 
friendship.  Such  was  the  desperate  treaoliery 
of  those  miscreant  conspirators.  This  view 
tallies  well  with  the  context. 

Vers.  4 — 7. — Vers.  4,  6,  and  7  are  linked 
together  by  the  figure  of  an  "  oven,"  common 
to  them  ;  while  4  and  6  have  also  in  common 
the  figure  of  a  "baker."  Further,  we  are 
helped  to  the  literal  meaning  of  the  meta- 
phorical language  of  vers.  4  and  6  by  vers. 
5  and  7  respectively.  They  are  all  adulterers, 
as  an  oven  heated  by  the  baker.  Whether 
the  sin  indicated  was  idolatry,  which  is 
often  represented,  as  spiritual  adultery,  or 
ailultery  in  the  literal  sense,  which  was  its 
frequent  accompaniment ;  or  in  a  larger 
sense  faithlessness  to  solemn  oblig.itiniis 
such  as  treason,  treachery,  or  perlidy  in 
general ;  it  was  their  habitual  practice,  as 
intimated  by  Piel  participle  in  its  iterative 
or  intensive  sense.  The  persons  charged 
with  this  sin  were  kuUam,  all  of  them — 
sovereign  and  subjects,  princes  and  people 
alike.  The  traitors  of  the  time  referred  to, 
or  rather  their  heart  heated  with  lawless 
lust  and  pernicious  passion,  is  pictured  by 
the  prophet  as  un  oven;  and  the  oven  is 
heated  by  the  baker,  or  more  literally, 
burning  Jrom  the  baker.  Who  or  what  is 
represented  by  the  baker?  This  may  be  a 
personification  of  the  spirit  of  treason  like 
tlie  spirit  of  whoredoms  (eh.  v.  4),  or  evil 
agency  that  impelled  these  men  to  their 
nefarious  deeds ;  or  we  may  understand  by 
tlie  "baker"  those  persons  who  were  the 
prime  movers  in  such  matters,  and  who 
instigated  others  to  become  their  tools  and 
execute  their  plans.  In  either  case  the 
burning,  once  commenced,  continued  of  itself; 
the  primaiy  instigators  had  no  difficulty  in 
seeming  agents  reaily  and  willing  as  them- 
selves for  such  bad  and  bloody  work,  and 
who,  once  set  agoing,  needed  no  further 
impulse,  but  of  their  own  motion  delighted 
to  carry  it  through.  Who  oeaseth  from 
raising  after  he  hath  kneaded  the  dough, 
until  it  be  leavened.  An  interval  of  time 
elapses  between  the  inception  and  execution 
of  the  work.  The  baker  oeaseth  from 
raising,  more  literally,  from  slirring  or 
stoking;  after  kindling  the  fire  in  the  oven 
he  lets  it  burn  on  and  leaves  off  stirring  it 
until  the  kneailed  dough  is  fully  fermented. 
This  respite  is  allowed  that  the  leaven  of 


vriokedness  may  do  its  work,  and  completely 
pervade  the  minds  into  which  it  has  been 
introduced,  and  until  matters  are  thoroughly 
matured  for  action.  Meantime  the  fire 
burns  steadily  and  sufficiently,  until  the 
oven  requires  to  be  more  highly  heated  for 
the  well-prepared  and  perfectly  leavened 
dough.  Thj  use  of  the  participle  T^p  is 
well  explained  by  the  principle  stated  by 
Ewald  as  follows:  "Just  as  the  idea  of  the 
verb  'to  be'  is  placed  in  Immediate  con- 
struction with  the  word  which  more  exactly 
forms  the  predicate,  so  also  may  those  verbs 
which  describe  u  somewhat  more  speoiflc 
kind  of  being,  e.g.  verba  which  signify 
•  commencing '  to  be,  i.e.  becoming  .  .  . 
verbs  of  hastening,  i.e.  quickly  becoming 
.  .  .  and  those  of  ceasing  to  be,  Hos.  vii.  4. 
.  .  .  The  following  verb,  if  such  a  word  be 
required  for  the  more  specific  predicate,  most 
rendily  chooses  the  participial  form  .  . .  verbs 
denoting  continuance  would  be  constructed 
in  ttie  same  way."  The  particle  nv,  equiva- 
lent to  utqUe  ad,  implies  the  completeness 
of  the  leavening. 

Ver.  5. — In  the  day  of  our  king.  This 
may  mean  the  anniversary  of  his  birth — his 
birthday  celebration,  or  the  anuiversary  of 
bis  accession  or  coronation ;  or  it  may  have 
been  used  in  an  ambiguous  sense,  and  to 
include  the  day  of  his  destruction,  like  the 
tragic  irony  or  contrast  between  the  know- 
ledge of  the  spectator  and  the  supposed 
ignorance  of  the  actor.  The  expression 
"our"  is  either  a  real  acknowledj;ment  of 
the  kings  of  Israel,  or  rather  the  lip-loyalty 
of  the  traitorous  princes  who  were  com- 
passing liis  ruin.  The  princes  have  made 
him  sick  with  bottles  of  wiae.  The  literal 
rendering  is,  have  made  sick  the  heat  of 
wine ;  i.e.  made  him  sick  with  heat  from 
wine.  The  construction  resembles  Micah 
vi.  13,  "  I  will  make  sick  tliy  smiting  ; "  i.e. 
I  will  make  thee  sick  through  smiling  thee. 
The  heat  from  wine  repeats  in  some  sort 
the  preceding  figure  of  a  heated  oven.  The 
object  of  these  wretches  was  twofold — ^to 
indame  their  passion,  and  nerve  their  hands 
for  the  bloody  work  on  which  they  were 
set;  and  to  leave  the  king  powerless,  a 
helpless  victim  in  their  hands.  He  stretched 
out  his  hand  with  soorners.  Whatever  the 
real  origin  of  this  phrase  may  be,  the 
meaning  is  plain — he  joined  in  fellowship 
with  those  wicked  princes,  and  took  part  on 
terms'of  equality  with  them  in  their  brutish 
debauch  and  profane  carousal.  He  stretched 
out  his  hand  and  hailed  them  as  boon- 
companions. 

Ver.  6. — For  they  have  made  ready  their 
heart  like  an  oven,  whiles  they  Ue  in  wait : 
their  baker  sleepeth  all  the  night;  in  the 
morning  it  burneth  as  a  flaming  fire.  Their 
heart  is  the  oven,  as  the  oomparison  here 


202 


THE  BOOK  OB*  HOSEA. 


[CH.  vlt  1—16. 


teaeheB  ns ;  the  fire  by  which  it  is  inflamed  i 
ig  the  fire  of  sinful  passion,  and  the  fuel 
that  feeds  the  flame  ia  the  murderous  ma- 
ohination  on  which  they  are  at  present  so 
intent;  the  baker  is  either  the  original 
contrivers  and  prompters  of  their  wicked- 
ness, or  their  own  wicked  spirit,  or  the  evil 
one  himself  at  the  head  of  all.  But,  though 
there  is  a  temporary  suspension,  there  is  no 
real  cessation  of  their  evil  purpose;  they 
are  only  biding  their  time,  lying  in  wait : 
the  baker  sleeps,  but  it  is  only  whilst  the 
dough  is  leavening.  Soon  as  the  suitable 
time  has  come,  soon  as  the  occasion  has 
arrived,  and  all  circumstances  in  readiness, 
in  the  morning  the  baker  rouses  from  his 
nocturnal  slumber,  stirs  up  the  fire,  and  sets 
the  oven  ablaze.  Now  that  the  dough  is 
sufficiently  leavened,  and  the  oven  tho- 
loughly  heated,  the  bread  is  put  in — the 
meditated  assassination  is  accomplished — it 
bumeth  <M  a  flaming  fire.  This  is  tlie  second 
and  last  stage  of  the  proceeding,  the  last 
scene  of  the  last  act  of  the  tragic  drama. 

Yer.  7. — ^Ihey  are  all  hot  as  an  oven,  and 
have  devonred  their  judges;  all  their  kings 
are  fallen.  Here  we  have  the  application, 
and  so  the  explanation  of  the  figurative 
language  of  the  preceding  verse,  which,  as 
we  have  seen,  is  the  second  stage  of  the 
action.  The  heat  of  the  oven  denotes  the 
intense  violence  of  their  passion,  as  also 
their  fierce  and  fiery  power  of  destruction. 
Inferior  rulers  and  magistrates  fell  victims 
to  it ;  while  regicides  in  incredible  number 
were  the  result  of  it.  Three  regicides  were 
perpetrated  in  thirteen  years;  and  four  in 
less  than  forty,  the  victims  being  Zechariah, 
Shallum,  Fekahiah,  and  Fekah.  Also 
Nadab,  Elah,  Zimri,  Zibni,  and  Jelioram 
perislied  by  their  successors.  There  is  none 
among  them  that  oalleth  unto  me.  Amid 
such  horrid  scenes  of  blood  and  violence, 
of  disorder  and  anarchy,  there  was  none  of 
tliem  to  realize  the  calamities  of  the  times 
or  recognize  the  cause.  Consequently  there 
was  no  one  to  discover  the  remedy,  and 
apply  to  the  true  and  only  source  of  relief. 

SUPPLEMENTABT  NoTKI. 

Ver.  4. — The  difficulty  of  the  section  in- 
cluding vers.  4 — 7  has  occasioned  consider- 
able difference  of  exposition ;  it  may  not, 
therefore,  be  amiss  to  supplement  the  fore- 
going observations.  1.  Abeu  Ezra  accounts 
for  mya  being  accented  as  mild  (1)  on  the 
ground  that,  though  a  feminine  formation,  it 
18  really  masculine  (to  agree  with  ni]n),like 
n^nj  and  rh'h,  both  of  which,  though  femi- 
nine in  form,  are  notwithstanding  of  the 
masculine  gender.  Abarbanel,  who  is  fol- 
lowed by  Wiinsche,  (2)  takes  ni]pS  as  a  par- 
tioiple  feminine  for  rnj;3  or  rny^  which  is 


justified  by  the  circumstance  that  the  names 
of  fire  and  of  what  is  connected  therewith 
ore  feminine  in  the  Semitic,  so  that  -mn  is 
feminine.  2.  The  word  TJfs,  which  Ewald 
and  others  take,  properly  we  think,  (1)  as 
participle  of  Hiph.,  is  treated  (2)  by  Gese- 
nins  and  Maurer  as  infinitive  Qal  vrith  min 
prefixed,  which  would  occasion  the  awkward 
and  unusual  combination  of  two  infinitives 
each  prefixed  with  min  in  immediate  se- 
quence; while  (3)  Kimchi  takes  it  as  in- 
finitive Hiph.  contracted  for  T]7np.  3. 
More  important  still  is  the  interpretation  of 
the  verse.  There  is  (1)  that  already  given, 
and  which  is  in  some  measure  supported  by 
the  following  rabbinic  comments:  "Their 
evil  passion,"  says  Kashi, "  which  stirs  them 
up,  rests  from  kneading  the  dough  until  it 
is  leavened,  t.e.  from  the  time  that  any  one 
has  thought  on  evil  in  his  heart  how  he 
shall  execute  it,  he  rests  and  sleeps  till  the 
morning,  when  he  shall  be  able  to  execute 
it,  as  the  baker  rests  from  kneading  the 
dough  until  it  is  leavened,  when  be  can 
bake  it."  Similar  and  yet  somewhat  peculiar 
is  the  concluding  portion  of  Eimchi's  com- 
ment: "As  soon  as  he  lays  the  pieces  of 
wood  into  the  oven,  in  order  to  heat  it,  he 
commands  the  women  to  knead,  and  he 
ceases  to  stir  them  (the  women)  up  until 
the  dough  is  leavened,  as  he  estimate  it  in 
his  heart,  and  then  he  rouses  them  to  come 
with  the  dough  to  bake  it.  And  this  is  the 
time  when  the  oven  is  heated."  (2)  The 
LXX.  takes  fj)  as  a  noun  prefixed  with 
the  preposition  min  Qairh  ttjs  <ti\oy6s),  and 
translates  the  whole  as  follows :  "  They  are 
all  adulterers,  as  an  oven  glowing  from 
fiame  for  hot-baking,  from  the  kneading  of 
the  dough  until  it  is  leavened."  The  inter- 
pretation (3)  of  Wiinsche  differs  considerably 
from  both  the  preceding;  it  is,  "They  are 
all  adulterers,  like  an  oven,  burning  &om  a 
baker,  who  re»t$  while  ttoking  from  the 
kneading  of  the  dough  till  its  fermenta- 
tion;" and  he  cites  in  favour  of  this  view 
Aben  Ezra  as  follows:  "This  verse  is  in- 
verted, and  accordingly  the  sense  is:  As 
the  oven  of  a  baker  bumeth  from  the 
kneading  of  the  dougli  till  its  fermentation, 
so  that  the  baker  can  scarcely  cease  to  stir 
it  up,  but  must  stir  it  up  and  heat  it 
violently." 

Ver.  5. — A  like  diversity  of  exposition  is 
found  in  connection  with  ver.  5,  at  least  its 
first  clause.  1.  There  is  (1)  the  rendering 
already  given;  but  (2)  Wiinsche,  taking 
^^nn  from  ^^n,  to  begin,  as  is  done  by  the 
LXX.,  Syriao,  Chaldee,  and  Jerome,  trans- 
lates: "  The  princes  begin  [i.e.  open]  the  day 
of  our  king  in  the  heat  <h  wine."  Conse- 
quently, yom  is  (a)  the  object  of  this  verb; 
while,  (b)  according  to  the  usual  rendering, 
it  is  the  accuisative  of  time,  equivalent  to 


CH.  VII.  1 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


208 


oVa;  others  ngain  (e)  take  the  word  as  a 
nominative  absolute,  or  translate  the  clause 
as  an  independent  one;  thus  Simson:  "It 
is  the  day  of  our  king."  2.  Again,  nnn. 
St.  construct  of  nan,  from  the  root  ddpi  or  on' 
(for  the  construct  state  is  used,  not  only  for 
tlie  genitive-relation,  but  also  before  pre- 
positions, the  relative  pronoun,  relative 
clauses,  even  vav  copulative,  etc.),  ia  (1)  the 
accusative  of  the  clause,  equivalent  to  "  in 
the  heat  (proceeding)  from  wine ; "  or  (2)  be 
may  be  understood ;  or  (3)  the  preposition 
min  may  be  regarded  as  transposed, — Bashi 
explains  it :  "  From  the  heat  of  the  wine 
that  bumeth  in  them ; "  or  (4)  \^a  may  he 
supplied,  as  Wiinsche  suggests,  equivalent 
to  "  possessors  (bearers)  of  heat  from  wine." 
3.  Y^  is  a  scoffer  and  worse  than  ^<B3,  a  fool, 
or  T\f,  a  simpleton ;  the  last  acts  tlirough 
inexperience,  the  second  from  unwisdom, 
the  first,  though  possessing  in  some  measure 
both  wisdom  and  experience,  acts  in  dis- 
regard of  both.  The  meaning  is  given  by 
Kimohi  in  the  following  comment:  '.'The 
sense  of  ,<o  'n  is  that  the  one  came  with  his 
bottle  full  of  wine,  and  the  other  with  his 
bottle;  and  they  made  the  king  sick; "  and 
to  this  there  is  an  exact  parallel  in  Hab. 
ii.  15, "  Woe  unto  him  that  givetb  his  neigh- 
bour diink,  that  pultest  thy  bottle  to  biin, 
and  makest  him  drunken  also."  In  the 
second  clause  the  expression,  "  drawing  out 
the  hand,"  is  borrowed  from  drunken  carou- 
sals, in  which  the  hand  is  stretched  out  in 
asking,  receiving,  and  handing  the  goblets ; 
or,  more  simply,  according  to  Pusey,  who 
says,  "  Men  in  drink  reach  out  their  hands 
to  any  whom  they  meet,  in  token  of  their 
sottish  would-be  firiendliness." 

Ver.  6. — This  verse,  Wiinsche  thinks,  is 
prolmbly  the  most  difScult  in  the  whole  book. 
1.  Tiie  translation  of  the  first  clause  in  the 
Authorized  Version  is  susceptible  of  a  more 
literal  and  improved  rendering.  (1)  "For 
they  bring  near  as  an  oven  their  heart,  whilst 
they  lie  in  wait ; "  that  is,  they  approach  the 
king  with  loyalty  on  tlieir  lips,  but  hatred 
in  their  heart.  Their  heart  (which  is  the 
fact)  is  heated  with  evil  passion,  as  an  oven 
(which  is  the  figure)  is  heated  for  baking 
purposes:  while  they  are  secretly  set  for 
wickedness.  (2)  Wiinsche,  after  enumerat- 
ing a  great  variety  of  renderings  and  ex- 
positions, with  none  of  which  he  is  satisfied, 
gives  the  following :  "  For  they  press  close 
together;  like  an  oven  is  their  heart  in  their 
artifice  (cunning)."  The  meaning,  accord- 
ing to  the  same  author,  is  that  all,  scoffers 
and  king  alike,  press  near  each  other,  being 
of  one  heart  and  disposition ;  cunning  makes 
them  one  single  society.  (3)  Keil  translates 
■acre  simply  as  foUowt;  "For  they  have 


brought  their  heart  into  their  ambnih,  ai 
into  the  oven."  In  this  rendering  he  com- 
bines the  explanation  of  Ewald  and  Hitzig. 
2.  In  the  second  clause  which  Keil  trans- 
lates in  the  same  sense  as  (1)  the  Authorized 
Version,  Wiinsche  (2)  changes  the  common 
reading  into  onBN,  equivalent  to  dbm,  their 
anger,  and  translates  accordingly,  "All  night 
their  anger  sleeps,  in  the  morning  it  burns 
like  flaming  fire."  That  the  reading  here 
is  somewhat  doubtful  may  be  inferred  from 
the  fact  that  the  LXX.  lias  "Ec^^dii/i :  while 
the  Ohaldee  and  Syriac  rugzehon,  their  fury ; 
still,  as  it  is  only  a  conjectural  emendation, 
we  prefer  abiding  by  the  ordinary  reading 
and  rendering,  at  least  in  this  instance.  The 
following  explanation  of  the  whole  verse  by 
Aben  Ezra  gives  a  consistent  sense:  "By 
D3~ii43  are  meant  their  evil  purposes,  which 
they  devise  all  night  long.  And  their  heart 
is  like  an  oven,  only  with  the  difference 
that  there  the  baker  sleeps  tlie  whole  night, 
and  only  in  the  morning  kindles  the  oven ; 
but  their  heart  does  not  sleep  at  all,  but 
devises  evil  the  whole  night."  It  is  cnriooa 
how  Bashi  and  Kimcbi,  while  giving  in  the 
main  the  same  explanation  with  Aben  Ezra, 
difier  from  him  about  the  meaning  of  the 
sleeping.  The  former  has  the  following  brief 
comment:  "Their  baker  lights  the  oven. 
After  they  have  prepared  their  heart  and 
thought  out  the  consummation  of  their 
wickedness,  how  tliey  could  carry  the  same 
into  effect,  then  their  baker  sleeps,  thai  is, 
they  sleep  till  morning ;  at  the  break  of  day, 
however,  they  bum  like  fire,  until  they  have 
brouglit  their  wickedness  fully  to  an  end." 
Kimchi  goes  into  the  matter  a  little  mora 
fully,  as  is  usual  with  him;  he  commenta 
as  follows :  "  The  heart  is  the  instrument  of 
the  thought,  and  the  power  that  works 
therein  is  the  baker  by  way  of  figure.  And 
as  the  baker  lights  the  oven  at  night,  and 
in  the  morning  finds  that  the  pieces  of  wood 
have  burnt  out,  and  he  baketh  therein  the 
bread,  which  is  the  chief  end  of  the  work  of 
heating;  and  lo,  the  baker  sleeps  in  the 
night  after  he  has  put  the  pieces  of  wood 
into  the  oven,  because  he  has  nothing  more 
to  do  till  the  morning.  Just  so  the  baker 
in  this  figurative  sense,  which  is  the  power 
of  thought — he  sleeps  in  the  night ;  as  if  he 
said  he  lies  there  and  rests,  because  the  pro- 
ject comes  not  forth  into  execution  until  the 
morning;  and  the  prophet  cnlls  liim  who 
thinks  sleeping,  because  that  there  is  no 
efibrt  of  the  body  in  thought.  In  the  morn- 
ing he  bumeth,  as  if  he  said  that  they  are 
'in  flume  in  the  morning  to  execute  the  evil 
which  they  have  devised  at  night." 

Ver.  7.— 1.  "  To  call  unto  me  (God)  "  is  to 
cry  to  God  for  help  and  succour,  to  seek 
safety  and  deliverance  with  him.  It  is  not 
the  same  with  that  other  expression,  via. 


204 


THE  ~  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  vn.  1 — 16. 


"  to  c»lt  on  the  Name  of  Jehovah,"  -which  is 
rather  to  reverence  and  worship  Jehovah. 
2.  The  word  jn  is  more  poetic  than  bse', 

though  the  meaning  of  both  is  "judgiug,"  the 
latter  probably  derived  from  npf,  to  set,  then 
to  set  ri|ht,  defend.  3.  Their  not  calling 
unto  Qod  is  well  explained  by  Einjchi  as 
fotlowB:  "Also  tliey  (the  people)  had  fallen 
by  the  hand  of  tlieir  enemies,  the  kings  of 
the  Gentiles;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  no 
one  among  them  oalls  to  me.  They  should 
have  thought  in  tlieir  heart,  There  is  no 
newer  in  the  hand  of  our  king  to  help  us  out 
of  our  distress ;  we  will  turn  to  Jehovah,  for 
he  will  be  our  Helper."  This  verse  is  not 
so  difficult  as  the  three  preceding;  we  pro- 
ceed, therefore,  in  regular  order  to  the  next. 

Yer.  8. — Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself 
among  the  people;  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not 
turned.  The  people  of  the  northern  king- 
dom had  fallen  away  from  Jehovah,  and 
mixed  themselves  with  the  heathen  nation- 
alities. They  resembled  a  cake  which, 
through  neglect  of  turning,  was  burnt  on 
the  one  side  and  raw  on  the  other.  The  best 
commentary  on  the  first  clause  of  this  verse 
is  found  in  Fs.  ovi.  85,  36,  and  89;  they 
"  were  mingled  among  the  heathen,  and 
learned  their  works.  And  they  served  their 
idols:  which  were  a  snare  unto  them.  .  .  . 
Thus  were  they  defiled  with  their  own 
works,  and  went  a-whoring  with  their  own 
inventions."  Tlie  second  clause  is  well  ex- 
plained by  Bishop  Horsley  as  follows :  "  One 
thing  on  one  side,  another  on  the  other; 
burnt  to  a  coal  at  bottom,  raw  dough  at  tlie 
top.  An  apt  image  of  a  character  that  is  all 
inconsistencies.  Such  were  the  ten  tribes  of 
tlie  prophet's  day ;  worshippers  of  Jehovah 
in  profession,  but  adopting  all  the  idolatries 
of  the  neighbouring  nations,  in  addition  to 
their  own  semi-idolatry  of  the  calves." 
Similarly,  the  Geneva  Bible  has,  "Baked 
on  one  side  and  raw  on  the  other,  he  is 
neither  through  hot  nor  through  cold,  but 
partly  a  Jew  and  partly  a  Gentile."  Je- 
hovah had  chosen  Israel  out  of  the  nations 
of  the  earth,  and  given  them  a  special  con- 
stitution. Tlie  object  of  this  segregation 
was  that  Israel  should  be  a  peculiar  people 
and  a  holy  nation.  Thus  distinguished,  they 
were  to  dwell  alone;  but, ungrateful  for  this 
high  distinction,  and  unmindful  of  their 
high  destiny,  they  mingled  with  the  nations, 
learned  their  heathenish  ways,  and  wor- 
shipped their  hateful  idols.  Thus  they  for- 
feited their  theocratic  pre-eroinenoe.  While 
it  was  their  privilege  as  well  as  duty  to 
follow  the  precepts  of  Jehovah,  and  serve 
him  with  undivided  aifection,  thny  fell  away 
from  his  service  and  adopted  the  idolatries 
ind  habita  of  the  heathen ;  it  was  only  a  just 


retribation,  therefore,  when  Ood  gave  them 
over  into  the  hand  of  those  heathen  peoples 
to  waste  their  resources  and  leave  them 
shorn  of  their  strength.  The  second  clause 
is  the  counterpart  of  this;  exactly  like  the  . 
peoples  subsequently  brought  from  Assyria, 
and  planted  in  the  lands  of  the  dispossessed 
Israelites,  they  worshipped  the  Lord,  but 
served  their  own  gods — they  were  neither 
true  worshippers  of  Jehovah  noront-and-out 
followers  of  Baal.  In  religion  they  were 
mongrels — inoonsistent  and  worthless  hy- 
brids; they  were,  in  fact,  what  Calvin  in 
rather  homely  phrase  says  of  them, "  neither 
flesh  nor  fish."  The  comment  of  Eimohi 
is  concise  as  it  is  clear :  "  The  prophet  means 
to  say.  He  (Israel)  mixes  himself  among  the 
peoples ;  though  God — blessed  he  he  I — sepa- 
rated them  from  them,  yet  they  mix  them- 
selves among  them  and  do  according  to 
their  works."  His  explanation  of  the  second 
clause  is  not  so  satisfactory  when  he  sayi, 
"  As  a  cake  which  is  baked  upon  the  ooals ; 
if  they  do  not  turn  it,  it  is  burnt  below  and 
not  baked  above,  so  is  the  connsel  that  is 
not  right  when  they  do  not  tnm  it  £rom 
side  to  side  (sense  to  sense)  until  they  bring 
it  upon  their  wheels  (into  action).  So 
(thoughtless  and  hasty)  is  Ephraim  in  his  de- 
termination to  serve  the  calves  and  other  gods 
without  proving  and  choosing  what  is  good." 
(2)  Other  explanations  need  only  be  referred 
to  in  order  to  be  rejected,  as  (1)  that  of 
Bashi,  who  is  followed  by  Grotins.  He 
takes  the  verb  in  the  future  sense : "  Ephraim 
in  exile  shall  be  mixed  among  the  peoples." 
But  it  is  obviously  the  present,  not  the 
future  time,  that  is  intended — the  present 
sin,  not  its  future  punishment.  There  is 
(2)  the  explanation  of  Aben  Ezra,  followed 
by  Eichhorn  and  Maurcr,  referring  to  the 
alliances  or  treaties  which  the  northern 
kingdom  formed  with  their  neighbonrs  to 
repel  tlieir  enemies,  and  by  which  the  re- 
sources of  the  land  were  consumed ;  while 
the  second  clause,  (a)  according  to  Aben 
Ezra,  refers  to  the  over-hastiness  and 
thoughtlessness  with  which  Israel  proceeded 
in  their  resolutions;  and,  (6)  according  to 
Maurer,  Jerome,  and  Theodoret,  it  signifies 
what  is  spoiled,  ill-advised,  and  worthless. 

Ver.  9.  —  Strangers  have  devoured  his 
strength,  and  he  knoweth  it  not  Israel's 
intercourse  with  other  nationalities  could 
not  Viut  issue  in  disaster;  a  specimen  of 
that  disaster  is  here  given.  As  the  Greeks 
called  all  who  did  not  speak  the  Greek  lan- 
guage, whether  they  were  savage  or  civilized, 
barbirians,  so  Israel  called  all  foreigners, 
whether  near  or  far  off,  strangers.  The 
foreign  nations  here  meant  were  those  with 
which  Israel  had  entered  into  treaties  or 
formed  alliances,  in  contravention  of  the 
constitution  which  God  had  gives  fhem. 


OB.  TIL  1— I6.3 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA. 


205 


These  nations,  moTeoTST,  devonred  their 
national  resources  by  the  imposition  of  taxes 
and  hostile  incursions ;  thus  the  King  of 
Syria  left  "  of  the  people  to  Jehoahaz  only 
fifty  horsemen,  and  ten  chariots,  and  ten 
thousand  fuotmen ;  for  the  King  of  Syria 
had  destroyed  them,  and  had  made  them 
like  the  dust  by  threshiDg;"  again,  when 
"  Pul,  the  King  of  Assyria,  came  against  the 
land,"  \re  read  that  Menahem  gave  Pul  a 
thousand  talents  of  silver,  that  his  hand 
might  be  with  him  to  confirm  the  kingdom 
in  his  hand.  And  Menahem  exacted  the 
money  of  Israel,  even  of  all  the  mighty  men 
of  wealth,  of  each  man  fifty  shekels  of  silver, 
to  give  to  the  King  of  Assyria;"  then,  "in 
the  days  of  Fekah  King  of  Israel  came 
Tiglath-pileser  King  of  Assyria,  and  took 
Ijon,  end  Abel-beth-maaohah,  and  Janoah, 
and  Kedesh,  and  Hazor,  and  Gilead,  and 
Galilee,  all  the  land  of  Naphtali,  and  carried 
them  captive  to  Assyria."  The  /strength  here 
mentioned  includes  all  those  things  which 
constitute  the  wealth  and  well-being  of  a 
country,  the  produce  of  the  soil  and  the 
riches  of  its  inhabitants.  Thus  Aben  Ezra 
rightly  explains  this  clause,  referring  it  to 
"the  tribute  which  the  Israelites  gave  to 
Assyria  and  Egypt,  as  is  written  in  the  Book 
of  Kings."  Yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and 
there  (margin,  sprinlded)  upon  him.  What 
from  foreign  foes  and  internal  feuds,  the 
body  politic  was  manifesting  unmistakable 
symptoms  of  decay  and  decrepitude  and  ap- 
proaching dissolution,  just  as  grey  hairs  on 
the  human  body  give  indication  of  the 
advance  of  old  age,  with  its  decay  of  strength 
and  nearness  to  the  tomb.  "  The  course  of 
nature,"  says  Aben  Ezra,  "has  sprinkled 
grey  hairs  upon  him,  just  as  grey  hair  comes 
on  men  in  consequence  of  the  course  of 
nature ; "  this  corresponds  to  the  sentiment 
of  the  preceding  clause,  for,  according  to 
the  commentator  just  named, "  the  grey  hair 
denotes  that  their  power  is  weakened  and 
their  possession  perished."  Yet  he  knoweth 
not  is  parallel  to  "  And  he  knoweth  (it)  not," 
and  repeats  the  same  sentiment,  of  course 
with  emphasis.  Of  what  was  Israel  thus 
iguorant?  Not,  surely,  of  the  declining 
state  of  the  national  strength  and  the  decay 
of  the  national  importance.  After  so  many 
drains  upon  their  resources  and  the  unsatis- 
factory position  of  their  foreign  relations, 
they  could  not  shut  tlieir  eyes  upon  the 
steadily  and  even  rapidly  approaching  de- 
cadence. But  though  they  could  not  pretend 
ignorance  of  the  fact,  they  remained  in  igno- 
rance of  the  cause,  its  consequence,  and  the 
cure.  Notwithstanding  the  already  ex- 
hausted condition  of  their  country,  and  the 
process  of  exhaustion  still  going  on,  they 
overlooked  the  lamentable  cause  of  all, 
which  was  their  sin,  national  and  individual. 


in  departing  from  the  Lord ;  and  at  the  same 
time  tlie  dangerous  consequences  that  were 
neither  remote  nor  capable  of  being  staved 
off;  as  also  the  only  possible  cure  to  be  found 
in  direct  and  immediate  return  and  appli- 
cation to  that  Ood  from  whom  they  had  so 
revolted.  The*'it"Bnpplied  in  the  Authorized 
Version  (1)  had  better  be  omitted;  (2)  the 
construction  adopted  by  Bashi  and  others, 
who  make  the  first  part  of  each  clause  the 
object  of  the  second,  is  erroneous,  as  we  have 
shown  in  the  preceding  observations.  "  They 
took  it  not  to  heart  that  the  kings  of  Syria 
consumed  them  in  the  days  of  Jehoahaz  "  is 
the  exposition  of  Rashi  just  referred  to ; 
but  that  of  Kimchi  favours  the  first  and 
correct  construction,  as  may  be  inferred  &om 
the  words,  "  And  he  (Israel)  knows  not  that 
on  account  of  bis  iniquity  all  this  has  come 
upon  him,  and  yet  he  turns  not  from  his 
wickedness." 

Ver.  10. — ^And  the  pride  of  Israel  testifleth 
to  his  faoe:  and  they  do  not  return  to  the 
Lord  their  God,  nor  seek  him  for  all  this 
(amid  all  this).  If  with  Keil  and  others  (I) 
we  understand  "  the  pride  of  Israel  "  to  mean 
Jehovah  the  glory  of  Israel,  and  take  the 
verb  in  the  sense  of  "  testify,"  the  meaning 
will  be  that  Jehovah  bore  witness  to  the 
face  of  Israel  by  the  weakening  and  wasting 
of  their  kingdom,  as  portrayed  in  the  pre- 
ceding verse.  We  prefer  (2)  to  understand 
"the  pride  of  Israel"  in  the  sense  of"  the 
haughtiness"  of  Israel,  and  the  verb  in  the 
sense  of  "being  bumbled,"  as  at  ch.  t.  5. 
The  real  meaning,  then,  is  expressed  in  the 
following  rendering:  And  the  haughtinees 
of  Israel  ehaU  be  humbled  to  his  face.  This 
humiliation  is  the  effect  of  the  wasting 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  verse ;  while  the 
evidence  of  their  bumiliatiun  is  specified  in 
the  succeeding  verse  by  their  resorting  to 
Egypt  and  repairing  to  Assyria  from  a  con- 
sciousness of  their  helplessness.  This  render- 
ing is  countenanced  by  the  LXX.,  both  here 
and  at  ch.  v.  5 ;  while  Eashi  says,  "The  verb 
njy  has  the  meaning  of  'humiliation.'"  Fur 
all  this.  This  emphasizes  the  obstinate  blind- 
ness and  perverseness  of  Ephruim,  wlicn, 
amid  all  the  calamities  and  miseries  of  the 
kingdom  both  within  and  without,  they 
turned  not  to  Jehovah  to  solirit  help  and 
deliverance,  but  ooucluded  treaties  or  made 
alliances  with  foreign  nations  in  hope  of 
being  lifted  up  out  of  their  national  impo- 
tence. On  this  Aben  Ezra  makes  the 
judicious  remark :  "  They  turned  not  to 
Jehovah  as  paupers  who  have  nothing  more 
to  give  foreign  nations  that  they  may  help 
them." 

Yer.  11. — ^Ephralm  also  is  like  a  silly  dove 
^thout  heart.  The  silliness  of  the  doTe, 
with  which  the  stupidity  of  Ephraim  is 
compared,  is  not  manifested  by  its  missing 


206 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  Tn,  1 — 16. 


its  nest  and  resting-place,  and  then  help- 
lessly  fluttering  about,  according  to  Ewald ; 
nor  by  its  falling  into  the  net  of  the  bird- 
eatcher  in  its  effort  to  escape  from  the  hawk, 
according  to  Hitzig;  nor  by  its  neither 
griering  nor  searching  for  its  young  when 
it  is  robbed  of  them,  according  to  Jerome ; 
nor  by  its  becoming  dejected  or  devoid  of 
consideration  when  it  has  lost  its  young, 
according  to  the  Targum ;  but  by  its  flying 
right  into  the  net  of  the  bird-catcher,  with- 
out suspecting  or  observing  it,  in  its  search 
for  food,  according  to  Rosenmiiller.  Thus 
Kimchi  explains  it :  "  The  prophet  compares 
Ephraim  to  a  dove  which  gets  caught  in  a 
net  owing  to  its  simplicity,  because  it  has  no 
sense  to  perceive  that,  when  it  goes  to  gather 
grains  of  com,  a  net  is  spread  there  to  catch 
it.  So  Ephraim,  when  they  went  and  asked 
help  from  Assyria  or  from  Egypt,  (did  not 
perceive)  that  they  went  to  their  hurt,  when 
they  sought  help  from  the  foreign  nations 
and  not  from  God — blessed  be  he  I — ^in  whose 
hand  all  is.  And  he  mentions  the  dove, 
though  it  is  the  manner  of  other  birds, 
because  the  dove  has  no  bitterness,  as  if  it 
went  in  simplicity  and  without  apprehension 
of  the  evil  tliat  would  oome  upon  it."  They 
call  to  Egypt,  they  go  to  Assyria.  The 
position  of  Palestine  exposed  its  inhabitants 
to  attacks  from  the  two  great  rival  powers  of 
Egypt  and  Assyria,  or  Babylon.  "  It  stood 
midway,"  says  Stanley,  "between  the  two 
great  seats  of  ancient  empire,  Babylon  and 
Egypt.  It  was  on  the  high-road  from  one 
to  the  other  of  these  mighty  powers,  the 
prize  for  which  they  contended,  the  battle- 
field on  which  they  fought,  the  lofty  bridge 
over  which  they  ascended  and  descended 
respectively  into  the  deep  basins  of  the  Nile 
and  Euphrates."  Accordingly  the  rulers  of 
the  people  sought  help,  now  from  Egypt  to 
strengthen  themagainst  the  oppression  of  As- 
syria ;  at  another  time  they  sought  lo  secure 
the  support  of  Assyria.  The  most  powerful 
enemy  of  the  northern  kingdom  was  Assyria, 
which  distressed  that  kingdom  more  and 
more,  until  at  last  they  made  an  end  of  it. 
"  But,"  says  Kimchi,  "  while  they  think  to 
obtain  help  by  them  (Egypt  and  Assyria), 
tliey  fall  into  the  net  of  the  Almighty — 
blessed  be  he  I — and  this  is  what  he  says 
(in  the  following  verse).  As  they  go  I  spread 
my  net  over  them." 

Ver  12. — When  they  shall  go,  I  will  spread 
my  net  over  them.  Threats  of  punishment 
are  contained  in  this  and  the  following 
verses.  He  begins  by  the  application  of  the 
comparison  of  Eplirniru  to  a  dove.  Exactly 
as  a  dove  in  its  silliness  falls  into  the  net 
set  by  the  fowler,  so  Israel  runs  into  the  net 
of  destruction  in  seeking  help  from  Egypt 
and  Assyria.  The  literal  rendering  is,  tio- 
eording  ae  fliey  go,ot,whaitoeverway  Oieyshall 


00.  Ood'threatens  to  spread  a  net  over  fhem, 
nom  which  there  can  be  no  escape.  The 
chief  aim  of  Hebrew  sovereigns  and  mlers 
was  to  defend  themselves  from  Egypt  bjrthe 
help  of  Assyria,  or  from  Assyria  by  the  aid 
of  Egypt ;  in  either  case  Ood  threatens  to 
spread  over  them  the  net  of  destruction  as 
the  bird-catcher.  The  application  to  one  or 
other  of  these  powers  God  forbade,  but  when 
they  go  to  either  for  relief,  the  result  is  sure 
to  prove  fatal.  The  image  of  a  net  is  fre- 
quent in  Ezekiel ;  so  in  Job,  he  "  hath  com- 
passed me  with  his  net."  I  will  bring  them 
down  as  tiie  fowls  of  the  heaven.  The  com- 
parison with  birds  and  bird-catching  con- 
tinues. Though  their  sunward  soaring  flight 
be  high  as  the  eagle's,  or  rapid  as  the  soft 
swift  wing  of  the  dove,  they  cannot  ontspeed 
or  escape  the  hand  of  God,  bat  shall  be 
brought  down  to  earth.  Or  the  idea  may 
be  that,  swiftly  as  a  bird  of  prey  swoops 
down  out  of  the  free  air  of  heaven  npon  its 
quarry  on  the  low-lying  earth,  Jehovah  will 
Bring  Israel  down  out  of  the  air  of  freedom 
into  the  net  of  captivity.  Thus  in  Chad.  1 
we  read,  "  Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the 
eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among 
the  stars,  thence  vrill  I  bring  thee  down, 
saith  the  Lord ; "  likewise  in  Amos  ix.  2, 
"  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall 
mine  hand  take  them;  though  they  climb 
up  to  heaven,  thence  will  I  bring  them 
down."  I  will  chastise  them  as  their  con- 
gregation hath  heard.  The  word  oyo-ti  is 
an  anomalous  Hiph.  instead  of  dto'M, 
that  is,  yod  mobile  instead  of  yod  qnies- 
cent  or  di|>hthongal  xere.  The  literal  render- 
ing makes  the  meaning  more  obvious ;  it  is : 
"  I  will  chastise  them  according  to  the  tid- 
ings [or, '  announcement ']  to  their  congrega- 
tion." In  the  Law  and  by  the  prophets  it 
was  repeatedly  declared  that  judgments 
would  fall  upon  the  disobedient  and  rebel- 
lious. As  specimens  of  such  announcements, 
we  may  refer  to  Lev.  xxvi.  14 — 39 ;  Deut. 
xxviii  15—68;  and  Deut.  xxxii.  15 — 35. 
The  prophet  now  assures  Ephraim  that  the 
judgments  so  frequently  and  forcibly  tm- 
nounced  to  the  congregation  of  the  children 
of  Israel  in  the  wilderness,  and  repeated  in 
subsequent  times  by  the  prophets,  would  be 
executed  on  the  rebellioiis  rigorously,  and  in 
exact  accordance  with  those  many  previous 
denunciations.  Eimchi  has  the  following 
comment:  "I  will  assemble  them  through 
the  chastisement  of  the  peoples,  as  I  an- 
nounced to  their  assembly  in  the  wihJemess 
words  of  chastisement,  which  are  written  in 
the  Law,  if  they  will  not  hearken  to  the 
words  of  the  Law."  The  LXX.  may  have 
read  Dmi',  as  their  rendering  is  iy  rf  aKop 
T^s  9\t\lieuis  avTuy,  equivalent  to  "I  will 
chasten  them  w&k  the  rummir  <^  their 
Cooming)  affliction." 


CH.  VII.  1 — 16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


207 


Ver.  13. — ^Woe  vnto  them !  for  they  have 
fled  from  me:  deatiaotlon  (margin,  spoil) 
unto  tbem !  because  they  have  transgressed 
againBt  me.  Of  these  exclamations,  the 
first  is  general  and  indefinite,  tlie  second  is 
specific  and  precise.  The  thought  of  coming 
chastisement  calls  forth  the  exclamation  of 
woe ;  while  the  second  exclamation  fixes  the 
character  and  explains  the  nature  of  that 
woe  denounced.  In  neither  case  does  'n;  or 
la^  need  to  be  supplied;  the  opposite  ex- 
pression is  on^  DiW  or  arh  roha.  In 
assigning  the  reason,  there  is  a  retrospective 
reference  to  the  figures  of  the  two  immedi- 
ately preceding  verses.  The  word  nn:  with 
min  is  employed  in  relation  to  birds  which, 
when  scared  from  their  nest,  fly  away. 
Kimchi  thinks  it  applies  to  the  abstention 
or  withdrawal  of  the  Israelites  from  Divine 
service  in  the  national  sanctuary  in  Jeru- 
salem, His  comment  is:  "They  fly  from 
me,  from  the  service  of  the  house  of  my 
sanctuary,  to  the  service  of  the  calves ;  and 
this  is  a  breach  of  faith  and  defection  from 
mo."  The  LXX.  translate  the  beginning 
of  the  second  clause  freely  by  SeiAoioi  (ta-lv, 
equivalent  to  "  they  are  cowards ; "  and 
Jerome  by  "miseri  (maticulose)  erunt,  et 
semper  timentis  ac  formidantes."  The  cause 
assigned  is  their  breaking  covenant  with 
God,  which  is  expressed  by  ye's,  literally, 
"to  break  away  from,"  "  tear  one's  self  loose 
from."  Though  I  have  redeemed  fhem.  This 
first  part  of  the  last  clause  is  rendered  (1) 
as  a  past  by  some,  as  Jerome,  who  refers  it 
to  the  redemption  from  Egypt;  thus  also 
the  Ohaldee:  "And  I  was  their  Deliverer." 
Kosenmiiller  approves  of  this,  but,  instead 
of  restricting  it  to  the  deliverance  from 
Egypt,  includes  their  recent  deliverance 
bam  the  Syrians  by  Jeroboam  IL  It  is  (2) 
better  rendered  in  a  voluntative  or  optative 
sense:  "I  would  (should  like)  to  redeem 
them,  but  they  speak  lies  agaiust  (or,  con- 
cerning) me."  The  verb  'ephdem  cannot 
with  any  propriety  be  taken  for  a  preterite. 
Tet  they  have  spoken  lies  against  me;  rather, 
hut  they  on  their  part  have  spoken  lies  con- 
cerning me.  The  prophet  had  already 
charged  them  with  lying  at  ver.  3,  and  pre- 
viously at  ch.  iv.  2 ;  but  their  lies  were  not 
confined  to  their  intercourse  or  dealings  with 
their  fellow-men;  they  spoke  lies  against 
or,  as  the  preposition  sometimes  signifies, 
concerning  God.  The  lies  in  questiou  in- 
cluded, no  doubt,  a  denial  of  his  essential 
Deity  or  sole  Divinity ;  of  his  power  or  will- 
ingness eitherto  protect  or  punish.  Or  they 
might  consist  in  their  falsehood  in  drawing 
neitr  to  God  with  their  lips  without  either  true 
faith  or  real  affection  in  their  hearts ;  some 
were  directly  opposed  to  the  claims  of 
Jehovah,  some  insincere  in  his  service,  and 


others  turned  aside  to  the  Idolatry  of  the 
calves, — all,  with  probably  some  honourable 
exceptions,  had  proved  false  to  his  covenant 
with  Israel.  The  last  olause  has  been  taken 
(3)  independently  by  Ewald,  without  any 
considerable  alteration  of  the  sense  :  "  I,  for 
my  part,  would  redeem  them,  but  they,  on 
their  side,  speak  lies  against  me."  Other 
acceptations,  (a)  interrogative  and  (&)  con- 
ditional, evidently  mistake  the  sense.  The 
whole  clause  is  correctly  explained  by  Kimcli  i 
thus  :  "  It  was  in  my  heart  to  redeem  them 
out  of  their  distress;  but  they  speak  lies 
against  me,  while  they  say  that  I  Imow 
nothing  nor  exercise  any  providential  care 
over  their  actions,  whether  their  actions  are 
good  or  bad.  Therefore  I  have  withdrawn 
my  providential  oversight,  and  have  hidden 
my  face  firom  them,  and  they  shall  be  con- 
sumed." 

Ver.  14. — ^And  they  have  not  eiied  nnto 
me  with  thuir  heart,  when  they  howled  upon 
their  beds.  This  clause  may  be  more  cor- 
rectly rendered,  They  did  not  cry  to  me 
in  their  heart,  but  howl  upon  their  becU. 
Their  falsehood  manifested  itself  in  works 
as  well  as  words;  a  practical  example  id 
here  given.  They  did  not,  in  reality,  seek 
help  from  God;  if  they  sought  at  all,  it  was 
insincerely.  They  cried  to  God,  but  that 
cry  did  not  proceed  from  their  heart.  They 
gave  vent  to  their  feelings  of  distress  by 
bowlings  upon  their  l>eds ;  but  those  bowl- 
ings were  the  expression  of  unbelief  and 
despair,  not  by  any  means  evidences  of  faltli. 
"  They  do  not  cry  to  me,"  says  Aben  Ezra, 
"as  the  sick  man  cries  to  the  physician." 
The  comment  of  Kimchi  is  still  fuller  and 
more  explicit :  "  They  have  not  cried  to 
me  in  their  heart,  because  of  their  notion 
that  I  do  not  see  their  cry  nor  know  what  is 
good  or  bad  for  them  ;  but  they  howl  upon 
their  beds,  i.e.  when  they  are  upon  their 
bed  and  when  they  think  of  that  misfoitune 
which  is  coming  upon  them.  They  howl 
and  weep  because  of  their  evil  case,  and  do 
not  tliink  that  the  evil  falls  on  them  from 
me,  because  they  have  broken  faith  with  me." 
The  form  of  M^;,  is  correctly  explained  by 
Gesenius  as  future  Hiph.  with  preformative 
put  before  the  third  person,  the  yod  of  the 
simple  form  being  superficially  taken  to 
belong  to  the  stem.  His  derivation  from  hn, 
God,  as  if  a  cry  to  him  for  help,  is  incorrect ; 
it  is  really  an  onomatopoetic  word.  They 
assemble  themselves  for  com  and  wine,  and 
they  rebel  against  me.  What  this  (1)  as- 
sembling of  themselves  was  does  not  clearly 
appear ;  whether  it  was  in  the  market-place 
or  elsewhere  to  purchase  corn  in  time  of 
famine,  as  some  think;  or  in  idol- temples  to 
propitiate  their  deities,  like  the  Eoman  sup- 
plicatio  or  lectiostemium,  as  others  suppose ; 
or  for  the  performance  of  some  extra  rito  of 


808 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA- 


[oH.  vn.  1 — 16. 


worship  to  Jehovah ;  or  for  the  purpose  of 
plunder  in  a  season  of  scarcity ;  or  generally 
their  assembling  in  knots  and  crowds  to 
discuss  anxiously  and  lament  despairingly 
the  distressed  state  of  the  country; — their 
ohief  design  and  highest  aim  being  a  good 
supply  of  com  and  wine,  that  is,  the  supply 
of  mere  bodily  wants.  (2)  The  LXX.  seem 
to  have  read  mjn'i,  as  their  renderiug  is 
KaTiTefiv6vTo,  equivalent  to  "  they  cut  them- 
•elves,"  or  "  pined  for  com  and  wine ; "  corre- 
sponding to  wliioh  rendering  is  Cyril'B 
exposition:  "As  enthusiasts  and  fanatic* 
making  incisions  with  steel  in  their  breasts 
and  both  hands,  and  absurdly  all  but  shed- 
ding in  sacrifice  their  own  blood,  perliaps  to 
graven  images."  (3)  Jerome,  taking  the  verb 
&om  ^^J,  to  ruminate,  translates  accordingly: 
'*  super  tritioum  et  vinum  ruminabant."  (4) 
The  Syriac,  tracing  it  to  nw,  to  be  afraid, 
translates :  "  They  feared  (or,  were  fearfully 
anxious)  about  corn  and  wine."  The  com- 
mon reading  and  rendering  are  clearly  pre- 
ferable ;  Kimchi's  exposition  is  in  haiinony 
therewith :  "  When  corn  or  new  wine  comts 
into  the  city  for  sale,  they  all  assemble  at  (or, 
round)  it  on  account  of  the  famine  which  ia 
in  the  city;  and  yet  they  fall  away  from 
me."  The  construction  of  the  last  clause  is 
pregnant,  that  is  (1)  "they  turn  aside  (and 
turn)  against  me."  Here,  again  (2)  the  LXX. 
seem  to  have  read  npv,  to  which  their  trans- 
lation, iiriuSeieTin-av  iv  i/ioi,  equivalent  to 
"  they  were  instructed  by  me,"  corresponds. 
Ver.  15.— Though  I  have  bound  (margin, 
chastened)  and  strengthened  their  arms,  yet 
do  they  imagine  mischief  against  me.  The 
first  clause  of  this  verse  is  more  accurately 
translated  as  follows :  And  yet  I  hate 
indructedf  have  strengthened  their  armi. 
Here  we  have  another  instance  of  God'g 
goodness  and  Israel's  ingratitude.  He  had 
done  much  for  them,  and  would  fain  have 
done  more;  and  yet  the  return  they  made 
was  devising  mischief  against  him.  The 
arms  are  the  seat  and  symbol  of  strength, 
as  the  handi  and  fingers  symbolize  skill ; 
thus,  in  referonce  to  the  latter  the  psalmist 
says, "  Blessed  be  tlie  Lord  my  Strength, 
which  teacheth  my  hands  to  war,  and  my 
fingers  to  fight ; "  and  with  regard  to  the 
former  he  says,  "  He  teacheth  my  hnnds  to 
war,  so  that  a  bow  of  steel  is  broken  by 
mine  arms."  Two  benefits  are  here  included 
in  the  prophet's  enumeration.  He  instructed 
the  arms,  by  which  ia  mennt  that  he  showed 
them  how  and  where  to  get  strength.  But 
this  was  not  all;  he  not  only  directed  to 
the  source,  and  taught  the  secret  of  ac- 
quiring strength,  he  actually  supplied 
strength,  thereby  giving  them  power  to  eon- 
tend  againsit  and  comjuer  their  enemies. 
At  a  time  when  "  there  was  not  any  shut 
np,  nor  any  left  [lh*t  i», '  n.either  bond  nor 


free']  nor  helper  for  Israel  ...  the  Lord 
.  .  .  saved  them  by  the  liand  of  Jeroboam 
the  son  of  Joash."  Notwithstiinding  all 
this,  they  (1)  acted  the  part  of  apostates 
and  rebels  against  him :  they  devised  mis- 
chief against  him  by  their  idolatry  which 
denied  him  the  Godhead  glory  which  was 
his  due,  and  by  their  rebellion  which  aimed 
at  depriving  him  of  his  kindly  power  and 
dignity.  The  reference  cf  the  last  clause, 
(2)  according  to  Bwald,  is  to  the  treaties 
which  Israel  entered  into  with  Assyria  and 
Egypt  for  snfety  and  defence;  and  (3)  ac- 
cording to  Kimchi,  to  Israel's  false  represen- 
tations of  the  government  and  providence 
of  Jehovah:  "For  they  say  the  good  or 
evil  does  not  come  to  them  from  me,  but  is 
purely  accidental."  With  respect  to  noi,  it 
must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  like  ru%  it  has 
two  meanings,  viz.  the  chastisement  of  pun- 
ishment (_K6\ains)  and  the  chastisement  of 
love  (naiSfia). 

Ver.  16. — ^They  return,  but  not  to  the  Most 
High.  This  verse  is  closely  connected  in 
sense  with  the  preceding.  Their  God-defying 
attitude,  as  described  in  ver.  15,  is  repre- 
sented in  ver.  16  allegorically  as  a  deceitful 
bow,  which  fails  to  send  the  arrow  to  the 
mark;  also  their  unsucoess  is  represented 
as  exposing  them  to  the  derision  of  Egypt ; 
while  the  princes  who  spake  so  exceeding 
proudly,  and  who  instigated  their  ung.id- 
liness  and  consequent  wretchedness,  would 
be  slain  with  the  sword.  This  is  the  drift 
of  the  whole  verse;  its  details,  however, 
demand  more  particular  consideration.  1. 
The  word  b})  is  by  some  identified  in  mean- 
ing with  (1)  the  adjective  ji'^Jf, equivalent 
to  "the  Most  High;"  by  others  (2)  it  is 
taken  adverbially,  and  translated  "  upwards." 
(8)  The  Septuagint  does  not  express  it, 
translating  &weaTpd!l>rj<Tav  ih  oufleV,  "  They 
turned  aside  to  that  which  is  not  [literally, 
'  nothing ']."  (4)  Jerome  translates  it  as  if 
hy,  were  equivalent  to  "  yoke : "  "  They  re- 
turned that  they  might  be  without  a  yoke." 
Their  return,  according  to  Jerome,  would  be 
to  their  pristine  condition  before  the  call  of 
Abram,  like  the  other  nations,  without  yoke 
or  knowledge  of  law.  2.  The  return  .-pokeu 
of  implies  that  there  were  junoturts  at 
which  they  seemed  disposed  to  return  tj 
religiouanesB,  but  ere  long  they  again  re- 
lapsed into  idolatry.  They  disappointed 
the  high  hopes  raised,  and  missed  tlieir  own 
high  destiny,  and  thus  tliey  resembled  a 
bow,  of  which  the  string,  hising  its  elasticity, 
could  not  propel  the  arrow  to  the  object 
aimed  at.  Appearing  to  return  to  the  wor- 
ship of  Jehovah,  they  turned  aside  to  an 
idol.  Tiius  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  57,  they  "turned 
back  and  dealt  unfaithfully  like  their 
fathers :  they  were  turned  aside  like  a 
deceitful  bow." 


m.  TIL  1— l«i]  THE  BOOS  OF  HOBEA.  206 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1^7, — Crimet  charged  on  Israel;  people  and  prince$.  It  was  a  time  of  great 
corruption  and  of  atrocious  crimes.  Nor  were  those  crimes  committed  only  by  persons 
"  of  the  baser  sort ; "  people  and  princes  alike,  rulers  and  ruled,  had  their  share  in  them  ; 
Vhe  country  and  the  capital,  Ephraim  and  Samaria ;  the  chief  tribe  and  the  chief  city, 
with  the  common  people  as  well  as  Slite,  in  the  former,  and  members  of  the  court  in  the 
latter.  All  classes  contributed  their' portion  to  the  national  sins,  and  sins  of  almost  all 
classes  were  freely  indulged  in. 

L  The  obabaoteb  of  siir  ab  a  diseasb.  Sin  is  represented  in  Scripture  as  a  disease 
— an  all-perTading  disease;  it  ia  as  universal  as  the  race,  for  all  have  sinned;  it  is  an 
all-embracing  disease,  for  it  extends  to  the  faculties  and  feelings  of  the  soul,  and  employs 
as  its  instruments  all  the  members  of  the  body.  It  infects  whole  peoples  as  well  as 
individual  persons.  The  description  which  Isaiah  gives  of  its  widespread  ravages  applies 
to  the  body  politic  as  well  as  to  the  body  human  :  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole 
heart  fainL  From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no  soundness  in  it  ; 
but  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrefying  sores."  It  is  thus  a  loathsome  disease,  a  dan- 
gerons  disease,  a  deadly  disease ;  and,  unless  arrested  in  time,  it  is  a  fearfully  fatal  disease. 
The  Apostle  Jnmes  gives  us  the  genesis  and  development  of  this  disease :  "  When  lust 
hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin :  and  sin,  wh^n  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death;"  and  the  symbol  of  this  spiritual  malady  is  leprosy — one  of  the  most  frightful 
scourges  of  humanity. 

II.  The  ueanb  of  healinq  employed.  The  disease  is  so  desperate  that  God  alone 
can  cure  it.  1.  If  there  is  balm  in  Gilead  and  a  phyacian  there,  God  himself  is  that 
Physician,  and  a  Physician  who  not  only  supplies  the  balm  but  applies  it;  he  has  pro- 
vided the  remedy  and  prescribed  the  way  in  which  it  is  made  available.  Thus  the 
Prophet  Jeremiah  pra^s,  "  Heal  me,0  Lord, and  I  shall  be  healed;  save  me,  and  I  shall 
be  saved :  for  thou  art  my  Praise."  To  a  people  as  well  as  a  person  laden  with  sin,  God 
promises  relief  when  it  is  earnestly  sought  and  properly  applied  for ;  thus  we  read  in 
2  Ghron.  vii.  13, 14,  "  If  I  shut  up  heaven  that  there  be  no  rain,  or  if  I  command  the 
locusts  to  devour  the  land,  or  if  I  send  pestilence  among  my  people ;  if  my  people, 
which  are  called  by  my  Name,  shall  humble  themselves,  and  pray,  and  seek  my  face, 
and  turn  from  their  wicked  ways ;  then  will  I  hear  from  heaven,  and  will  forgive  their 
sin,  and  will  heal  their  land."  If,  then,  sin-sick  souls  are  not  healed,  it  is  not  that  God 
is  either  unwilling  or  unable  to  heal  them.  When  Christ  would  have  (fathered  the  people 
of  Palestine,  or  the  inhabitants  of  its  principal  city,  with  all  the  tenderness  and  all  the 
carefulness  that  the  parent  bird  exercises  in  gathering  its  brood  under  its  outspread 
wings,  they  would  not.  So  is  it  still ;  sinners'  condemnation  is  self-procured  as  well  as 
justly  deserved,  while  the  salvation  of  the  righteous  is  only  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  means 
which  God  employs  for  healing,  though  various,  are  yet  pretty  much  the  same  at  all  times. 
One  of  these  means,  and  that  most  commonly  employed,  is  the  Word  of  bis  grace  read, 
preached,  or  meditated  on.  In  all  ages  the  chief  instrumentality  for  reclaiming  men 
has  been  his  message  of  mercy.  Thus  he  dealt  with  his  ancient  people :  "  The  Lord 
God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending  ; 
because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people,  and  on  bis  dwelling-place:  but  they  mocked 
the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the 
wrath  of  the  Lord  arose  against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy  "  (margin,  "  heal- 
ing "),  Other  means  used  for  the  same  end  are  afflictions  and  adverse  circumstances 
of  whatever  kind  ;  cases  of  this  sort,  such  as  dearth,  or  famine,  or  pestilence,  or  impoverish- 
ment, or  sore  sickness  and  of  long  continuance,  were  frequent  experiences  of  God's  people 
in  the  past.  But  the  purpose  was  benevolent  and  salutary :  "  By  this  therefore  shall  the 
iniquity  of  Jacob  be  purged  ;  and  this  is  all  the  fruit  to  take  away  his  sin."  It  is  so 
still ;  for  while  "  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous : 
nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  unto  them  which 
are  exercised  thereby."  Again,  God  sends  intervals  of  prosperity  with  like  design. 
This  he  did  with  Israel  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  in  the  days  of  Joash,  and  at  other 
periods  in  their  history,  in  order  to  wean  them  from  sin  and  win  them  to  himself. 
Another  meana  of  healing  which  God  resorted  to  in  the  case  of  Ma  ancient  people  wai> 

HOSKA.  V 


no  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSKA.  [oh.  vn.  1—16 

the  removal  of  ringleaders  in  iniquity  and  notable  apostates,  as  when  he  made  an  end 
of  the  dynasty  of  Ahab.  Not  a  few  similar  instances  in  subsequent  and  modern  times 
might  be  pointed  out. 

III,  The  extent  of  the  hubt  biscovered  by  the  attempt  at  HEALiNa.  While 
God  was  manifesting  his  intentions  of  mercy  towards  Israel,  the  virulence  of  their 
disease  became  evident.  God  here,  in  condescension  to  our  weakness,  accommodates 
himself  to  the  manner  of  men  and  adopts  their  mode  of  speech.  As  though  he  had  not 
known  the  desperate  state  of  matters  before,  he  speaks  of  it  being  now  discovered.  It 
Is  by  probing  a  wound  that  a  surgeon  discovers  its  'depth,  and  whether  it  reaches  some 
vital  part;  it  is  only  by  careful  examination  a  physician  detects  the  character  of  his 
patient's  disease,  and  whether  it  is  curable  or  likely  to  prove  fatal.  So  with  the  good 
physician  on  closely  examining  the  state  of  Israel ;  he  found  it  even  worse  than  had 
been  supposed — much  worse  than  it  appeared  to  the  superficial  observer.  Much,  no 
doubt,  must  have  appeared  on  the  surface,  and  much  lay  hid  in  secret ;  it  had  been,  in 
fact,  "  half  revealed,  half  concealed."  When  the  iniquity  of  Ephraim  was  fully  dis- 
covered and  the  wickedness  of  Samaria  clearly  seen,  it  proved  incurable,  so  enormoiu 
was  their  guilt,  so  hardened  were  they  in  their  transgressions,  above  all,  so  impenitent 
were  they  and  so  unwilling  to  be  helped  and  healed.  Their  obduracy  barred  the  door 
against  the  entrance  of  mercy,  their  refusal  to  part  with  their  enormities  checked  the 
outgoings  of  the  Divine  goodness  towards  them.  Nay  more;  as  when  a  rock  rises  up 
in  a  river-bed,  or  the  stream  is  narrowed  by  the  encroaching  banks,  the  water  rushes 
with  greater  violence  and  is  lashed  into  foam,  so  the  very  attempt  to  repress  the  sin  of 
Israel  remlered  it  more  violent  and  outrageous.  The  rulers  and  those  who  occupied 
high  places,  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  metropolis  Samaria,  and  the  people  of  the  pre- 
eminent tribe  of  Ephraim,  proved  the  most  incorrigible  of  all.  Among  the  vices  of  the 
time  were  falsehood  and  fraud,  and  the  fraud  was  both  private  and  public. 

IV.  The  sins  charged  against  Iskabl  are  common  to  them,  with  the  ungodly, 
AT  ALL  times.  This  assertion  is  proved  by  the  further  enumeration  of  these  sins  by 
Hosea.  There  was  also  sinful  security  and  senseless  stupidity.  1.  They  did  not  confer 
with  their  own  hearts  in  reference  to  their  state  in  the  sight  of  God,  nor  impress  on 
themselves  their  responsibility  to  him.  They  were  strangers  to  any  right  searching 
of  heart,  or  any  serious  reflection  on  the  issues  of  their  conduct  and  conversation.  It 
is  thus  with  hundreds  of  our  fellow-men;  want  of  consideration  has  ruined  thousands 
both  for  time  and  eternity ;  hence  the  earnest  wish  of  the  great  lawgiver,  "  Oh  that 
they  were  wise,  that  they  understood  this,  that  they  would  consider  their  latter  endl" 
Hence,  too,  the  solemn  command  of  "  the  Lord  of  hosts;  Consider  your  ways."  2.  The 
want  of  consideration  or  of  communing  with  their  own  heart  had  special  reference  to  the 
relationship  in  which  they  stood  to  God.  They  did  not  reflect  that  God  remembered 
all  their  wickedness,  consequently  they  did  not  recollect  their  liability  to  punishment 
for  their  wickedness  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  therefore  they  did  not  feel  any  remorse 
on  account  of  their  wickedness  when  committed.  Being  spared  after  their  wickedness, 
and  not  visited  with  immediate  vengeance  because  of  their  wickedness,  they  thought 
themselves  certain  of  impunity;  enjoying  a  season  of  prosjierity  notwithstanding  the 
greatness  of  their  wickedness,  they  were  emboldened  in  their  wicked  ways.  3.  Atheism, 
theoretical  or  practical,  or  both,  was  at  the  root  of  the  matter  with  them.  The  first 
article  of  belief  emliraces  the  existence  of  God,  and  the  existence  of  God  implies  a 
Being  of  Divine  attributes  and  infinite  perfections;  the  secmd  article  includes  a  belief 
in  God  that  he  is  a  Eecompenser  of  men's  actions — a  Eewarder  of  them  that  diligently 
seek  him,  and  a  Punisher  of  all  workers  of  wickedness.  They  rejected,  at  least  prac- 
tically, these  rudiments  of  the  faith,  these  primary  articles  of  belief;  "as  if  God  could 
not  Bee  their  wickedness,  though  he  is  all  eye ;  and  did  not  heed  it,  though  his  name 
is  Jealous ;  or  had  forgotten  it,  though  he  is  an  eternal  mind  that  can  never  be  unmind- 
ful ;  or  would  not  reckon  for  it,  though  he  is  the  Judge  of  heaven  and  earth.  This  is 
the  sinner's  atheism ;  as  good  say  there  is  no  God,  as  say  he  is  either  ignorant  or  for- 
getful; none  that  judgeth  in  the  earth,  as  say  he  remembers  not  the  things  he  is  to 
give  judgment  upon ;  it  is  a  high  affront  they  put  upon  God,  it  is  a  damning  cheat 
they  put  upon  themselves,  when  they  say.  The  Lord  shall  not  see"  nor  remember. 
4.  The  eyes  of  such  shall  he  opened  one  day.  They  shall  wake  up  out  of  their  day- 
dream, and  their  delusion  shall  vanish  when  their  doings  shall  laeset  them  about,  and 


OH.  TIL  1— It.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  211 

the  gad  effects  thereof  ghall  entangle  them  as  in  a  net.  They  shall  see  their  sins  In  the 
punishments  they  bring  upon  them  ;  they  shall  feel  them  in  the  sorrows  and  sufferings 
that  attend  them  ;  and  they  shall  recognize  that  God  had  them  before  his  face  all  the 
time,  having  knowledge  of  them  when  committed,  taking  notice  of  their  demerit,  and 
r  membering  them  for  the  exercise  of  his  retributive  justice.  Even  men's  secret  sins 
God  sets  in  the  light  (literally  "luminary,"  maor)  of  his  countenance;  the  fire-flashing 
pye  of  the  Omniscient  penetrates  the  deep  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and  brings  forth 
Its  secret  workings  into  the  sight  of  the  sun  and  the  broad  light  of  day. 

V.  Obsequiousness  to  rulers  in  theik  sinful  commands  ob  courses  I8  extremely 
PERNICIOUS.  It  may  please  ungodly  sovereigns  or  civil  rulers  to  find  subjects  so  pliable 
as  at  once  to  fall  in  with  their  wicked  works  and  ways ;  or  to  be  flattered  by  them ; 
or  to  hear  the  upright  who  oppose  their  vilenessi  slandered ;  or  to  listen  to  the  lieS  by 
which  the  unscrupulous  seek  to  ingratiate  themselves;  but  such  pandering  must  prove 
pitiful  and  profitless  work  for  both  the  persons  who  indulge  in  it  and  the  princes  who 
encourage  it.  The  former  have  often  realized,  though  not  perhaps  to  the  same  extent, 
the  bitter  experience  of  the  great  cardinal  when  he  said — 

"  Oh,  how  wretched 
Is  that  poor  man  that  hangs  on  princes'  faroural 
There  is,  betwixt  that  smile  we  would  aspire  to^ 
That  sweet  aspect  of  princes,  and  their  ruin, 
More  pangs  and  fears  than  wars  or  women  hav*; 
And  when  he  falls,  he  falls  like  Lucifer, 
Never  to  hope  again.  .  ,  , 
Had  I  but  served  my  God  with  half  the  zeal 
I  served  my  king,  he  would  not  in  mine  age 
Ilave  left  me  naked  to  mine  enemies." 

There  !■  an  alternative  interpretation  of  ver.  3  which  presents  the  other  side,  and 
another  aspect  of  the  case,  namely,  when  deceitful  men  wickedly  and  mendaciously 
impose  on  the  credulity  of  princes  by  false  professions  of  friendship  at  the  very  time 
they  are  plotting  their  downfall  and  planning  their  destruction.  The  ordinary  accepta- 
tion, however,  suits  the  sense  of  the  passage  very  well.  When  people  are  so  wicked  as 
to  conform  to  the  idolatrous  worship  prescribed  by  godless  rulers,  or  to  imitate  their 
impious  and  immoral  practices,  or  to  applaud  their  worthless  favourites,  or  to  calumniate 
those  known  to  be  obnoxious  to  them,  those  rulers  are  more  than  gratified  and  glad- 
dened by  such  lying  and  baseness,  they  are  encouraged  and  stimulated  in  their  wrong- 
doing, while  a  terrible  responsibility  rests  upon  the  head  of  both.  Thus  Herod,  after 
harassing  the  Church  and  slaying  James  the  brother  of  John,  "because  he  saw  it 
pleased  the  Jews,  proceeded  further  to  take  Peter."  People,  again,  when  they  see  that 
their  acts  of  wickedness  please  their  rulers,  or  their  accounts  thereof  amuse  them,  are 
emboldened  to  proceed  yet  further.  Thus  sovereigns  and  subjects  encouraging  each 
other  in  sin  ultimately  work  each  other's  destruction.  There  is  probably  a  reference  to 
the  people's  facile  complaisance  with  the  idolatry  of  the  calves  legalized  by  Jeroboam, 
or  of  Baal  by  Ahab — a  conscienceless  acquiescence  which  in  the  end  was  fraught  with 
the  most  baneful  results  to  princes  and  people. 

VL  The  course  of  sin  is  a  downward  blopk.  After  reprehending  the  profligate 
pleasure  which  both  princes  and  people  took  in  sin,  the  prophet  reproves  the  servile 
submission  of  the  latter  to  idolatry,  and  the  debaucheries  ot  the  former.  The  adultery 
which  he  proceeds  to  stigmatize  may  be  understood  literally  as  well  as  spiritually,  the 
former  being  so  frequent  an  accompaniment  of  the  latter.  In  this  case  the  heart  is 
aptly  compared  to  an  oven,  its  lusts  the  fire  with  which  it  is  heated ;  while  Satan  sup- 
plies by  his  temptations  the  fuel  to  the  fire,  and  at  the  same  time  puts  the  leaven  in 
the  dough.  Whether  the  baker,  after  kindling  the  fire,  ceases  from  stirring  it  till  morn- 
ing, by  which  time  the  dough  is  leavened  and  ready  for  the  oven,  which  he  then  raises  to 
a  greater  heat ;  or  whether  he  rests  comparatively  while  still  stoking  during  the  interval 
that  elapses  from  kneading  the  dough  till  it  is  leavened  and  ready  for  use;  in  either  case 
there  is  a  respite,  not  from  the  fire  of  lust  abating  or  the  fuel  of  temptation  ceasing,  but 
from  want  of  opportunity  oi  courage  or  ability.  Soon,  however,  as  the  occasion  presents 
itself,  or  opportunity  is  afforded,  or  means  of  gratification  are  available,  or  hopp  of 


212  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vn.  1—16. 

impunity  is  cherislied,  the  fire  of  lust  that  seemed  smouldering  flames  up  with  increased 
intensity ;  the  wicked  plot  is  executed ;  the  covert  passion  breaks  out  into  the  overt 
act;  the  half-stifled  concupiscence  finds  vent;  the  lustful,  covetous,  or  ambitious  project 
is  accomplished. 

VII.  Dbuneeitness  18  A  FBEPABATiON  FOB  OTHBB  wiOEBDKESs.  The  reference  to 
it  in  ver.  6  is  interjected  between  the  mention  of  adultery  and  other  enormities,  as 
if  it  were  an  iocentive  thereto.  1.  The  occasion  on  which  the  intemperance  took 
place  was  a  celebration  day,  whether  the  king's  birthday,  or  the  day  of  his  accession 
to  the  throne,  or  his  coronation  day.  As  it  was,  it  is ;  days  of  celebration,  while  not 
improper  in  themselves,  may  be  turned  into  days  of  sinful  carousal.  Days  of  high 
festival  that  ought  to  be  days  of  thanksgiving  to  God,  of  grateful  praise  and  holy  joy, 
are  too  often  taken  advantage  of  for  purposes  of  intemperance,  gluttony,  or  dissipation. 
Days  that  should  be  consecrated  to  religious  exercises  or  real  national  rejoicing  are  too 
frequently  desecrated  by  irreligious  sensuality  and  anti-religious  debauch.  2.  Accord- 
ing to  the  common  rendering,  the  health  of  the  king  suffered ;  according  to  another 
rendering,  which  some  prefer,  the  day  was  begun  so  that  his  honour  was  tarnished. 
According  to  either,  his  high  dignity  was  levelled  in  the  dust.  It  is  bad  enough  and 
sad  enough  to  see  any  man  indulge  in  the  sin  of  intemperance — a  sin  which  deranges 
and  disorders  the  body,  damages  the  soul  and  its  eternal  interests,  dishonours  God,  and 
degrades  man  below  the  beast  that  perisheth.  But  for  a  king  who  is  appointed  to 
govern  others  to  lose  the  government  of  himself  through  such  scandalous  excess,  is  the. 
extreme  of  vileness ;  hence  the  faithful  admonition,  "  It  is  not  for  kings,  O  Lemuel, 
it  is  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine."  3.  While  the  duty  of  a  king  was  neglected,  the 
dignity  of  a  king  was  sacrificed.  Eimchi  has  the  following  judicious  remark  in  reference 
to  this  matter :  "  The  prophet  says.  What  was  the  business  of  the  piinces  with  the 
king  ?  There  was  no  conversation  about  the  might  and  conquest  of  the  enemies  and 
about  the  establishment  of  justice,  as  it  becomes  the  king  of  a  free  nation,  but  their 
business  consisted  in  eating  and  drinking  until  they  made  the  king  sick  from  the 
excessive  drinking  of  wine."  Even  worse,  if  possible,  was  the  fact  of  his  debasing  him- 
self by  companionship  with  profane  scoffers.  Bashi  aptly  observes,  "  The  king  with- 
draws his  hand  from  the  good  and  worthy  in  order  to  join  in  fellowship  with  scorners. 
The  men  that  put  the  bottle  to  his  mouth  with  professed  friendliness  were,  as  the  event 
proved,  plotting  his  ruin  and  preparing  for  his  assassination." 

VIII.  The  8BEMINO  respitk  fbom,  and  bbactionart  nature  of,  sin.  The  respite  was 
not  a  real  rest  from  sin ;  it  was  only  the  interval  while  the  mischief  was  being  premedi- 
tated, and  the  opportunity  for  putting  it  in  practice  waited  for.  1.  In  the  morning,  at  the 
first  and  earliest  opportunity,  soon  as  the  plot  was  matured  and  the  favourable  moment 
for  its  execution  arrived,  the  fire  of  passion  or  lust  that  had  been  burning  slowly  all  the 
time  broke  out  afresh  and  with  greatly  increased  vigour.  They  made  ready,  applied, 
or,  as  Pusey  says, "  literally  brought  near  their  heart.  Their  heart  was  ever  brought  near 
to  sin,  even  while  the  occasion  was  removed  at  a  distance  from  it."  While  the  leaven 
is  commingling  with  the  dough  and  the  fuel  combining  with  the  fire,  the  baker  may 
•leep,  OT  seem  to  do  so;  so,  while  temptation,  like  fuel,  is  acting  on  the  fire  of  lust  within, 
and  the  evil  suggestion  of  Satan  is  pervading  the  powers  of  the  soul  in  which  it  has 
found  lodgment,  the  tempter  may  appear  to  slumber.  The  work  is  going  on  internally; 
and  once  the  occasion  offers  it  shall  be  carried  out  externally  in  full  force  and  certain 
effect,  2.  A  man  throws  a  stone  in  the  air  and  it  comes  back  on  his  own  head ;  men 
sin  themselves  or  tempt  others  to  sin,  and  the  consequences  recoil  on  themselves.  The 
Israelitish  kings,  from  the  period  of  the  disruption  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam,  corrupted 
the  worship  of  God  or  acquiesced  in  that  corruption,  and  induced  the  people  to  conform 
to  that  corruption  and  other  sinful  courses  that  followed  in  its  wake ;  and  all  for  their 
own  political  advantnge  and  private  selfish  ends — to  prevent,  if  possible,  the  return  of 
power  to  the  Davidic  line,  and  the  reunion  of  the  ten  tribes  with  the  two.  But  the 
time  of  reaction  arrived,  and  the  retributive  Nemesis  began  to  work  ;  the  people  who 
had  been  corrupted  by  their  rulers  now  turned  against  their  corrupters ;  disloyalty  to 
God  brought  in  its  train  disloyalty  to  man ;  kings  and  subordinate  rulers  perished  in 
quick  succession.  And  notwithstanding  the  times  of  anarchy,  insecurity  for  life  and 
property,  and  general  upheaval  of  social  order — amid  all  those  scenes  of  terrible  con- 
'iision,  there  was  none  among  them  to  realise  the  fact  th*t  "  for  the  transgression  of  a 


OH.  TO.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  213 

land  many  are  the  princes  thereof."  Consequently  theie  was  none  among  them  to  call 
upon  God  in  supplication  for  relief  and  preservation. 

Vers.  8 — ^11. — The  silly  sinful  pride  and  obduracy  of  Israel,  in  spite  of  many  mantfest 
tokens  of  decay,  or  their  disastrous  foreign  policy.  The  prophet  had  descrihed  the  cor- 
ruption ;  he  now  turns  to  the  state  of  the  country.  From  the  iniquity  of  the  princes  he 
descends  to  the  sin  of  the  people.  The  figure  of  baking  is  still  present  to  the  prophet, 
as  is  evident  from  the  metaphor  of  a  cake. 

L  ThB    INCONSISTENOT    and  WOBTHLESSNESB    of  divided   ALLEaiANCB.      Qod    had 

intended  to  separate  Israel  from  the  rest  of  the  nations,  and  by  prohibiting  inter- 
marriages to  keep  them  distinct.  1.  The  great  purpose  of  this  separation  was  to  prevent 
their  associating  with  their  heathen  neighbours,  and  conforming  to  their  idolatries  and 
immoralities.  Thus  they  were  to  conserve  the  doctrines  of  the  Divine  unity,  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God,  and  the  purity  of  his  worship.  But  by  intercourse  with  their 
neighbours,  and  forming  alliances  now  with  one  then  with  another,  in  order  to  secure 
their  help — the  help  of  one  against  another — ^they  got  mixed  up  with  them,  and  became 
like  a  cake  in  which  two  ingredients  at  least,  Judaism  and  Gentilism,  were  kneaded 
together.  The  consequence  of  such  admixture,  as  the  word  (^^a)  implies,  was  confusion. 
2.  But,  in  addition  to  baking  the  cake  of  such  heterogeneous  elements,  there  was  the 
defective  ovening,  or  rather  imperfect  hardening  of  the  cake  by  fire,  so  that  one  side  was 
burnt  and  blackened,  the  other  doughy  and  damp — neither  roast  nor  raw,  and  conse- 
quently useless.  Thus  Israel  was  often,  as  in  the  days  of  Abab,  halting  between  G«d 
and  Baal ;  now  zealous  for  the  latter  and  indifferent  to  the  former,  or  the  converse ; 
more  commonly  cold  towards  Jehovah  and  warm  for  Baal ;  frequently  neither  cold  nor 
hot,  but  lukewarm.  They  blended  Gentile  idolatry  with  the  worship  of  the  true  Qod ; 
they  joined  in  the  calf-worship  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  while  they  swore  by  the  Name  of 
Jehovah.  It  is  thus  also  with  many  professing  Christians :  they  have  a  name  to  live, 
but  are  dead  ;  they  have  a  form  of  godliness,  but  want  the  power;  they  are  hypocritical 
professors,  but  are  devoid  of  real  godliness.  Whatever  outward  services  they  perform, 
it  is  for  parade  or  to  be  seen  of  men,  while  they  are  strangers  to  the  practice  of  piety 
and  exercise  of  charity.  The  Targum  explains  this  of  punishment  rather  than  of 
position.  "  The  house  of  Ephraim  is  like  to  a  cake  baked  on  coals,  which  before  it  is 
turned  is  eaten  ; "  that  is,  they  are  suddenly  destroyed  by  their  enemies,  who  are  like 
hungry  men  that,  without  waiting  for  the  turning  and  proper  baking  of  a  cake,  snatch 
it  up,  though  only  half  baked,  and  speedily  devour  it. 

II.  Tokens  of  Divine  displeasobb.  When  God  is  displeased  with  a  person  or  a 
people,  one  way  in  which  he  manifests  such  displeasure  is  by  desertion.  He  leaves 
them  in  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  On  the  contrary,  when  a  man's  ways  please  the 
Lord,  he  makes  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  When  Israel,  in  consequence 
of  sin,  was  thus  deserted,  strangers  devoured  his  strength,  that  is  to  say,  his  substance ; 
they  robbed  him  of  his  wealth,  they  wasted  the  fruits  of  his  field,  they  dismantled  his 
fortresses,  they  destroyed  the  flower  of  the  population,  and  they  imposed  oppressive 
tribute.  The  strangers  referred  to  included  several  nationalities.  The  Syrians  had  so 
weakened  and  dirtressed  Israel  in  the  reign  of  Jehoahaz  that  they  had  made  them 
"  like  the  dust  by  threshing."  Then  came  the  Assyrians  nnder  Pal  in  the  days  of 
Menahem  King  of  Israel,  and  exacted  a  tribute  of  a  thousand  talents  of  silver,  thus 
draining  their  resources  and  devouring  their  strength.  Subsequently,  Tiglath-pileger, 
monarch  of  Assyria,  captured  many  of  the  Israelitish  fortresses,  and  carried  the  inhabi- 
tants into  captivity.  By  such  exactions  and  devastations  strangers  exhausted  ttie 
strength  of  IsraeL 

III.  Marks  of  nationai.  and  spiritual  deoat.  Grey  hairs,  if  plentiful,  are  a  sign 
that  old  age  has  already  arrived ;  grey  hairs,  when  sprinkled  here  and  there,  are  symp- 
toms of  its  approach,  and  of  life's  decline.  1.  Grey  hairs  had  at  this  time  appeared 
here  and  there  in  Israel,  and  thus  proved  the  kingdom  to  be  in  a  weak  and  declining 
state ;  they  were  not  only  symptomatic  of  the  present,  but  prognostic  of  the  future. 
They  afforded  proof  plain  and  palpable  of  national  declension  at  present  existing  through 
the  depredations  and  exactions  of  the  enemy;  they  also  foreboded  the  melancholy  fact 
that  utter  decay  was  near  at  hand.  2.  But  there  is  also  spiritual  decay,  and  the  life  of 
the  soul  is  subject  to  it.    How  many  professing  Christians— members  of  the  visible 


214  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  ra.  1—16. 

Church— are  in  this  sad  condition  of  spiritual  declension,  and  hardly  consdous  of  it  I 
Grey  biurs  are  here  and  there  upon  them,  and  they  know  it  not.  The  dwelling>plaoe  of 
Grod  is  not  so  lovely,  nor  the  tabernacles  of  his  grace  so  amiable,  as  they  once  were ;  there 
is  not  the  same  relish  for  the  Word  of  God  as  there  once  was ;  prayer  is  not  so  fervent  or 
so  frequent  as  formerly ;  praises  are  not  so  hearty  nor  so  heavenly  as  when  the  Christian 
life  began ; — all  such  circumstances  °;ive  evidence  that  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon 
persons  in  the  condition  indicated,  whether  they  perceive  them  or  not.  But  ve  cannot 
stay  to  dwell  on  the  nature  of  spiritual  decay  and  the  marks  thereof;  we  may,  however, 
briefly  sum  them  up.  They  are  such  as  the  following :  diminished  appreciation  of  the 
Divine  Word,  without  self-application  of  it  or  growth  in  the  knowledge  of  it ;  restraining 
prayer  before  God,  without  supplication  for  one's  self  on  special  occasions  and  under 
particular  circumstances,  and  without  earnest  intercession  for  others;  less  love  to  Christ 
and  less  leaning  on  him;  less  hatred  of  sin  and  less  esteem  for  the  righteous.  3.  It  is 
of  prime  importance  to  ascertain  the  causes  of  decay.  What  caused  the  national  decay 
of  Israel?  There  was  the  prevalence  of  lust:  "They  are  all  adulterers,  as  an  oven 
heated  by  the  baker ; "  this  was  one  of  the  causes  of  Israel's  decline.  Another  cause 
was  their  intercourse  with  the  ungodly :  "  Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself  among  the 
people."  These  may  be  taken  as  specimens  of  the  causes  which  brought  about  the 
national  decline  of  Israel.  When  lust  prevailed,  or  when  they  associated  freely  among 
the  nations  instead  of  dwelling  alone,  grey  hairs  appeared  here  and  there  upon  them. 
So  is  it  with  spiritual  decay  in  the  case  of  Christians.  Wlien  sensual  lust,  or  lust  for 
gold,  or  for  pleaaiue,  or  for  praise,  overmasters  a  follower  of  Christ,  decay  bas  set  in, 
grey  hairs  show  themselves  here  and  there  upon  him.  Again,  when  worldly  society  is 
eagerly  sought  and  keenly  relished  by  Christians,  forgetful  that,  like  Israel  of  old,  they 
are  a  peculiar  people,  as  our  Lord  has  said,  "  Ye  are  not  of  the  world,  as  I  am  not  of 
the  world,"  then  spiritual  affections  are  decaying,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon 
them.  4.  The  most  surprising  circumstance  of  all  is  the  ignorance  of  those  who  are 
sufferers  by  this  process  of  decay.  Israel  did  not  know  because  he  did  not  wish  to 
know,  as  if  by  ignoring  it  he  could  conceal  it  from  himself  or  others.  "  He  knoweth 
not,"  says  Pusey,  "  the  tokens  of  decay  in  himself,  but  hides  them  from  himself;  he 
knoweth  not  God,  who  is  the  Author  of  them;  he  knoweth  not  the  cause  of  them,  his 
sins ;  he  knoweth  not  the  end  and  object  of  them,  his  conversion ;  he  knoweth  not 
what,  since  he  knoweth  not  any  of  these  things,  will  he  the  issue  of  them,  his  destruc- 
tion." Somehow  thus  it  is  with  spiritual  decay.  Most  persons  dislike  the  idea  of 
growing  old,  or  even  of  being  thought  old.  They  care  not  to  notice  themselves,  and 
they  conceal  from  others  as  much  as  possible,  the  marks  of  age  and  the  progress  of 
decay.  All  the  while  grey  hairs  multiply,  and  old  age  creeps  on  apace,  almost  imper- 
ceptibly and  without  being  observed,  so  that  in  a  certain  sense  many  persons  become 
old  without  fully  realizing  the  fact.  Likewise  in  the  decay  of  life  in  a  Christian's  soul, 
it  goes  on  secretly,  and  little,  if  at  all,  noticed,  like  the  silent  advance  of  age  with  its 
gradually  increasing  decrepitude  and  decay ;  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him, 
and  he  knows  it  not.  Let  us  beware  of  the  insidious  approach  of  spiritual  decay,  and 
be  on  our  guard  against  it. 

lY.  Pbide  baisbs  a  great  barrieb  between  the  80UL  AND  Gh>Di  Notwithstanding 
Israel's  decline,  pride  attended  them  still ;  it  remained  unsubdued ;  it  prevented  their 
return  to  God ;  it  stood  in  the  way  of  their  seeking  him.  Or,  if  the  other  translation  be 
preferred,  and  if  it  be  granted  that  Israel's  pride  was  humbled  by  the  calamities  that 
had  come  upon  them,  those  calamities  had  not  been  sanctified,  and  so  they  returned 
not  to  nor  sought  the  Lord.  For  all  this,  and  in  spite  of  all  God's  merciful  dealings 
with  them,  they  persisted  in  their  impenitence  and  stood  out  against  the  Most  High. 
God  had  shown  them  his  loving-kindness,  and  again  he  had  visited  them  with  severe 
corrections ;  he  had  almost  exhausted  the  resources  of  his  grace ;  and  yet  they  were  in 
no  way  bettered,  but  rather  grew  worse.  Bo  is  it  with  many.  God's  gracious  dealings 
fill  to  draw  them  to  God ;  his  a69ictive  dispensations  too  often  drive  them  away  from 
God.  And  yet,  when  he  sends  affliction,  it  is  a  loud  call  on  men,  not  only  to  seek  relief 
from  God,  but  also  to  seek  God  himself,  his  face  and  favour— free  as  well  as  that  help 
which  be  alone  can  give ;  whereas  obstinate  impenitence  frustrates  the  dispensations 
of  Providence,  and  afflictions  unsanctiiied  in  no  way  better  men  or  improve  their 
slate. 


OH.  VII.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE  A.  21E 

V.  POLLT  THE  CAUSE  OF  MEN  NEGLECTINO  THE  RIGHT,  AND  RESORTING  TO  WRONG  SOUBCEB 

OP  SUCCOUR  AND  BELIBP.  1.  Simplicity  with  godly  sincerity,  in  accepting  the  Word  of 
God  and  in  obeying  the  will  of  God,  is  estimable  and  highly  commendable ;  simplicity 
without  a  heart  to  love  God,  following  his  guidance,  and  delighting  in  his  governance, 
is  both  wrong-headed  and  reprehensible.  With  regard  to  the  former  there  is  the 
promise,  "The  Lord  preserveth  the  simple;"  in  relation  to  the  latter  the  solemn 
question  is  asked,  "  How  long,  ye  simple  ones,  will  ye  love  simplicity?"  The  union 
of  simplicity  or  ingenuousness  of  purpose  with  understanding  of  Iieart  is  commended  by 
the  exhortation  of  our  Lord,  "  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,  harmless  [or, '  simple ']  as  doves." 
2.  The  silliness  of  Israel  was  simplicity  in  its  bad  sense,  as  we  learn  from  the  specimen 
of  their  conduct  which  the  prophet  subjoins.  The  calamities  which  befell  them  were 
«o  many  calls  to  them  to  return  to  God  and  seek  his  merciful  interposition ;  but,  instead 
of  applying  to  God,  they  exhibited  unspeakable  folly  in  having  recourse  to  one  or  other 
of  the  two  great  rival  powers,  Egypt  and  Assyria,  of  which  the  former  was  as  unreliable 
as  a  broken  reed,  piercing  the  hand  that  leans  on  it,  and  the  latter  crushing  and  cruel 
as  the  king  of  foreign  beasts  in  devouring  his  prey.  "  Egypt,"  it  has  been  well  said, 
"  was  a  delusive  promiser,  not  failing  only,  but  piercing  those  who  leant  on  it ;  Assyria 
was  a  powerful  oppressor."  3.  The  miseries  which  Israel  brought  upon  himself,  and 
in  which  men  frequently  involve  themselves  by  taking  a  similarly  silly  and  simple 
course,  were  (1)  unescapable,  and  such  as  they  could  by  no  possibility  extricate  them- 
selves from,  for  the  net  of  God  would  ensnare  and  envelop  them.  (2)  They  are  un- 
questionably certain ;  for  however  high  hopes  men  may  entertain  of  their  carnal 
confidences,  to  whatever  height  of  temporary  prosperity  they  may  be  elevated,  God  is 
sure  to  bring  them  down,  and  their  fall  will  be  disgraceful  in  proportion  to  the  elevation 
they  fancied  themselves  to  have  attained.  (3)  They  will  consist  of  sore  chastisements, 
and  all  the  sorer  from  being  so  well  deserved.  4.  The  folly  of  such  conduct  in  the  face 
of  warnings  so  great  and  manifold  is  as  inexcusable  as  undeserving  of  pity.  Israel 
sent  southward  to  Egypt  or  travelled  northward  to  Assyria  in  search  of  human  helps, 
all  the  time  turning  their  back  on  God;  while  to  all  the  exhortations  and  remonstrances 
addressed  to  the  congregation  of  Israel  they  refused  to  lend  an  ear.  Line  upon  line 
they  had  been  favoured  with  in  the  book  of  the  Law — in  the  blessings  on  obedience 
and  the  curses  on  disobedience  which  Ebal  and  Gerizim  respectively  re-echoed—  in  the 
teachings  of  other  prophets,  in  the  appeals  of  Hosea  himself;  their  heedlessness  to  all 
these  disentitled  thran  to  sympathy  from  man  or  succour  from  God. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS   AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 7. — Sins  of  court  and  country.    The  reproofs  contained  in  this  chapter  lay 

special  emphasis  upon  the  sins  of  the  upper  classes.  But  the  prophet  brands  the  whole 
nation  also  for  its  irreligion  and  immorality,  and  (in  the  second  part  of  the  chapter) 
for  its  political  corruption. 

I.  The  exposure  op  Israel's  sis.  The  wickedness  of  the  people  is  portrayed,  both 
as  regards  principles  and  individual  acts.  It  may  be  described  as :  1.  Cold-Wooded  in 
its  principles.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  These  showed  themselves  in  habits  of:  (1)  "  Falsehood." 
(Ver.  1.)  There  was  "  no  truth  in  the  land  "  (ch.  iv.  1).  The  life  of  the  nation  had 
become  a  lie.  Towards  God  there  was  chronic  hypocrisy,  and  towards  man  habits  of 
theft  and  robbery  (ch.  vi.  6—10).     (2)  Sympathy  with  sin  and  crime.    (Ver.  3.)    The 


subjects.     Such  satisfaction  ..  — ,    ,,    ,         .,  ■         t       it 

(B)  Spiritual  inconsiderateness.  (Vers.  2,  7.)  ,  The  root  of  all  the  evil  was  Israels 
forgetfulness  of  God.  They  failed  to  remember  his  holiness,  his  justice,  his  omnisci^ce. 
And  in  ignoring  these  truths,  they  neglected  also  their  own  highest  interests ;  for,  from 
the  lack  of  timelv  repentance,  their  sins  "  beset  them  about."  This  inconsiderateness 
is  the  cardinal  error  of  all  ungodly  men.     Multitudes,  like  Ephraim,  have  had  their 


216  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  to.  1—16. 

pared  three  several  times  to  a  baker's  "  oven,"  the  meaning  being  that  in  doing  their 
deeds  of  guilt  they  were  enthusiastic  and  passionate.  They  sinned  hotly  in  the  direc- 
tion of:  (X)  Idolatry.  (Ver.  4.)  "They  are  all  adulterers;"  t.e.  king,  princes,  and 
people  alike  were  guilty  of  apostasy  from  Jehovah,  and  shared  in  the  dissoluteness 
which  was  associated  with  the  worsiiip  of  the  Phoenician  deities.  "  They  had  violated 
their  faith  pledged  to  God,  they  gave  themselves  up  to  filthy  superstitions,  and  they 
had  wholly  corrupted  themselves;  for  faith  and  sincerity  of  heart  constitute  spiritual 
chastity  before  God  "  (Calvin).  Their  souls  were  inflamed  with  their  idolatrous  lusts 
like  a  burning  oven.  (2)  Debauchery.  (Ver.  5.)  Both  the  king  and  the  nobles 
followed  habits  of  intemperance.  At  the  banquet  held  on  the  royal  birthday  he  and 
they  "  erred  through  strong  drink,"  and  scoffed  together  at  the  majesty  of  Jehovah.  In 
our  own  country,  too,  how  many  there  are  who  spend  Christmas  as  if  they  were  cele- 
brating the  birth  of  the  devil  rather  than  that  of  the  Redeemer  1  (3)  Anarohy.  (Vers. 
6,  7.)  The  fiery  passions  of  the  people  caused  the  land  to  be  long  torn  by  disorder  and 
revolution.  Their  rulers  became  fuel  for  the  fire  of  their  anger.  "  All  their  kings  are 
fallen;" — Ze-chariali  was  murdered  by  Shallum,  Shallum  by  Menahem,  Pekahiah  by 
Pekah,  etc.  Indeed,  very  few  of  the  monarchs  of  the  northern  kingdom  died  in  peace. 
During  its  entire  course,  the  heat  of  political  violence  devoured  like  a  furnace ;  and  in 
the  deepest  national  calamities  none  sought  the  aid  of  the  Divine  King. 

IL  What  led  to  this  exposure.  1.  The  encircling  presence  of  their  sins.  (Ver.  2.) 
The  people  sinned  so  deeply  and  so  boldly  that  their  enormities  grew  up  around  them 
like  a  rampart.  Wherever  they  went  their  wickedness  attended  them,  and  became  a 
swift  witness  against  them.  A  man's  iniquity  wraps  him  round  like  a  poisoned  tunic. 
He  is  "  holden  with  the  cords  of  his  sins  "  (Prov.  v.  22) ;  and  it  is  his  own  hands, 
alas  I  that  have  forged  and  riveted  his  chains.  Evil  doings  "  beset "  a  man  through 
the  accusations  of  conscience,  through  the  power  of  habit,  through  the  action  of  natural 
law,  and  through  the  providence  of  God,  which  makes  sure  that  his  "  sin  wiU  find  him 
out."  2.  Ood's  remembrance  of  their  sin*.  (Ver.  2.)  The  Lord  must  take  notice  of 
sin,  for  he  must  punish  it.  Although  the  sinful  nation  has  forgotten  this,  the  fact 
remains.  "  They  are  before  my  face ; "  i.e.  ever  present  to  me ;  I  cannot  avoid  seeing 
them.  "  These  words  ['  before  me ']  in  the  first  commandment  teach  us  that  God,  who 
seeth  all  things,  taketh  notice  of,  aud  is  much  displeased  with,  the  sin  of  having  any 
other  god  "  (Westminster  Assembly's  Shorter  Catechism).  3.  Ood's  efforts  to  cure  them 
of  their  tins.  (Ver.  1.)  As  the  depth  and  seriousness  of  a  wound  are  often  not  known 
until  the  surgeon  probes  it,  and  as  the  nature  of  a  disease  may  not  be  fully  understood 
for  some  time  after  the  physician  has  begun  to  grapple  with  the  case,  so  the  depravity 
•  of  Israel  was  adequately  exposed  only  when  God  adopted  strong  measures  in  connection 
with  it,  by  the  chastisements  of  his  providence,  and  the  warning  voices  of  his  prophets. 
For  the  people  refused  to  obey  each  summons  to  repentance ;  and,  instead  of  placing 
confidence  in  Jehovah,  "  they  called  to  Egypt,  and  went  to  Assyria  "  (ver.  11).  So  the 
very  means  of  grace  which  God  used  in  order  to  save  Israel,  became  the  occasion  of 
showing  how  far  the  nation  had  already  wandered  from  him,  and  even  of  inducing  them 
to  wander  still  further.  And  thus  is  it  still,  when  God  deals  with  men  by  his  Word  and 
Spirit.  "  By  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  "  (Rom.  iiL  20).  The  primary  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  to  "convince  the  world  of  sin"  (John  xvi.  8).  By  his  common 
grace  he  gives,  even  to  the  unconverted,  a  partial  view  of  their  own  unworihiness. 
And,  in  the  case  of  all  who  enter  upon  the  Christian  life,  he  uses  the  disclosure  of  sin 
to  lead  the  penitent  to  renounce  all  self-rightecusness,  and  to  fall  at  the  feet  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  mercy, — C.  J. 

Ver.  8. — "  A  cake  not  turned,"    There  are  many  striking  sayings  in  Hosea.    This 

one,  in  particular,  has  a  quiet  touch  of  humour  in  it,  as  well  as  a  severe  reproof.  There 
is  nothing  conventional  in  the  style  of  the  Bible  writers.  When  they  have  anything 
practical  to  say,  they  do  not  wrap  it  up  in  verbiage.  The  Book  of  Hosea  contains 
strains  of  poetry  of  8ur[>assing  splendour ;  yet  here  is  an  illustration  from  the  cottager's 
l^itchen.  Let  us  look  at  this  cake.  It  is  burnt  to  a  ciuder  on  one  side,  and  remedDs 
1 1  amp  and  doughy  on  the  other.  It  is  partly  underdone,  partly  overdone;  and  thus, 
being  neither  dough  nor  bread,  it  is  quite  spoiled,  and  fit  only  to  be  tliruwii  away.  The 
metaphor  reminds  us  of  the  English  legend  of  good  King  Alfred,  when  a  wanderer  in 


OH.  TIL  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA-  217 

tbe  forest  of  Selwood :  the  royal  fngitlve  kept  mending  his  bow  and  arrows,  and  forgot 
to  turn  the  cakes  which  the  neat-herd's  wife  had  committed  to  his  care.  The  first  part 
of  the  verse  helps  us  to  understand  the  metaphor  in  its  application  to  the  kiiigilom  of 
the  ten  tribes.  Ephraim  had  "  mixed  himself  among  tbe  peuple,"  i.e.  entered  into 
political  alliances  with  the  heathen  round  about,  and  conformed  to  their  idolatrous 
usages.  Yet  he  did  not  wish  to  break  with  Jehovah  altogether ;  the  Israelites  continued 
to  observe  the  sabbaths  and  the  feast-days  (ch.  ii.  11).  But  the  simile  before  us  may 
be  used  with  a  still  wider  application.    It  describes — 

I.  The  natdbal  state  of  mankind.  Human  nature  since  the  Fall  has  been 
spoiled  and  worthless.  There  clings  to  it  a  radical  defect  Godward.  Man  is  like  a  cake 
which  has  its  warm  side  to  the  earth,  and  its  cold  side  towards  heaven.  Some  unrenewed 
men  are  very  kindly  in  feeling  and  unselSsh  in  action  towards  their  fellow-men,  but 
all  the  while  their  hearts  remain  cold  and  ungrateful  towards  God.  We  remember  the 
young  man  who  came  to  Christ,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  "  Jesus,  beholdini;  him,  loved 
him"  (Mark  x.  21);  he  was  amiable  and  truthful,  yet  what  a  fatal  "  lack  "  there  was 
in  his  character  I  Such,  however,  is  the  natural  condition  of  man  everywhere — "  a  cake 
not  turned." 

*  Low,  but  majestlo,  though  most  etrangoly  formed 
Of  contradictions  and  antithoses, 
With  head  of  gold  and  feet  of  miry  clay. 
One  half  of  dust,  one  half  of  deity ; 
Touching  the  angel  here,  and  there  the  brute. 
Here, '  thoughts  that  wander  through  eternity ; 
There,  passions  sounding  all  the  sties  of  time; 
His  rooted  selfisbneBS  and  lofty  love. 
His  little  life,  his  princely  intellect, 
Uis  pure  desires,  his  hateful  selflshnoss, 
His  deeds  of  darkness,  and  hia  thoughts  of  light'* 

(Gimilan.) 

II.  The  characteb  or  uani  who  hake  a  rsoFEssioN  of  beliqion.  1.  In  this 
connection  various  ideas  are  suggested.  1.  Eypocrity.  Ephraim  boasted  that  he  was  a 
nation  sacred  to  Jehovah  all  the  while  that  he  addicted  himself  to  the  idolatry  of  Baal  and 
Ashtaroth,  So,  still,  the  man  who  sings  at  meeting  and  swears  at  market  is  a  hypocrite. 
It  is  in  vain  to  call  out  "  Lord,  Lord,"  if  we  do  not  the  things  which  Christ  says. 
Obedience  in  the  letter  is  valueless,  when  divorced  from  obedience  in  the  spirit.  The 
bottles  of  profession  are  of  no  use  if  we  do  not  potir  into  them  the  wine  of  principle.' 
2.  Inetmtistency.  The  people  of  the  northern  kingdom  betrayed  this  in  "mixing 
themselves  "  spiritually  with  the  uncircumcised  and  unclean  Gentiles.  And,  in  our 
own  day,  how  many  there  are  whose  fixed  resolve  seems  to  be  to  wear  the  Christian 
name,  and  at  the  same  time  take  care  not  to  part  from  the  world  t  Their  business 
habits  assume  the  form  of  an  ingeniously  adjusted  compromise  between  the  service  of 
God  and  that  of  mammon.  And  in  social  and  domestic  life  they  try  to  retain  some 
relish  for  the  pleasures  of  religion,  even  amidst  the  pursuit  of  amusements  that  are 
distinctively  worldly.  But  it  is  a  wretched  thing  to  be  "  neither  fish  nor  flesh "  as 
regards  character.  It  is  impossible  to  "run  both  with  the  hare  and  the  hounds."  Spiri- 
tually, each  of  us  is  really  either  one  thing  or  the  other,  and  we  should  seem  to  be  what 
we  are.  The  Lord's  command  is,  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world  "  (Bom.  xii.  2) ; 
"  Gome  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate"  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).  3.  Ealf-heartedness, 
There  are  many  who  name  Christ's  Name  by  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  whose 
religion,  as  reflected  in  their  daily  lives,  seems  little  more  than  nominaL  You  cannot 
say  that  they  are  wicked  sinners,  but  neither  dare  you  call  them  saints.  They  are  too 
good  to  ban,  and  too  bad  to  bless;  too  good  for  hell,  but  not  nearly  good  enough  for 
heaven.  Their  character  is  one  of  insipid  negative  respectability.  Then  there  are 
those  also  who  make  only  a  half-and-half  profession — who^confess  Christ's  Name  so  far  as 
to  attend  public  worship,  but  stop  short  at  the  threshold  of  the  guest-chamber,  where 
the  Lord's  Supper  is  spread.  Perhaps  they  think  that  only  conscientious  scruples  keep 
them  back  ;  but  God,  who  knows  the  heart,  may  judge  that  it  is  rather  half-hearted- 
iiess.    For,  if  Christianity  be  true,  it  is  a  tremendous  verity.    And  if  it  be  right  to 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  tu.  1—16, 


hear  Christ's  gospel  preached,  it  is  dutiful  also  to  obey  his  other  precepts ;  as,  e.g.,  to 
"do  titis  in  remembrance  of  him," and, "  whatsoever  we  do,  to  do  all  in  the  Name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus." 

III.  The  spiEiruAi.  condition  or  mant  tbub  Christians.  Indeed,  we  might  almost 
Bay,  of  all.  For  where  is  the  believer  whose  spiritual  condition  satisfies  his  own  enlight- 
ened convictions  as  to  what  he  ought  to  be  ?  Our  personal  deficiencies  abound ;  and 
these  are  due  either  to  our  moral  ignorance  or  to  our  moral  supineness.  1.  Our  Chrig- 
tian  character  lacks  thoroughness.  The  process  of  sanctification  is  designed  to  renew  us 
"  in  the  whole  man,"  and  yet  we  know  that  in  fact  a  holy  character  is  never  perfected 
in  this  life.  Every  believer  has  within  him  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  and  the  purer 
he  becomes  he  is  the  more  ready  to  acknowledge  the  imperfection  of  his  nature.  Many 
true  Christians, however,  do  not  co-operate  with  God's  Spirit  so  earnestly  as  they  might, 
in  striving  to  rid  themselves  of  indwelling  sin.  They  carry  with  them  that  Laodicean 
lukewarmness  which  the  Lord  abhors  (Rev.  iii.  16) ;  their  Christian  character,  in  want- 
ing thoroughness,  is  like  "  a  cake  not  turned."  2.  It  also  lacks  all-sidedness.  A  man 
may  be  a  true  believer  for  a  lifetime,  and  yet  neglect  entirely  to  bring  some  important 
departments  of  conduct  into  contact  with  the  fire  of  Divine  grace.  He  may  try  to 
re;;ulate  his  •domestic  affairs  by  the  law  of  Christ,  and  forget  all  the  while  to  subject  his 
business  concerns  to  the  same  law.  Some  good  men  trust  God  absolutely  about  their 
souls,  but  only  partially  about  their  temporal  affairs.  Some  are  zealous  workers  in  the 
cause  of  Christ,  but  would  rather  avoid  putting  money  into  his  treasury ;  while  others 
seldom  refuse  to  give  a  subscription,  but  give  it  on  the  understanding  that  they  are  not 
to  be  expected  to  take  any  personal  trouble.  Now,  if  we  distinguish  in  this  way  between 
one  duty  and  another,  both  of  which  are  equally  binding,  what  are  we  but  "  a  cake  not 
turned "  ?  To  avoid  such  defects,  we  must  enlighten  conscience  and  strengthen  its 
authority ;  and  expose  our  whole  nature,  in  spirit  and  soul  and  body,  to  the  fire  of 
gospel  truth  and  grace, — C.  J. 

Ver.  9. — "  Grtif  Jiain."  In  Scripture  these  are  Bometimes  associated  with  sentiments 
of  honour  and  reverence,  for  they  suggest  the  thought  of  ripe  wisdom  and  venerable 
piety  (Lev.  xix.  32 ;  Prov.  xvi.  31).  Here,  however,  they  are  viewed  simply  as  premo- 
nitions of  old  age,  and  of  an  old  age,  besides,  that  was  premature.  There  is  a  lesson  in 
our  text,  taking  it  even  in  its  most  literal  sense.  The  believer's  first  grey  hairs  should 
remind  him  that  the  grace  of  God  will  enable  him  to  "  grow  old  gracefully."  But  the 
"  grey  hairs ''  spoken  of  in  this  verse  are,  of  course,  figurative.  We  may  consider  the 
text  in  connection  with — 

L  The  deolinb  of  nations.  Its  primary  reference  is  to  "  Ephraim,"  and  to  the 
symptoms  which  Ephraim  showed  of  approaching  national  ruin.  But  the  whole  Bible, 
and  especially  the  Old  Testament,  is  full  of  teaching  about  the  decadence  of  nations. 
The  Hebrew  prophets  point  to  "the  giant  forms  of  empires  on  their  way  to  ruin." 
Hence  the  priceless  value  of  their  writings  to  the  Christian  patriot,  and  to  the  devout 
student  of  history.  What  are  some  of  the  "  grey  hairs  "  which  forebode  national 
decay  ?  1.  Idolatry/.  The  northern  kingdom  had  departed  from  God,  first  in  worship- 
ping Jeroboam's  calves,  and  afterwards  in  serving  the  idol-deities  of  Fhcenicia,  And 
now,  in  his  time  of  political  need,  Ephraim  was  looking  for  help  to  Egypt  and 
Assyria  (vers.  8 — 11),  instead  of  returning  to  Jehovah  as  his  Portion.  This  "  grey 
hair"  led  quickly  to  the  degradation  and  nun  of  the  kinodom.  So,  still,  those  nations 
that  will  not  serve  the  Lord  our  God  shall  perish,  and  be  utterly  wasted.  2.  Immo- 
rality. A  people  may  increase  greatly  in  civilization  and  intellectual  culture,  and  yet 
be  sprinkled  all  over  with  this  "  grey  hair."  Ancient  Greece,  when  it  was  the  land  of 
art  and  poetry  and  philosophy,  was  morally  all  the  while  a  mass  of  corruption.  Borne, 
during  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  was  even  worse.  Juvenal  calls  it  "  a 
filthy  sewer,"  and  Seneca  "  a  cesspool  of  iniquity."  When  immorirility  is  rampant,  it 
marks  the  commonwealth  as  moiibund,  and  forebodes  its  "decline  and  fall."  3.  Vicious 
luxu/ry.  It  was  a  sign  of  decay  when  Ephraim  began  to  "  live  delioiously,"  like  ancient 
Tyre  and  Babylon  (Amos  vi.  3,  et  sej.).  In  the  palmy  days  of  the  Roman  common- 
wealth the  Romans  were  brave,  hardy,  and  victorious ;  but  under  the  Smpire  the  inner 
life  of  the  people  was  gradually  eaten  away  by  the  canker  of  luxury.  Our  own  nation, 
and  all  the  great  Anglo-Saxon  commuiiilies  at  the  present  time,  need  to  guard  against 


OH.  TIL  1—16.]  THE  BOOK   OF  HOSEA.  219 

this  "  grey  hair."  A,  Oppression  of  the  poor.  If  a  nation  is  to  continue  safe  ao;ainst 
dissolution,  it  must  be  governed  by  justice  and  humanity.  The  French  revolution  of 
1789  was  the  result  of  the  sinful  waste  of  the  Bourbon  kings,  and  the  misery  of  the 
French  peasantry.  But  every  nation  is  in  danger  which  takes  no  care  to  "judge  the 
poor  of  the  people."  This  text  reminds  us,  accordingly,  of  our  duty  as  citizens.  We 
must  take  order  that  our  political  representatives  shall  act  in  all  public  matters  with 
justice  and  honour.  Every  Christian  elector  should  use  his  ballot-paper  under  a  sen^e 
of  his  responsibility  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  King  of  nations;  and  he  ought  to  do 
what  he  can  otherwise  to  strengthen  public  opinion  in  the  direction  of  wise  political 
principles,  and  of  a  healthy  condition  of  the  naiional  conscience. 

II.  The  declink  of  Churohes.  For,  alas!  the  marks  of  decay  are  often  found 
there  also.  It  was  so  with  the  seven  Churches  of  proconsular  Asia  in  the  first  century. 
In  most  of  the  episths  which  the  Lord  addressed  to  them  (Rev.  ii.,  iii.)  he  points  out 
the  "  grey  hairs."  How  gradually,  too,  premonitions  of  spiritual  decline  appeared  in 
the  Church  of  Rome  1  The  student  of  Church  history  sees  at  first  only  one  or  two 
"grey  hairs"  upon  its  head.  We  may  indicate  some  of  the  signs  of  spiritual  decay  in 
Churches.  1.  Prevalence  of  unsound  doctrine.  A  Church,  to  be  spiritually  healthy, 
must  be  thoroughly  evangelical.  Its  ministers  must  not  regard  themselves  merely  as 
the  educators  of  some  native  goodness  in  man ;  and  they  must  not  preach  as  if  the 
cross  were  only  a  myth,  or  the  Holy  Ghost  a  metaphor.  The  Church's  best  times  are 
those  in  which  it  teaches  most  clearly  and  emphatically  the  three  evangelical  "R's," 
viz.  ruin  by  the  fall,  redemption  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  re  generation  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.  2.  Lack  of  missionary  zeal.  This  defect  frequently  accompanies  nnwholesome 
doctrine.  The  continued  vigour  of  a  Church  depends  upon  its  aggr  ssiveness  as  a 
crusading  institute  in  opposition  to  the  sin  and  misery  of  the  world.  It  is  not  enough 
that  it  provide  carefully  for  its  own  edification,  and  know  thait  its  members  are  benefited 
by  its  services.  It  will  decline  in  spiritual  life  if  it  forgets  those  around  who  perish 
"  for  lack  of  knowledge."  3.  Decadence  of  family  religion.  In  the  Bible  the  true 
et-jlssiastical  unit  is  not  the  individual,  but  the  family.  Holy  Scripture  magnifies  "  the 
Church  in  the  house."  And  experience  shows  that  a  congregation,  to  be  strong  and 
liealthy,  must  be  composed  of  well-trained,  intelligent,  aod  devout  families.  What 
both  the  Cliuroh  and  the  nation  greatly  need  to-day  is  godly  households.  The  lack  of 
family  religion  is  a  precursor  of  spiritual  ruin.  4,  The  s/drit  of  worldliness.  The  Lord 
Jesus  detected  this  "  grey  hair  "  in  the  Church  of  Ephesus  (Eev.  ii.  4)  and  in  the 
Church  of  Laodicea  (Eev.  iii.  15).  And  those  of  our  own  day  are  not  untainted  with 
the  same  spirit.  It  is  a  mark  of  decay  when  a  denomination  or  congregation  plumes 
itself  upon  its  social  importance ;  or  when  it  makes  an  idol  of  decorum  and  good  taste ; 
or  when  it  becomes  formal  in  spirit,  and  discouiviges  religious  enthusiasm ;  or  when  it 
relaxes  in  faithfulness  of  discipline. 

III.  The  decijnb  of  spibituai,  life  in  the  bodl.  The  figure  appropriately 
describes  the  backslidings  of  true  and  professed  believers.  We  shall  mention  one  or  two 
symptoms  which  even  those  who  themselves  manifest  them  are  prone  to  fail  to  recog- 
nize. 1.  Habits  of  sin.  It  may  be  that  seeds  of  evil  which  we  sowed  long  ago  in  our 
hearts  are  growing  up  now,  and  occasioning  us  s|iiritual  failure  and  confusion.  Little 
sins  are  like  those  "  grey  hairs ; "  e.g.  the  spiri  t  of  over-carefulness,  the  spirit  of  cavilling, 
the  spirit  of  ostentation  in  reliuious  duiies,  the  unforgiving  spirit,  undue  love  of  human 
praise,  uncharitable  judging,  etc.  2.  Neijlect  of  ordinances.  Christ  has  given  us  his 
Word,  and  has  invited  us  to  come  to  tiie  throne  of  grace,  and  has  spread  for  us  the 
communion-table.  But  how  gradually  may  we  lose  our  relish  for  these  means  of 
grace,  and  how  easily  may  the  habit  of  neglecting  them  steal  in  upon  our  souls! 
3.  Cove'ousness.  Some  one  has  de-cribed  the  love  of  money  as  "  the  Church  member's 
sin."  Thomas  Binnoy  has  said  of  it  that  it  is  "  about  the  only  great  damning  vice 
which  can  be  indulged  and  clung  to  in  connection  with  a  recognized  modern  religious 
profession."  There  is  no  sin  more  insidious ;  it  may  occupy  the  heart  and  one  "  not 
know  "  it.  4.  Conformity  to  the  world.  The  ddily  circumstances  of  our  lot  constantly 
appeal  to  sense  and  self,  and  continually  tempt  us  to  give  up  trying  to  lead  a  spiritual, 
pure,  and  consecrated  life.  Even  a  true  believer,  before  he  knows  it,  may  be  "  following 
afar  off,"  and  slowly  abating  his  testimony  as  a  nonconformist  to  the  ungodly  custonu 
of  the  world. 


Itt  TEE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  vii.  1—16. 

GoNOLUsioir.  We  require  fiequently  to  "examine  ourselves,  whether  we  be  in  tha 
folth."  We  ouglit  constantly  to  holdnp  before  onr  eyes  the  clear  mirror  of  Holy 
Soiipture,  that  we  may  detect  the  "  grey  hairs."  We  mnst  also  see  reflected  in  it  the 
glorloos  form  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  one  Image  of  perfect  manhood.  There  are  no 
"grey  tMirs"  upon  him ;  " his  locke  are  bushy,  and  black  as  a  raven  "  (Cant.  ▼.  11), 
V^  must  seek  grace  to  give  ourselves  constantly  to  tlie  imitation  of  Christ. — 0.  J. 

Vers.  11 — ^16. — Ephraim't  folly  and  falteness.  In  this  passage  the  Lord  threatens 
the  northern  kingdom  for  its  unnatural  and  untheocratic  policy  of  seeking  support  from 
the  neighlMuriDg  heathen  powers.  These  verses,  therefore,  deal  primarily  with  the 
sins  of  the  court  and  the  government.    The  nation  is  to  be  punished  for— 

L  PoLiTioAii  INFATUATION.  (Vers.  II,  12.)  The  true  resting-place  of  the  common- 
wealth was  in  God ;  but  Ephraim  had  wandered  from  him,  and  was  fluttering  about 
inconsiderately  "  like  a  silly  senseless  dove,"  now  seeking  help  from  Egypt  and  now 
from  Assyria  (2  Kings  xvii.  3,  4).  How  prone  are  governments  to  lay  stress  upon 
statecraft  and  diplomacy,  when  they  should  be  simply  trusting  in  God  and  following 
righteousness !  Dr.  Pusey  aptly  refers  in  this  connection  to  "  the  balance  of  power  " 
which  for  so  long  a  period  controlled  the  policy  of  European  statesmen.  But  this  theory 
has  of  late  years  largely  lost  its  influence,  and  given  place  to  a  policy  of  non-interven- 
tion, accompanied  with  an  enormous  increase  of  military  armaments.  The  true  balance 
of  power  will  lie  established  only  when  the  nations  everywhere  acknowledge  the  kinn;- 
ship  of  Christ,  and  deal  with  one  another  on  the  principles  of  justice  and  amity  which 
his  Law  enjoins.  As  Ephraim  was  caught  in  the  "  net "  of  his  own  foreign  entangle- 
mente-^these  becoming  his  ruin — so  will  all  those  nations  be  that  forget  God,  and 
make  flesh  their  arm.  In  the  case  of  Israel,  "  their  congregation  had  heard  "  the  threat 
of  such  cliastisement  from  Moses  and  the  prophets ;  while  modern  states  "  hear "  it 
from  the  Word  of  God,  and  witness  its  esecntion  in  the  retributions  of  history. 

n.  MoBAL  INOBATITUDE.  (Vers.  13—16.)  During  the  whole  career  of  the  Hebrew 
people  God  had  lavished  upon  them  his  tender  love  and  compassion ;  but  they  had 
requited  him  with  the  basest  ingratitude.  They  had  been  unthankful  and  eyil, 
although  he  was:  L  Tkeir  Redeemer.  (Ver.-lS.)  Jehovah  had  delivered  them  from 
Egypt ;  he  had  protected  them  in  the  desert ;  he  had  raised  up  the  judges  to  repel 
their  foreign  oppressors;  he  had  "saved"  the  northern  kingdom  "by  the  hand  of 
Jeroboam  ll.,  the  son  of  Joash  "  (2  Kings  xiv.  27).  The  Lord  bad  constantly  redeemed 
them ;  and  he  was  prepared  to  do  so  again,  if  they  would  but  turn  to  him  in  penitence 
and  faith.  But,  alas  I  Ephraim  persisted  in  his  apostasy,  and  by  his  idol-worship  and 
insincerity  "made  God  a  liar,"  and  his  own  national  life  also  a  lie.  2.  The  Oiver  of 
th*ir  harvests.  CVet.  14.)  In  the  time  of  prosperity  Israel  ignored  Jehovah  as  the 
Author  of  fruitful  seasons  (ch.  ii.  8).  In  the  time  of  famine,  however,  the  people  in  their 
distress  wildly  "  howled  "  for  bread ;  but  if  they  cried  to  Jehovah  at  all,  they  did  not  do 
so  "  with  their  heart."  8.  Their  Physician.  (Ver.  15.)  Jehovah  had  acted  towards 
Israel  like  a  vrise  and  skilful  surgeon.  He  had  seen  their  power  enfeebled,  like  a 
relaxed  or  dislocated  arm ;  and  he  had  bound  the  arm,  to  make  it  once  more  strong  and 
rinewy.  Tet  the  first  use  to  which  Israel  put  the  healed  arm  was  to  raise  it  to  strike 
the  Healer.  What  a  warning  have  we  here  against  the  sin  of  unthankf illness  1  The 
Lord's  reproach  reminds  us  that  apart  from  the  grateful  heart  there  can  be  no  trne 
piety.  Gratitude  is  inseparable  from  faith  in  God.  And  the  reflex  influence  of  grati- 
tude upon  the  soul  is  to  inspire  and  ennoble  it.  "  Oh  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord 
for  his  goodness  1 " 

m.  Spibitual  instabilitt.  (Ver.  16.)  The  princes  of  Israel  were  constantly 
changing  their  policy;  but  they  never,  amidst  all  their  changes,  really  turned  towards 
Qod.  The  nation  often  professed  to  seek  him,  but  their  evil  heart  constantly  drew 
them  aside  to  idols.  "  They  are  like  a  deceitful  bow,"  which  has  either  been  faultily 
eonstructed  at  the  first,  or  the  string  of  which  has  lost  its  elasticity,  and  which,  there- 
fcfe,  disappoints  the  archer  by  sending  forth  the  arrow  wide  of  the  mark.  So  Ephraim 
had  given  a  wrong  direction  to  his  whole  spiritual  life.  The  nation  had  failed  to 
aooomplish  the  end  for  which  God  had  chosen  it.  Its  profession  and  its  practice  were 
at  variance.  Its  arrows  were  not  directed  towards  the  Divine  glory,  and  therefore  it 
must  presently  "  fall  by  the  sword,"  and  suffer  the  "  derision  "  of  Egypt,  in  whom  it 


OH.  TO.  1—16.]  ^THE  BOOS  OF  UOSEA.  221 

had  fooligUy  trusted.  But  does  not  thia  graphic  metaphor, "  a  deceitful  bow,"  deaerlhe 
the  character  of  every  nnheliever;  and  of  every  Ohristian,  in  so  far  as  he  trusts  in  his 
own  strength  ?  "  In  like  way  doth  every  sinner  act,  using  against  God,  in  the  service 
of  Satan,  God's  gifts  of  nature  or  of  outward  means,  talents,  or  wealth,  or  strength,  or 
beauty,  or  power  of  speech.  God  gave  all  for  his  own  glory ;  and  man  turns  all  aside  to 
do  honour  and  service  to  Satan  "  (Pusey).  We  must  be  daily  strengthened  with  the 
grace  that  is  in  Ohrist  Jesus,  if  our  bow  is  to  "  turn  not  back,"  but  to  "  abide  in 
strength." — 0.  J. 

Ver.  2. — An  unconsidered  truth.    Two  facts  are  suggested  here. 

I.  That  God  bbmbmbbrs  the  wickedness  of  man.  "  Wickedness "  may  exist  in 
thought  or  intention  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24),  in  word  (Matt.  xii.  36),  in  act  (Ps.  li.  4). 
1.  This  fact  is  proclaimed  in  Qod's  Word.  (1)  Statements.  Jer.  xiv.  10  proves  God's 
watchfulness,  Jer.  xviL  1  his  recollection,  Isa.  xliv.  22  his  record,  etc.  (2)  Examples 
seen  in  the  sin  of  Adam,  the  antediluvians,  Joseph's  brethren,  Abraham  in  Egypt, 
David,  etc.  2.  This  fact  is  necessitated  hy  the  Divine  nature,  God's  omnipresence, 
omniscience,  and  immutability  imply  it.  His  absolute  perfection  makes  impossible 
either  defect  of  knowledge  or  decay  of  faculty.  3.  This  fact  is  exemplified  in  the  life  oj 
ihe  Lord  Jesus.  "He  knew  what  was  in  man;''  "  He  knew  their  thoughts,"  etc.  Show 
how  completely  he  detected  the  plots  of  his  foes,  knew  the  doubts  of  his  disciples 
(John  XX.  27),  overheard  the  discussions  of  distant  followers  (Mark  ix.  34),  perceived 
the  unexpressed  longings  of  the  unpardoned  (Matt.  ix.  2 — 7),  and  read  the  secrets  of  a 
sinful  life  (Luke  vii.  37 — 50).  4.  This  faxt  is  a  requisite  to  a  just  judgment.  See 
references  to  the  coming  judgment  (Eccles.  xii.  14;  Jer.'xxxii.  18,  etc.).  No  fair  decision 
could  be  given  except  by  One  who  knew  all  our  sins  and  struggles,  and  had  forgotten 
none  of  their  circumstances. 

II,  That  man  foboets  the  btjpbbvision  of  God.  "  They  consider  not,"  etc.  It 
is  not  said  man  has  no  knowledge  of  the  fact,  but  that  he  does  not  reflect  upon  it.  To 
"consider  in  the  heart"  is  to  think  over  the  truth  seriously, closely, with  sincere  appli- 
cation to  ourselves.  If  the  charge  were  not  true,  we  should  no  longer  continue  in  sin  ; 
we  should  not  attempt  to  extenuate  it ;  we  should  mourn  over  it  as  an  offence  against  God 
rather  than  as  a  cause  of  dishonour  or  loss  to  ourselves.  Show  the  sinfulness  of  this. 
1.  It  is  disobedience  to  the  exhortation  of  Ood.  "  Now  therefore  consider  your  ways ;  " 
"  Oh  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  would  consider,"  etc.  1  2.  It  is  rebellion  against  the 
rule  of  conscience.  Show  what  conscience  b  to  the  child  at  his  first  offence,  and  what 
it  becomes  through  continued  heedlessness.  3.  It  is  encouragement  to  secret  sin,  "  They 
say.  Doth  God  know?"  etc.  Many  sins  are  disguised  from  the  world,  unsuspected  by  our 
friends,  from  which,  therefore,  no  regard  for  reputation  will  save  us.  'Jhe  secret  sin 
undermines  the  character.  Opeu  sin  follows.  Even  if  it  does  not,  the  judgment  of 
God  is  against  those  that  do  such  things,  i.  It  is  a  hindrance  to  true  repentance. 
Men  do  not  come  to  Christ  imtil  they  feel  their  need  of  him,  who  "  saves  his  people  from 
their  sins." — ^A.  R. 

Ver.  8. — The  sin  of  hcdf-heartedness.  When  the  discipline  which  God  sends  to  arousr 
men  to  thought  fails  of  its  purpose,  it  cannot  but  harm  the  nation  or  the  individual 
receiving  it.  There  is  a  light  from  heaven  which  ushers  in  the  new  day,  and  wakes  the 
world  to  Ufe  and  joy ;  but  there  is  also  a  light  from  heaven,  seen  in  the  lightning-flash, 
which  serves  only  to  make  the  darkness  visible ;  and  this,  not  that,  was  the  emblem  ol 
the  light  shed  upon  Israel  by  exhortation  and  discipline  in  Hosea's  times.  They  were 
scorched,  not  blessed,  because  they  refused  to  turn  to  the  Lord.  Subject — Th»  sin  of 
half-heartedness  is  set  before  us  in  the  graphic  imagery  of  our  text. 

I.  The  cause  of  this  sin.  Doubtless  it  varies  according  to  the  circumstancas  and 
the  character  of  each  one  who  is  guilty  of  it.  Sometimes  the  sin  results  from  weakness 
of  character  and  vacillation  of  purpose,  and  sometimes  from  want  of  earnest  considera- 
tion. But  the  cause  mentioned  in  our  text  is  by  no  means  infrequent.  "Ephraim 
hath  mixed  himself  among  the  people,"  j.e.  the  heathen.  Israel  was  ordained  to  be  a 
separated  people  (Exod.  xxxiv.  12,  13 ;  Ler.  xx.  24).  Balaam  was  shrewd  enough  to  see 
that  their  strenstn  lay  in  their  separateness  (Kumb.  xxiii.  9).  He  knew  that  the  curse 
Bal»k  sought  against  them  would  fall,  if  only  they  could  he  blended  with  the  idolatruui: 


222  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oH.  vn.  1— 16. 

people  around.  Partakers  in  guilt,  they  would  be  partakers  in  punishment.  To  us  the 
restrictions  placed  on  their  roarriaga  and  their  commerce  appear  illiberal }  but  he  who 
imposed  them  understood  the  wenkness  of  this  people,  and  estimated  rightly  the  univer- 
sality and  intensity  of  idolatry.  Results  justified  Gud's  ordinance.  Jeroboam's  residence 
in  Egypt  brought  calf-worship  into  Israel ;  Ahab's  marriage  with  Jezebel  introduced 
the  rites  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth.  In  Hosea's  time  the  people  were  leavened  by  idolatry, 
and  the  allusion  here  is  to  this  fact,  and  not  to  the  political  alliances  formed  with  heathen 
empires,  or  to  the  conquest  of  parts  of  Israel's  territory  by  idolatrous  kings.  To  him 
loss  of  character  was  more  ominous  than  loss  of  territory.  Israel  was  no  longer  worth 
preservino;.  The  object  of  their  existence,  to  witness  to  the  one  living  and  true  God, 
could  no  longer  be  attained.  The  salt  had  lost  its  savour,  and  was  henceforth  good  for 
nothing.  With  their  remembrance  of  Mosaic  Law  and  their  practice  of  idolatrous  rites, 
they  were  like  "  a  cake  not  turned  " — irremediably  spoilt.  Show  from  this  the  impor- 
tance 01  right  companionship,  especially  to  those  whose  characters  are  in  the  formative 
stage.  Jealously  as  parents  watch  against  the  intrusion  of  one  who  is  suffering  from 
infectious  disease,  how  much  less  watchful  and  firm  are  they  against  the  introduction 
to  their  homes  of  those  whose  presence  cannot  fail  to  be  a  source  of  moral  infection  I 
When  the  result  of  such  association  is  not  seen  in  outward  depravity,  it  is  often  seen  in 
a  wasted  and  frivolous  life.  The  effect  is  gradually  produced.  The  Khine  and  the  Amo 
flow  side  by  side  in  the  same  channel  without  mingling  their  waters ;  but  though  the 
swifter  stream  keeps  clear  for  a  while,  at  last  it  is  defiled ;  and  it  is  the  turbid  stream 
that  conquers.  "  Gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners ; "  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men 
shall  be  wise,  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed." 

II.  The  natueb  of  this  sin.  The  cake  (uggah)  was  a  thin  circular  pancake,  exposed 
to  the  scorching  heat  of  red-hot  stones,  and  of  necessity  must  be  quickly  turned,  or  it 
would  be  burnt  on  one  side  and  moist  dough  on  the  other :  spoilt,  because  not  pene- 
trated. A  good  figure  to  represent  this  people,  who  knew  God's  Law,  remembered  his 
worship,  but  were  in  practice  idolaters.  They  refused  to  turn  to  God  the  other  half, 
the  practical  part  of  their  being.  Give  examples  of  those  who  have  served  God  by 
halves;  belonging  neither  to  the  world  nor  to  the  Church.  In  Elijali's  days  the  people 
were  impressed  by  the  power  of  Jehovah,  yet  loved  the  pleasures  of  idolatry ;  hence  the 
question  of  the  prophet,  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?  "  Christ  Jesus  had 
around  him  those  who  admired  his  ti  aching ;  but  they  would  not  risk  being  put  out  of 
the  synagogue,  nor  associate  with  illiterate  peasants,  nor  follow  One  who  would  lead 
them  to  the  cross ;  so  to  them  he  said,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  See  also 
the  condition  of  Laodicea  (Rev.  iii.  14 — 18).  Such  a  character  is  discoverable  still,  in 
those  who  join  in  worship,  though  in  heart  they  neither  pray  nor  praise;  in  those 
conscious  of  sin,  yet  not  justified  by  faith ;  in  those  using  the  words  of  prayer,  without 
any  speaking  to  the  Father  who  seeth  in  secret,  etc.  God  seeks  not  for  such.  We  are 
to  be  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord ;  whole-hearted  in  all  we  offer  to  him — not  as 
Ephraim,  the  cake  not  turned. 

III.  The  effects  of  this  sin.  We  are  responsible  for  our  unconscious  influence 
over  others.  Our  Lord  condemned  the  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  "  for,"  said  he,  "  ye  shut 
up  the  kingdom  of  heaven  against  men ;  for  ye  neither  go  in  yourselves,  neither  suffer 
ye  them  that  are  entering  to  go  in."  Better  far  would  it  have  been  had  they  been 
openly  irreligious.  Picture  a  man  standing  near  the  door  of  the  ark — a  wise  and  promi- 
nent man  in  antediluvian  society,  hesitating  whether  to  believe  Noah  or  the  sceptics; 
while  others  wait  to  see  his  decision.  How  deep  and  loud  their  curses  afterwards  if  he 
decided  not  to  enter,  or  if  he  hesitated  so  long  that  it  was  too  late  for  him  and  them  I 
Apply  this  to  modern  life.  A  father  has  children  whose  characters  are  rapidly  forming ; 
and  he  is  not  in  the  kiiigJora,  though  not  far  from  it.  They  naturally  say,  "We  are 
waiting  for  father;  he  is  a  hearer  of  the  truth;  he  knows  more  than  we;  he  is  an 
upright  man ;  if  it  be  right  to  be  wholly  on  Christ's  side  he  will  be,  so  let  us  wait  for 
ills  decision."  For  the  sake  of  others  let  procrastination  come  to  an  end,  and  be  it  yours 
to  say  with  Joshua,  "  As  for  me  and  ray  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 

IV.  The  perils  of  this  sin.  1.  You  strengthen  temptations  against  yoursdf.  You 
say  in  effect  to  influences  for  evil, "  Don't  give  me  uj)  yet,  for  I  am  not  decided."  A 
candidate,  who  in  canvassing  finds  one  voter  who  has  not  made  up  his  mind,  will  call 
again  with  others  who  have  more  influence  than  himself,  and  the  waverer  is  won  over. 


OH.  vn.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  223 

In  the  counsel*  of  the  vicked  concerning  one  who  is  half-hearted  It  la  aaid,  "  We  idll 
ask  him  again ;  hii  answer  was  not  decided ;  he  is  not  an  avowedly  Christian  man ;  by 
a  Uttle  pressure  we  can  bring  him  over."  How  can  such  a  man  pray,  "  Lead  us  not 
into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  evil "  f  2.  Tou  weaken  powen/or  good,  and  lessen 
hope  cf  the  future.  There  is  a  blossoming  time  for  every  tree,  •  flowering  time  for 
every  corn-field,  and  then  the  future  is  decided,  for  fruit  or  for  barrenness.  Our  Lord 
comes  down  to  listen  at  every  heart  for  prayer,  to  see  the  effect  of  all  he  has  done  for 
each.  He  looks  and  feels  for  fruit  amidst  the  leaves  of  the  fig  tree,  and  finding  none  he 
finally  utters  the  word,  "  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward  for  ever." — ^A.  B. 

Ter.  9. — The  unperceived  etgm  of  moral  decay.  This  chapter  is  occupied  with  a 
denunciation  of  the  sins  of  the  princes  and  chief  men  in  Israel,  who  are  designated  (in 
ver.  1)  by  "  Ephraim,"  the  principal  tribe,  and  "  Samaria,"  the  principal  city.  Such 
men  are  ever  most  condemned  in  Scripture,  twcause  they  have  (1)  more  opportunity  of 
knowing  God's  will,  and  (2)  more  influence  over  others  (see  I^att.  xi.  20 — ^24).  A 
godless  lad  who  has  been  brought  up  imder  Christian  influence,  and  lias  seen  the 
Christian  life  represented  in  his  home,  is  more  deserving  of  condemnation  than  the  waif 
thrown  up  by  the  sea  of  irreligious  life,  who  has  been  unblessed  by  teachiog  and  prayer. 
The  man  successful  in  business  or  scholarsliip,  the  attractive  and  popular  visitor,  the 
gifted  writer,  the  eldest  in  a  fiiimily,  the  leader  in  policy,  etc.,  have  heavier  responsibili- 
ties than  others  liecanse  they  have  nobler  powers.  The  sins  condemned  here  were 
(1)  drunkenness,  which  specially  prevailed  on  the  king's  birthday  (ver.  fi)  and  at 
similar  festivities ;  (2)  passion  for  idolatry  and  its  licentious  rites,  the  heart  of  the 
people  being  like  the  oven  heated  hot,  and  needing  only  the  stirring  of  opportunity  to 
burst  into  flame  (vers.  4,  6,  7) ;  (3)  refusal  to  believe  in  Ood's  presence  and  watchful- 
ness (ver.  2).  These  and  other  sins  were  the  signs  of  moral  decay,  which  were  reflected 
in  national  disasters.  Yet  none  of  these  were  perceived  by  the  infatuated  people.  (See 
Keil  and  Delitzsch  in  justification  of  the  rendering  "  He  knoweth  it  not "  ia  both 
clauses.)    Subject — Unnoticed  signs  of  moral  decay. 

I.  That  mobal  deoat  has  ascertainable  oaubes.  Exemplify  from  the  sources  of 
Israel's  decadence.  1.  Want  of  consideration.  (Ver.  2 ;  Isa.  i.  3 ;  Hag.  i.  6.)  Every 
faculty  fails  after  disuse ;  e.^.  the  eyeless  fishes  of  lakes  in  dark  caverns.  Muscular  and 
mental  development  or  decay,  by  exercise  or  inertness.  He  who  will  not  think  of  Grod, 
at  last  cannot  think  of  him.  2.  Association  with  evU.  (Ver.  8.)  Show  the  effects  of 
unconscious  influence  in  the  formation  of  character.  They  must  be  jealously  watchful 
over  themselves  who  are  necessarily  associated  with  the  godless.  The  companionship 
of  books  equally  important.  Sensuous  or  sceptical  literature  may  emasculate  character. 
3.  Forgetfulness  of  God.  AU  are  prone  to  this.  Material  life  becomes  increasingly 
aggressive  in  thought.  The  hurry  of  business,' the  whirl  of  society,  lessen  the  frequency 
and  intensity  of  prayer.  4,  Self-indulgenee.  Israel  gave  way  to  drunkenness  and  the 
licence  of  idolatry.  It  was  the  opportunity  for  gratifying  the  worst  passions  that  mude 
the  worship  of  the  groves  so  popular.  Many  begin  by  staining  the  imagination  who 
end  by  defiling  the  life.  Depict  the  ruin  of  the  drunkard,  who  once  perhaps  was  a 
leader  in  Christian  and  benevolent  enterprise. 

II.  That  uobal  deoat  has  obsebtable  sthftohs.  "  Strangers  have  devoured  his 
strength."  Egypt  and  Assyria  had  despoiled  Israel,  sometimes  by  exacting  tribute, 
sometimes  by  violent  attack  (2  Kings  xiii.  7 ;  xvi.  9).  Compare  the  condition  of 
the  Roman  empire  just  before  its  rliin  by  the  Goths.  With  Israel  the  losses  were  the 
direct  result  of  leagues  made,  contrary  to  God's  will,  with  idolatrous  nations  around ; 
for  they  became  thereby  involved  in  their  disputes  and  disasters.  Still  this  was  not 
perceived.  These  and  other  signs  of  wasting  and  decay  were  visible  to  the  prophet,  and 
seemed  to  him  like  grey  hairs  sprinkled  here  and  there — ^the  effects  of  declining  age,  the 
tokens  of  decay.  Point  out  symptoms  of  spiritual  decline  in  the  soul.  1.  Want  of 
appetite  for  what  is  good.  The  house  of  Qoi  neglected,  the  old  service  forsaken,  the 
infrequency  and  unreality  of  prayer,  etc.  2.  Want  of  sensibility  to  what  is  evU. 
Contentment  with  a  lower  standard  for  Christian  life,  fiippancy  in  dealing  with  infidelity, 
indifference  to  acts  and  words  which  at  one  time  would  have  raised  a  flush  of 
shame^  eta 

IIL  That  horal  deoat  has  ierbvbksiblb  issues.     These  grey  hairs  were  the 


224  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [«■.  til  1—16. 


precursors  of  death,  Israel  would  never  be  restnred.  The  life  was  lived,  wag  nearly 
over,  and  without  hope  of  resurrection.  Christ  Jesus  speaks  of  a  time  of  probation 
given  now  which  will  not  be  given  hereafter.  He  will  do  all  that  can  be  done  even  for  a 
fruitless  fig  tree,  but  at  last  must  say,  " Gut  it  down ;  why  cumbcreth  it  the  ground?" 

IV.  That  uobal  decay  makes  impbeceptiblb  advance.  At  first  grey  hairs  are 
sprinkled  here  and  there.  How  fast  they  multiply,  though  no  one  notices  the  change 
in  each  hairl  When  first  noticed,  an  endeavour  may  be  made  by  nostrums  to  disguise 
the  fact ;  but  the  decay  goes  on.  The' march  of  old  age,  as  he  sprinkles  his  snows,  is  not 
really  checked.  If  a  man  could  persuade  himself  as  well  as  others  that  he  was  still 
young,  that  would  not  prolong  his  life.  But  it  is  far  easier  to  disguise  from  ourselves  the 
signs  of  moral  decay,  and  this  has  been  done  with  fatal  frequency.  The  old  world, 
though  often  warned, "  knew  not  till  the  flood  came  and  swept  them  all  away."  Samson 
betrayed  the  source  of  his  strength  and  lost  it ;  but  when  he  rose  against  his  foes  as 
aforetime,  "  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord  was  departed  from  him."  King  Saul  was  robbed 
of  his  means  of  defence  and  refreshment,  but  he  still  slept  on  (1  Sam.  xxvi.).  So  Israel 
shut  its  eyes  to  the  loss  of  strength  and  hope.  Beware  lest  character  be  like  the 
cliff,  secretly  honeycombed  by  the  sea,  until  in  an  unexpected  moment  it  falls  in 
irreparable  ruin. 

OoNCLUsioN.  Addreu  the  aged.  There  te  a  natural  decay,  which  may  be  the  pre- 
cursor of  destruction  or  the  promise  of  resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.).  1.  "  The  hoary  head 
i$  a  crown  of  glory,  if  it  he  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  Eleazer  said,  "  I 
will  not  do  that  which  seems  to  be  evil,  lest  I  should  spot  my  white  head."  2.  The 
hoary  head  is  a  call  to  repentance,  if  it  he  found  in  the  way  of  Vfickednesi.  "  I  have  no 
pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord  God :  wherefore  turn  yourselves, 
and  live  ye." — A.  E. 

Ver.  14. — Uselete  prayer*.  Two  instances  In  Scripture  of  true  repentance  at  the 
point  of  death.  Manasseh  in  the  Old  Testament,  the  dying  thief  in  the  New  Testament. 
These  save  from  despair,  yet  are  too  few  to  allow  any  to  presume  on  them.  Four 
characteristics  of  the  useless  prayer  mentioned  in  the  text. 

I.  It  IS  A  DGFEBBED  PRATEB.  "  On  their  beds."  In  health  and  strength  the  idols 
had  been  worshipped.  Now  death  seemed  near,  the  Name  of  Jehovah  was  on  the 
trembling  lip.  Mercifully,  delay  is  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  make  a  cry  to  God  useless. 
David  lingered  in  sin  till  Nathan  rebuked  him.  The  prodigal  dwelt  in  the  far  country 
till  all  was  gone,  etc.  Still  it  is  perilous  to  defer  any  known  duty,  most  of  all  tiiat  of 
coming  to  God, 

II.  It  IB  AN  nrsiNOEBE  PBATEB.  "  They  have  not  cried  unto  me  with  their  heart" 
This  fact  would  make  any  prayer  useless.  "  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship 
him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  Compare  the  prayers  of  the  Pharisees 
in  the  temple  or  the  street  with  those  of  publicans  and  sinners  (Matt.  vL  7 ;  xv. 
8,  etc.). 

III.  It  is  a  despeeatb  pbateb.  "  They  howled  upon  their  beds."  The  agony  of 
pain,  or  the  dread  of  meeting  God,  not  the  consciousness  of  sin,  caused  this.  Repent- 
ance is  not  the  dread  of  sin's  punishment,  but  the  turning  from  sin  because  of  its 
sinfulness.  Contrast  the  cry  of  the  condemned  criminal  with  the  prayer  of  the  dying 
Christian.  Depict,  for  example,  the  death  of  Stephen,  and  the  utterance  of  Paul  about 
his  departure  (2  Tim.  vi.  61. 

IV.  It  18  uifAVAiLiNG.  '  The  unreality  of  the  prayer  was  seen  in  the  subsequent 
conduct  of  those  who  offered  it.  This  is  described  in  the  next  clause.  No  sooner 
were  they  restored  to  health  than  "  they  assembled  for  corn  and  wine,"  i.e.  went  back 
to  the  old  revelries  and  forgetfulness.  How  many  have  dealt  thus  with  Qodl  Brought 
back  firom  the  gates  of  death,  the  spared  life  is  no  more  sober,  devout,  and  holy  than 
the  past.  Let  us  beware  lest  we  harden  ourselves  through  the  deceit/ulness  of  sin.  If, 
of  those  restored,  so  small  a  proportion  prove  that  the  prayers  and  vows  in  illness  were 
genuine  and  availing,  how  can  we  indulge  much  hope  of  those  whose  future  is  not  in 
time  but  in  eternity  ? 

In  view  of  this  solemn  subject  t  1,  Urge  Christians  to  speak  faithfully  to  tinners 
in  the  day  of  health,  Z.  Urge  sinners  to  come  humbly  to  the  Saviour  in  tJie  day  of 
hope. — A.  &, 


CH.  Til.  1— 16.J  THK  BOOK  OF  H08EA.  225 

Ver.  2. — Oo^$  memory  of  man'*  mckedneu.  There  is  somethioK  to  »11  nnreoondled 
and  unpardoned  sinneri  very  terrible  in  tills  assertion,  "  I  remember  all  their  wicked- 

B8SS." 

I.  God  bemembebb  man's  wickedness  in  the  exercise  of  his  ohkiboiekoe.  "  All " 
here  comprehends  every  kind  of  wickedness,  in  thought,  word,  and  deed ;  every 
instance  of  wickedness,  whether  noted  or  not  by  fellow-men;  the  aggravations  of 
wickedness  which  has  been  more  serious  because  of  the  light  and  privileges  notwith- 
standing which  the  sinner  has  transgressed. 

II.  God  bbmehuers  van's  wickedness  in  his  oharaoteb  of  a  ferfeotiiT  holt 
Being.  It  is  not  simply  a  matter  of  knowledge ;  the  evil  he  knows  God  hates.  Every 
such  recollection  is  accompanied  with  displeasure.  "He  is  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day;"  and  whilst  men,  through  familiarity  with  human  sius,  often  become 
either  indifferent  or  cynical,  the  Most  Holy  retains  his  disapproval  and  his  loathing 
undiminished. 

III.  God  rbmbmbbes  van's  wickedness  in  his  ohabacteb  or  a  riohteous  Judge. 
The  upright  and  pure  man  may  view  the  prevalence  of  wickedness  with  revulsion  and 
distress ;  but  "  vengeance  belongeth  unto  God."  As  the  sovereign  Buler  of  the 
universe,  bound  by  his  own  nature  to  maintain  his  authority,  and  to  do  righteously  as 
the  Judge,  the  Lord  exercises  his  judicial  attributes  and  functions.  And  what  ho 
remembers  he  will  one  day  bring  forward,  for  the  confusion  of  the  impenitent. 

IV.  God  has  promised  that,  if  the  sinner  will  bbpent,  he  will  remember  his 
bins  no  more.  We  need  not  trouble  ourselves  with  the  attempt  to  reconcile  what  may 
seem  to  us  conflicting  statements,  which,  however,  are  both  necessary  to  set  forth  all 
the  truth.  Let  the  impenitent  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the  righteous  God  remembers 
all  their  iniquities ;  and  let  the  penitent  and  believing  hearers  of  the  gospel  rest  assured 
that  a  merciful  God  will  cast  their  sins  behind  his  back,  and  sink  them  in  the  depths 
of  the  unfathomable  sea  of  oblivion. — T. 

Ver.  7. — None  cdlleth  unto  God.  The  calamities  and  miseries  which  befell  Israel 
were  in  themselves  awful,  but  perhaps  the  most  terrible  circumstance  connected  with 
them  was  this:  they  failed  to  lead  the  people  to  a  better  mind,  to  true  repentance,  to 
sincere  supplication  unto  God. 

I.  The  hand  that  afflicts  alone  can  heal.  Chastisement  is  necessary  in  the 
economy  of  Divine  government ;  yet  our  heavenly  Father  chastens,  not  for  his  pleasure, 
but  for  our  profit.  He  is  more  ready  to  cherish  and  to  comfort  than  to  smito.  And 
when  he  has  afflicted,  it  is  vain  to  look  elsewhere  than  to  him  for  solace. 

n.  The  callousness  of  sinners  mat  prevent  them  from  sekkino  Divine 
MERCT  and  consolation.  Surely  the  first  thing  for  those  to  do  who  are  smarting 
beneath  the  rod  is  to  humble  themselves  beneath  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  to  repent 
of  sin,  to  entreat  clemency,  favour,  forgiveness.  But  so  hardening  is  the  effect  of 
sin,  that  there  are  many  cases  in  which  this  is  the  last  thing  that  occurs  to  the 
mind.  It  is  an  addition  to  the  heinousness  of  sin,  when  the  sinner  refrains  from 
bringing  his  transgression  with  penitence  before  the  throne  of  him  whom  he  has 
offended. 

III.  Yet  there  is  no  belief  except  upon  the  condition  of  application  to  the 
All-merciful.  To  call  upon  man  is  vain.  To  sink  into  apathy  is  to  despair.  Hope 
is  in  one  direction  only.  Let  the  sinner  call  upon  God,  and  God  will  hear,  answer,  and 
save. — T. 

Ver.  10. — They  return  not  unto  the  Lord,  The  life  of  man  is  a  journey,  and  the 
sinner  has  taken  the  wrong  road — the  road  which  leads  to  destruction. 

I.  The  importance  and  necebsitt  of  returning  unto  the  Lord.  The  further  the 
sinner  proceeds  the  nearer  he  approaches  final  ruin,  and  the  harder  it  is  for  him  to 
reverse  his  steps. 

II.  The  method  or  BETUBNiNa  unto  tub  Lobd.  The  sinner  must  change  his  view 
of  God  and  his  view  of  himself.    He  must  repent  of  sin  and  believe  the  gospeL 

III.  The  encoubagement  to  return  unto  the  Losd.  There  are  the  express 
directions,  and  the  faithful  promises  of  Heaven. 

IV.  The  results  of  bbtubnino  unto  the  Lobd.    To  return  to  God  is  to  return  to 

■OBKA.  Q 


226  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  vii.  1— 16. 

holiness  anl  happiness,  to  peace  and  hopo.    Truly  to  return  to  him  is  to  remain  fo* 
ever  in  his  favour  aad  his  fellowship. — T. 

Vem.  11, 12. — The  silly  dove.  The  folly  of  sin  is  a  frequent  topic  with  the  inspired 
writers,  and  is  urged  upon  the  attention  of  some  who  may  be  more  fearful  of  lacking 
wisdom  than  of  grieving  God.  In  this  passage  the  prophet  makes  use  of  a  homely  and 
striking  similitude  with  a  view  to  impress  upon  the  rebellious  the  vanity  and  simple 
credulity  of  their  sinful  conduct. 

I.  The  dove's  perplexity.  Alarmed  by  a  bird  of  prey  hovering  over  her  and  ready 
to  seiie  her,  the  simple  dove  is  ready  to  rush  into  any  danger.  An  emblem  of  Israel  of 
old,  placed  between  Assyria  and  Egypt,  and,  when  alarmed  by  the  threats  of  one  power, 
ready  to  court  the  alliance  of  the  other.  And  an  emblem  of  foolish  sinners,  of  all 
nations  and  of  all  times,  whose  only  safety  and  whose  only  guidance  is  in  God,  but  who 
are  ever  prone  to  look  hither  and  thither,  to  human  counsellors  and  to  human  helpers. 

II.  The  dove's  flioht.  As  the  simple  dove,  in  her  danger  and  perplexity,  makes 
straight  for  the  fowler's  net,  so  Israel,  seeking  security  by  her  fancied  policy,  which  in 
reality  was  short-sighted  and  vain,  again  and  again  brought  herself  into  national 
disaster  and  misery.  "  They  said.  We  will  ride  upon  horses."  "  Therefore,"  was  the 
responsive  prediction,  "  shall  ye  flee."  Where  is  the  foolish  rebel  against  God  who  has 
not  by  his  own  unwise  precipitation  brought  himself  into  ruin  and  calamity  ? 

IIL  The  dove's  captuke  in  the  net.  The  dove  fails  to  escape,  falls  into  the  snare 
of  the  fowler,  and  perishes.  Israsl,  however  she  might  forget  and  forsake  God,  could 
not  evade  the  penalties  of  disobedience;  for  she  could  not  get  beyond  the  range  of 
the  Divine  government  and  judicial  sway.  "I,"  said  Jehovah,  "will  chastise  them, 
according  to  the  announcement  to  their  congrigation."  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand, 
the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  Let  none  imagine  that  there  is  a  possibility  oi 
eluding  Divine  justice. 

Application.  The  way  of  wisdom  is  the  way  of  safety ;  and  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord, 
that  is  wisdom."  It  is  bet  ter  to  flee  to  the  Lord  as  to  a  Tower  of  refuge,  than  to  fall  into 
the  net  of  retribution. — T. 

Ver.  14. — Failure  to  cry  unto  the  Lord.  As  s  child  in  trouble  calls  aloud  npon  his 
father  for  help,  as  a  soldipr  in  danger  calls  upon  a  comrade  for  succour,  so  sinful,  feeble, 
helpless  man  calls  upon  his  God  for  deliverance  and  consolation,  and  does  not  call  in  vain. 
The  guilt  and  folly  of  Israel  was  great  iu  sinning,  but  far  greater  in  neglecting  to 
call  upon  the  Lord  with  the  heart.  It  appears  when  it  is  considered  that  this  duty 
was  neglected — 

L  Although  circumstanobs  might  have  impelled  to  such  an" invocation.  Many 
a  time  had  Israel  been  afflicted,  and  her  afflictions  were  intended  in  mercy  to  drive  her 
to  the  God  she  had  forsaken.  No  one  of  us  has  been  without  occasion,  urgent  and 
distressing  occasion,  to  seek  God.  Providence  has  not  left  us  without  the  inducement, 
furnished  by  great  straits  and  sore  needs,  to  seek  the  God  of  salvation. 

IL  Although  no  othek  kbpuge  ob  helper  could  be  found.  Israel  was  ever  seeking 
safety  by  heathen  alliances,  by  the  policy  of  diplomacy,  or  by  the  might  of  arms.  Yet 
events  constantly  taught  the  unwisdom  of  such  recourse  to  human  aid.  It  is  well  when 
the  soul  is  led  to  exclaim,  " Beside  thee  there  is  none  else ; "  "To  whom  shall  I  go  but 
unto  thee?" 

m.  Although  KNOonRAOBD  by  the  character  and  the  promises  of  the  Divine 
Helper.  As  in  the  history  of  Israel,  so  through  all  time,  the  great  Kuler  has  revealed 
himself  as  the  great  Deliverer.  To  us  as  Christians  this  revelation  is  especially  plain 
and  effective;  for  in  Jesus  we  see  "  the  salvation  of  the  Eternal."  If  it  be  hard  to  cry 
upon  a  God  who  is  known  to  us  only  as  a  just  and  almighty  Judge,  surely  it  is  not  hard 
to  call  upon  a  God  who  has  come  to  us  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  full  of  "  grace  and 
truth." 

IV.  Although  the  vanity  is  apparent  of  oallino  upon  the  Lord  only  with  the 
lips.  We  have  only  to  consider  our  own  spiritual  nature,  and  to  remember  that  God  is 
a  Spirit,  in  order  to  feel  the  absurdity  and  uselessness  of  offering  to  Heaven  the  homage 
of  the  lips,  and  withholding  the  reverence,  the  faith,  the  aspirations  of  the  heart.  Ye 
•hall  find  the  Ltrd,  if  with  all  yoitr  heart  ve  truly  seek  him. — T. 


OH.  Til.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  227 

Ten.  2, 3. — OocP$  rememhrance  of  tin.  "  And  they  consider  not  in  their  heart*  that 
I  remember  all  their  wickeduesa:  now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about;  they 
are  before  my  face.  They  make  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and  the  princes 
with  their  lies."    These  words  contain  three  facts. 

I.  That  God  bemembebb  men's  sins.  "  I  remember  til  their  irickednesa."  This  ia  ■ 
wonder/id  fact.  When  we  think  of  the  infinite  greatness  of  him  to  whom  the  universe 
is  as  nothing,  we  are  struck  at  first  with  amazement  that  God  remembers  the  sins  of  a 
creature  so  frail,  so  insignificant  as  man.  Still,  as  we  reflect,  we  soon  get  the  conviction 
that  there  is  nothing  absurd,  nothing  unreasonable,  in  the  fact.  To  the  Infinite  there  ii 
nothing  great  or  small ;  to  the  Omniscient  there  is  nothing  unobserved ;  to  the  Holy 
there  is  nothing  so  distressing,  so  oppressive,  u  sin.  Sin  is  no  trifle  in  the  eye  of  liim 
whose  glory  is  his  holiness.  This  is  not  only  a  wonderful,  but  a  iolemn  fact.  Gk)d  not 
only  observes  and  knows  my  sins,  but  he  remembers  them — does  not  lose  sight  of  one. 
They  are  in  his  memory.  What  a  book  is  the  memory  of  God!  The  whole  history  of 
the  universe  is  there  I  Every  sin  that  has  ever  been  committed  by  any  moral  intelligence 
in  the  creation,  however  insignificant,  has  record  there.  "Thou  art  acquainted  with  all 
my  ways ;  for  there  is  not  a  word  in  my  tongue,  but  thou.  Lord,  art  acquainted  with  it 
altogether."  "  Doth  not  be  see  all  my  ways,  and  count  all  my  steps  ?  "  "All  things  are 
naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  "  Hell  is  naked 
before  him,  and  destruction  hath  no  covering."  "  How  much  more  then  the  hearts  of  the 
children  of  men  1"  How  useless  the  attempt  to  dissemble  our  sins  firom  him  I  How 
awful  the  revelations  of  the  last  day  I 

IL  Mbn  DisREaABD  God's  remembrance  of  their  sins.  "  They  consider  not  in  their 
hearts  that  I  remember  all  their  wickedness."  "  They  say.  The  Lord  shall  not  see, 
neither  shall  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it."  Sinners,  the  world  over,  are  indifferent  to 
this  fact.  So  far  from  considering  that  all  their  sins  are  in  the  memory  of  the  holy 
and  just  One,  they  practically  ignore  his  very  existence.  In  their  plans,  engagements, 
and  avocations  they  take  no  account  of  him.  Why  do  they  not  consider?  Is  it 
because  the  thought  strikes  them  as  so  manifestly  improbable  as  not  worthy  of  their 
attention?  Assuredly  not.  They  have  only  to  reflect  on  this  subject  to  see  that  it 
must  be  so.  Why,  then  ?  1,  Because  other  thcyughts  engross  their  minds — thoughts 
of  worldly  wealth  and  power,  thoughts  of  selfish  gains  and  sensual  pleasures.  They 
are  too  full  of  vain  and  worldly  thoughts  to  admit  an  idea  so  grand  and  solemn  as  this. 
2.  Because  this  thought,  if  it  occurs  to  them  for  a  moment,  t$  too  painful  to  he  enter- 
tained. The  corrupt  nature  revolts  from  it,  expels  it  the  moment  it  gains  admission, 
and  bolts  every  door  against  it,  environs  itself  with  associations  that  keep  it  far  away 
in  the  distance.    "  It  desires  not  a  knowledge  of  it." 

III.  That  men's  disregard  of  God's  remembrance  of  their  sins  leads  them  to  betel 
IN  IKIQUITT.  "Now  their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about;  they  are  before  my 
face."  Here  we  have  their  sins :  1.  In  general.  They  are  abundant  and  daring. 
Their  sins  encompass  them  on  all  sides,  and  they  perpetrate  them  without  shame  under 
the  very  face  of  God  himself;  they  give  foil  play  to  all  their  passions,  an  unbridled 
licence  to  all  their  sinful  impulses  and  lusts.  2.  In  particular.  Some  of  their  sins  are 
specified  here.  "  They  make  the  king  glad  with  their  wickedness,  and  the  princes  with 
their  lies."  "  It  pleases  them,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  to  see  the  people  conform  to  their 
wicked  laws  and  examples  in  their  worship  of  their  idols,  and  other  instances  of  impiety 
and  immorality,  and  to  hear  them  flatter  and  applaud  them  in  their  wicked  ways. 
When  Herod  saw  that  his  wickedness  pleased  the  people  he  proceeded  further  in  it. 
Much  more  will  the  people  do  so  when  they  see  that  it  pleases  the  prince"  (Acts  xiii. 
3).  Particularly,  they  made  them  glad  with  their  lies,  with  the  lying  praises  with 
which  they  crowned  the  favourites  of  the  prince,  and  the  lying  calumnies  and  censures 
with  which  they  blackened  those  whom  they  knew  the  princes  had  a  dislike  to.  Those 
who  show  themselves  pleased  with  slanders  and  ill-natured  stories  shall  never  want 
those  about  them  who  fill  their  ears  with  stories.  FroT.  xxix.  12,  "  If  a  ruler  hearken 
to  lies,  all  his  servants  are  wicked,"  and  will  make  him  glad  with  their  lies,— D.  T. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Bad  aspects  of  character.  "  Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself  among 
the  people;  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned.  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength,  and 
he  knowetb  it  not :  yea,  grey  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon  him,  yet  he  know^  not," 


228  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  to,  1—16. 

The  primary  application  of  these  wordi  to  Ephraim  is  obvious  from  the  context,  and 
from  the  history  of  Israel  at  the  time.  We  shall  use  them  as  indicating  certain  bad 
aspects  of  human  character. 

L  Wbono  companionship.  "  Ephraim,  h«  hath  mixed  himself  among  the  people." 
rhe  reference  is  here  not  to  the  punishment  or  dispersion  of  the  Israelites  among  the 
nations,  but  to  the  state  in  which  Israel  was  at  the  time.  -  Heaven's  plan  was  that 
the  Hebrew  people  should  separate  from  the  nations,  and  bo  holy  to  him  (Lev.  xx. 
24 — 26) ;  to  be  as  Balaam  predicted, "  a  people  dwelling  alone  "  (Numb,  xxiii.  9).  But 
in  opposition  to  this  the  ten  tribes  had  mingled  with  the  heathen,  learned  their  works 
and  served  their  idols.  Now,  what  is  a  wrong  mixing  with  the  people  ?  Not  inter- 
mixture in  marriages.  It  appears  to  us  that  the  mingling  of  the  different  tribes  of 
mankind  in  matrimonial  alliances  is,  according  to  the  plan  of  the  Creator,  highly 
promotive  of  the  good  of  the  entire  race.  Not  intercourse  in  busineu.  Such  is  the 
state  of  human  society  that  good  men  are  bound  in  worldly  affairs  to  have  dealings 
with  the  irreligious  and  depraved.  Not  associating  vnth  them  for  spiritual  usefulness. 
Those  who  think  that  the  saints  of  God  should  shut  themselves  up  from  the  world, 
dwell  in  monasteries,  and  live  as  hermits,  make  a  great  mistake.  The  more  Divine 
love  and  truth  a  man  has  in  him,  the  more  bound  is  he  to  be  out  in  the  world,  and 
to  let  the  light  of  his  doctrines  and  his  character  flash  widely  and  strongly  upon  the 
heart  of  his  compeers.  The  man  who  has  "  mixed  himself  with  others  "  does  as  did 
the  ten  tribes  now;  for  worldly  advantage  and  unholy  gratifications  make  bad  people 
companions.  It  is  said  that  Pythagoras,  before  he  admitted  any  one  into  his  school, 
inquired  who  were  his  intimates,  justly  concluding  that  they  who  could  choose  immoral 
companions  would  not  be  much  profited  by  his  instructions. 

II.  MoBAL  woBTHLESBNESS.  "  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned."  The  Easterns  bake 
their  bread  on  the  ground,  covering  it  with  embers,  and  turn  it  every  ten  minutes 
to  bake  it  thoroughly  without  burning  it  (1  Kin^s  xix.  6).  Without  the  turning  it 
would  be  charcoal  on  one  wde  and  dough  on  the  other,  and  the  bread  would  be 
worthless.  Worthlessness  is  the  idea.  Ephraim  or  Israel — for  the  words  seem  to  be 
used  convertibly — had  become  utterly  useless  in  a  spiritual  sense.  It  no  longer  fulfilled 
its  Divine  mission  maintaining  and  promoting  the  worship  of  the  one  true  and  living 
God.  As  the  unturned  cake  would  be  thrown  away  as  utterly  unfit  for  human  food, 
Israel  was  to  be  thrown  away  by  God  as  utterly  unfit  to  fulfil  its  mission.  What 
a  sad  thing  to  be  utterly  worthless  in  a  moral  sense  I — salt  that  has  lost  its  savour,  only 
fit  to  be  trodden  underfoot;  trees  that  have  lost  their  fruit,  only  fit  for  the  fire! 
Usefulness  is  the  grand  purpose  of  our  being.  The  man  who  does  not  make  the  world 
better  than  he  found  it,  must  be  accursed. 

III.  Social  despoilmbnt.  "  Strangers  have  devoured  his  strength,  and  he  knoweth 
it  not."  The  reference  probably  here  is  to  the  fact  that  Shalmanescr  King  of  Assyria 
finally  carried  away  Israel  captive  because  of  the  defection  of  Eoshea  King  of  Israel 
to  So  King  of  Egypt  (see  2  Kings  xiii.  7  ;  xv.  19,  20 ;  xvii.  3,  6).  In  consequence 
of  their  unholy  niingliug  with  idolatrous  people  and  their  depemience  upon  foreign 
nations,  they  got  rifled  of  their  property,  their  power,  and  their  influence.  Thus 
strangers  devoured  their  strength.  How  many  souls  in  all  ages  lose  their  "  strength  " 
under  the  influence  in  which  they  mingle  I  Their  intellectual  power,  social  sympathies, 
moral  sensibilities,  get  used  up,  and  they  become  the  mere  creatures  of  others  and  of 
circumstances.  The  man  of  society  "  has  his  strength  devoured  ; "  he  loses  freedom 
and  force  and  manhood. 

IV.  Unconscious  decay.  "  Yea,  grey  hiurs  are  here  and  there  npon  him,  yet  he 
knoweth  not."  Moral  strength  goes  so  slowly  from  men  that  they  are  often  not 
conscious  of  its  loss  until  they  are  reduced  to  the  utmost  prostration.  Thus  with 
Samson,  "  He  wist  not  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  him."  Nations 
have  their  grey  hairs,  and  they  don't  know  it ;  GhurcheB  have  their  grey  hairs,  and  are 
unconscious  of  them.  So  also  with  individuals ;  decay  is  so  gradual  that  the  subject 
is  unconscious  that  death  is  working  its  ruin. 

CoKOLUBioN.  Let  us  look  at  these  aspects  of  character  and  learn  practical  wisdom. 
Form  no  friendship  with  sinners;  come  out  ttoxa.  amongst  them— "the  companion 
of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."  Avoid  a  worthless  life.  Be  not  like  the  unturned  cake  ; 
render  some  service  to  the  universe.    Allow  not  the  social  influences  of  your  sphen  to 


c-ti.  VII.  1— it).]  I'HJi   BOOfe  OF   HoSMA.  229 

steal  away  your  strength,  to  eat  up  your  manhood;  conclude  not  that  decay  is  not 
working  within  yon  because  you  are  unconscious  of  it.  Wake  up  to  the  great  realities 
of  your  spiritual  being,  and  be  strong  in  the  Lord. — ^D.  T. 

Ver.  11. — The  sGlineu  of  tin.  "Ephraim  also  li  like  a  silly  dove  irithout  heart." 
"  There  is  much  force  and  beauty  in  this  comparison  of  Ephraim  to  a  '  silly  dove 
without  heart,'  or  rather  without  understanding,  which  when  pursued  by  a  bird  of  prey 
trusts  to  the  rapidity  of  its  flight;  that  is,  relies  upon  its  own  powers  for  the  means 
of  escape,  instead  of  at  once  throwing  itself  into  the  nearest  recess,  where  the  inter- 
ference of  man  or  the  narrowness  of  tlie  place  might  render  it  secure  from  molestation. 
Israel,  instead  of  taking  shelter  under  the  wing  of  the  Almighty,  who  is  a  God  near 
at  hand,  and  not  afar  off,  rested  his  hope  of  defence  upon  the  celerity  of  his  movements 
— stretching  his  wing  towards  Assyria  or  Egypt ;  but  in  the  length  of  the  flight  is 
overtaken,  secured,  and  dies  in  the  cruel  talons  of  his  unrelenting  pursuer"  ('  Pictorial 
Bible  ')•  The  passage  may  be  used  to  illustrate  the  silliness  of  sin.  Men  under  the 
influences  of  sin  are  as  silly  as  the  dove.    What  do  naturalists  say  about  the  dove  ? 

I.  It  18  TOO  BiLLT  TO  DEFEND  ITS  OWN.  Most  creatures  will  stand  by  their  young 
and  fight  for  them  to  the  last,  but  the  dove,  it  seems,  cares  but  little  for  them,  and 
allows  them  to  be  captured  without  resistance.  Ephraim  had  sunk  into  this  state ; 
his  most  distinguished  blessings  were  going  from  him,  and  he  struggled  not  to  retain 
them.  The  sinner  will  not  battle  with  the  devil  to  defend  his  own — his  force  oi" 
thought,  his  sensibility  of  conscience,  his  freedom  of  will,  his  purity  of  love;  he 
allows  these  precious  things  to  be  taken  from  him  without  a  struggle. 

IL  It  IB  TOO  BILLT  TO  FEEL  ITS  LOSS.  It  IS  Said  that  the  dove  will  lose  its  nest  and 
not  feel  it.  The  tree  seems  as  attractive  to  it  without  its  nest  as  with  it.  Men  under 
the  influence  of  sin  do  not  feel  their  loss.  Though  sin  has  broken  up  their  nest,  they 
still  strive  to  make  the  world  a  resting-place.  Whatever  is  taken  from  them,  they  still 
cling  to  earthly  things. 

III.  It  is  too  billy  to  escape  danger.  More  dull  than  other  fowls,  it  discovers  not 
its  perils ;  it "  hasteueth  to  the  snare,  ami  'knoweth  not  it  is  for  her  life  "  (Prov.  vii.  23). 
Thus  it  was  with  the  ten  tribes  politically,  and  thus  it  is  with  all  souls  morally  in 
their  fallen  state.  They  will  not  flee  to  the  right  place  of  safety — too  silly  to  be  calm 
under  trial.  It  is  said  of  the  dove  that  it  has  not  courage  to  stay  in  the  dove-hoUse 
when  frightened,  where  it  is  safe  under  the  careful  protection  of  its  owner,  but  flutters 
and  hovers,  seeking  rest  first  in  one  place  and  then  in  another,  and  thus  exposes  itself 
to  new  and  greater  dangers.  Thus  with  Ephraim :  instead  of  settling  down  under  the 
protection  of  God,  he  hurried  forth  in  quest  of  foreign  help,  and  was  the  more  exposed 
to  calamities  and  ruin.    Thus,  too,  with  souls  under  the  influence  of  sin. 

Conclusion.  Sin  is  folly.  The  fool  and  the  sinner  are,  in  God's  vocabulary, 
convertible  terms.  Oh,  how  sad  it  is  to  see  human  souls  hovering  and  fluttering  about 
like  gilly  doveSj  with  no  sense  of  their  loss,  no  resting-place,  no  security,  no  peace  I 

A  soul  immortal  spending  all  her  fires, 
Wasting  her  strength  in  strennons  Idlenese, 
Thrown  into  tumult,  raptured,  or  alarmed, 
At  aught  this  scene  can  threaten  or  indulge^ 
Besembles  ocean  into  tempest  wrought, 
To  waft  a  feather  or  to  drown  a  fly." 

(Young,) 

IX  T. 

Vw.  12. —  The  fowler  of  retribution.  "When  they  shall  go,  I  will  spread  my  net 
upon  them ;  1  will  bring  them  down  as  the  fowls  of  the  heaven."  Tliis  should  be  translated, 
"  As  they  go  1  spread  my  net  over  them ;  I  bring  them  down  as  fowls  of  the  heavens  " 
(Keil  and  Delitzsch).  "  As  they  go."  Whither  ?  "  The  preceding  verse  answers  the 
question :  to  Egypt  and  Asshur  seeking  help  in  their  difficulties  rather  than  to 
Jehovah,  Israel,  here  spoken  of  as  Ephraim,  being  sorely  pressed  by  Asshur,  at  one 
time  seeks  help  from  Egypt  against  Asshur;  whilst  at  another  they  try  to  secure  the 
friendship  of  the  latter.  For  what  threatened  Israel  was  the  burden  of  '  the  king 
of  princes.*     And  that  they  tried  to  avert,  partly  by  their  coquettish  arts  (ch.  viii.  9^ 


230  THE  BOOK  OF   HOSBA.  [ch.  vii.  1—16. 

anil  partly  by  appealing  to  the  help  of  Egypt ;  and  while  bo  doing,  they  did  not  observe 
that  they  had  fallen  into  the  net  of  destruction  by  the  power  of  Assyria.  In  this  net 
will  the  Lord  entangle  them  aa  a  punishment.  As  they  go  thither  God  will  spread 
his  net  over  them  like  a  bird-catcher,  and  bring  them  down  to  the  earth  like  flying 
birds ;  i.e.  bring  them  from  the  open  air,  that  it  to  say,  from  freedom — ^unto  the  net 
of  captivity  or  exile."  Here  the  work  of  retribution  is  spoken  of  as  the  work  of  the 
fowler,  and  it  includes  two  things— entrapment  and  abasement. 

I.  Bntbapmbnt.  The  spreading  of  the  net  refers  to  the  taking  of  the  birds  that  lay 
on  the  ground.  The  literal  reference  here  is  to  2  Kings  zvii.  4.  Here  the  retributive 
providence  of  Gkid  employed  the  Assyrians  as  s  net,  but  so  ensnared  the  Israelites  that 
they  could  not  escape.  Eliphaz  observed  this  ensnaring  work  of  Providence :  "  He 
taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness."  So  did  David,  who  says,  "  He  made  a  pit 
and  digged  it,  and  is  fallen  into  the  ditch  which  he  made.-  His  mischief  shall  return 
upon  his  own  head,  and  his  violent  dealing  shall  come  down  upon  his  own  pate."  How 
often  in  the  history  of  the  world  is  this  retributive  entrapment  witnessed!  The  cases 
of  Joseph's  brethren  and  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  are  striking  examples  in  sacred 
history.  Popery  confined  Luther  in  the  Wartburg  Castle,  but  there  he  translated  that 
Bible  which  shattered  the  whole  system.  Anglican,  bigots  confined  Banyan  in  Bedford 
Jail;  there  he  produced  a  book  that  has  given  him  immortal  fame.  The  net  that 
entangled  sinners  is  not  manufactured  in  heaven ;  it  is  made  on  earth,  made  by  them- 
selves. Righteous  Providence  allows  them  to  be- so  ensnared  by  it  M  to  render  that 
enthralment  painful  and  lasting.    Take  care  of  the  net. 

II.  Abasement.  "  I  will  bring  them  down  as  the  fowls  of  the  heaven."  However 
high  up  they  may  tower  in  their  ambitious  work,  retribution  has  missiles  to  bring 
them  down.  "  Thine  eyes  are  upon  the  haughty,  that  thou  mayest  bring  them  down." 
There  are  men  on  earth  who  in  their  worldly  prosperity,  pride,  and  ambition  soar  like 
the  eagles  high  up  in  heaven  above  all  the  rest.  It  is  said  that  an  ancient  philosopher, 
when  once  asked  what  Jupiter  did  in  the  highest  heaven,  replied,  "  He  pulls  down  the 
haughty,  and  exalts  the  humble."  Hear  these  words :  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath 
deceived  thee,  thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  whose  habitation  is  high, 
that  saith  in  bis  heart,  Who  shall  bring  me  to  the  ground?  Though  thou  exalt  thyself 
as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the  stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thea 
down,  saith  the  Lord." 

Conclusion.  Ponder  well  thy  condition,  sinner.  Not  only  is  the  eye  of  retributive 
Justice  upon  thee  wherever  thou  art  and  whatever  thou  dost,  but  it  has  all  the 
machinery  for  thy  ruin.  Art  thou  down  grovelling  in  the  earth,  working  out  thy 
sordid  soul  ?  it  has  nets  that  will  ensnare  thee  there  I  Or  art  thou  high  up  iu  the 
heavens  of  worldly  prosperity  and  haughty  ambition,  proudly  exulting  in  thy 
superiority  ?  it  has  shots  that  will  reach  thee  and  bring  thee  down  to  the  dust  Thy 
only  safety  is  the  cross.— D.  T. 

Yer.  15. — Divine  dispensation)  abused.  "Though  I  have  bound  and  strengthened 
their  arms,  yet  do  they  imagine  mischief  against  me."  This  text  has  received  different 
translations.  "  And  I  have  instructed  them  and  strengthened  their  arms,  and  yet  they 
think  evil  against  me  "  (Delitzsch).  "  Whether  I  chastised  or  strengthened  their  arms, 
yet  they  thought  evil  against  me"  (Elzas).  I  accept  the  latter  translation ;  then  the 
idea  is,  that  God's  treatment  of  man,  whatever  its  character,  afflictive  or  otherwise,  is 
abused.    Observe— 

I.  That  God's  dispensations  with  meh  abb  ohabaotbbizbd  bt  variety.  "I 
have  bound  and  strengthened,"  or,  "  I  have  chastised  and  strengthened."  The  events 
of  human  life  are  of  a  mixed  and  conflicting  character.  There  is  affliction  and  health, 
prosperity  and  adversity,  friendship  and  bereavement,  sorrow  and  joy,  wounding  and 
healing.  All  these  conflicting  events  are  under  the  direction  of  the  great  Father 
whose  aim  in  all  is  to  make  his  children  "  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light."  As  the  soil  to  be  fruitful  requires  the  frosts  of  winter  as  well  as  the  sunbeams 
of  spring  and  summer,  man  requires  trials  as  well  as  joys  to  make  his  spirit  fruitful  in 
good  works.  As  the  loving  father  has  the  good  of  his  child  at  heart  whether  he 
chastens  him  with  a  rod  or  presses  him  to  his  bosom,  so  has  the  Almighty  Father  in 
all  tiis  dispensations  with  men,  whether  the  painful  or  the  pleasant.     "  All  these  things 


OH.vn.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  281 

worketh  Ood  oftentimes  in  man,  that  he  may  hring  him  back  from  the  pit  and  enlighten 
him  with  the  light  of  the  living." 

IL  That  whatever  the  ohabaoteii  of  the  Divnrs  dispensations,  thbt  are 
OFTEN  PERVERTED.  "  They  imagine  mischief  against  me."  It  matters  not  what  the 
treatment,  they  continue  to  reliel.  They  are  like  the  sterile  ground  to  which  all 
seasons,  all  weathers,  are  alike.  Observe:  1.  The  force  of  the  human  will.  It  can 
oppose  the  influences  of  God,  and  turn  what  he  designs  for  good  to  ill.  Man  is  no 
passive  being.  He  is  not  to  be  acted  upon  as  a  machine,  nnt  to  be  coerced  either 
by  anathemas  or  benedictions.  He  is  a  voluntary  agent.  This  links  him  to  moral 
government,  makes  him  responsible  for  his  actions,  and  invests  his  existence  with 
a  momentous  solemnity.  2.  The  depravity  of  the  human  heart.  This  force  of  will 
explains,  not  man's  rebellion,  for  regenerate  souls  and  holy  angels  have  it,  and  they 
run  in  the  way  of  the  Divine  commandments.  The  reason  of  the  rebellion  is  the 
depravity  of  the  human  heart,  which  is  desperately  wicked. 

CoNOLtrsiON.  Open  your  hearts  to  the  various  dispensations  of  Heaven.  Be  thankful 
for  their  variety.  One  is  designed  to  touch  a  chord  within  thee  that  another  cannot 
reach.  The  one  may  strike  conviction  of  sin,  another  may  tune  thy  heart  to  gratitude 
and  hopflh 

*  God,  full  as  kind  as  he  la  wise, 

So  tempereth  all  the  favours  he  will  do  vm, 
That  we  his  bounties  may  tlie  better  prize, 

And  make  his  chastisement  less  bitter  to  na. 
One  while  a  scorching  indignation  bums 

The  flowers  and  blossoms  of  our  hope  away. 
Which  into  scarcity  our  plenty  turns, 

And  changeth  new-mown  grass  to  parched  hay] 
Anon  his  fruitful  showers  and  pleasing  dews, 

Commixed  with  cheerful  rays,  he  sendeth  down. 
And  then  tlie  barren  earth  her  crops  renews. 

Which  with  rich  harvests  hills  and  valleys  crown. 
For,  as  to  relish  joys  he  sorrow  sends. 
So  comfort  or  temptation  itill  attends. 

(George  Wither.) 

D.  T. 

Ven.  1,  2..— iStn's  mdignancy.  Jehovah  was  Israel's  Healer  (Exod.  xv.  26).  His 
constantly  cherished  desire  was  to  do  them  good.  He  had  laboured  for  this  end  by 
his  prophets,  by  chastisements,  and  by  exhibitions  of  kindness.  All  bad  been  in  vain. 
Tiie  people  would  not  permit  the  Lord  to  be  their  Healer.  If  sin  was  checked  for 
a  little,  it  was  only  to  break  out  again  in  worse  forms  than  before.  The  more  he 
sought  to  heal  them,  only  the  more  clearly  was  their  iniquity  discovered.  We  note 
here  concerning  Ephraim's  wickedness — 

I.  Its  INVETERATE  MALIGNANCY.  "When  I  wouM  have  healed  Israel,  then  the 
iniquity  of  Ephraim  was  discovered,  and  the  wickedness  of  Samaria"  (ver.  1).  The 
evil  of  sin  is  revealed  in  the'  very  attempt  to  cure  it.  1.  The  cure  of  sin  makes 
necessary  the  laying  tare  of  its  evil.  The  wound  must  be  probed  before  remedial 
measures  can  be  adopted.  It  is  when  he  begins  to  probe  it  that  the  physician  discovers 
its  dangerous  character.  So,  when  God  would  heal  us,  he  begins  by  discovering  to  us 
the  truth  about  our  spiritual  state.  He  calls  sin  by  its  right  name.  He  tells  us  of  our 
depravity,  our  corruption,  and  brings  into  light  the  transgressions  we  had  covered  up. 
This  was  the  work  of  the  prophets  of  Israel.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Law,  and  of  God's 
Word  generally.  Till  we  are  thoroughly  convinced  of  sin,  recovery  is  hopeless.  "  By 
the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin  "  (Eom.  iii.  20).  2.  The  evil  of  sin  is  discovered  in 
its  resistance  to  cure.  An  ordinary  disease  yields  to  remedies.  Where  these  are 
employed  and  no  improvement  is  manifest,  we  pronounce  the  case  a  serious  one.  Its 
resistance  to  treatment  evinces  its  malignity.  It  is  thus  that  Ephraim's  sin  was 
discovered  by  God's  attempts  to  heal  him.  Every  means  of  remedy  had  been  tried, 
but  without  success  (ch.  vi.  4).  Wickedness  seemed  at  a  greater  height  than  ever. 
Sin  is  DO' skin-deep  disorder.  The  difficulty  of  its  cure  is  sufficient  proof  of  the 
inveteracy  of  its  hold.    So  depraved  is  the  heart,  that  nothing  will  remedy  it  but 


232  THE  BOOK  0^  HOSEA.  [ch.  vii.  1—16. 

complete  renewal.  We  have  evidence  every  day  of  tlie  determined  resistance  which 
sin  is  capable  of  offering  to  God.  We  see  it  in  others,  and  we  know  it  in  experience. 
3.  The  attempt  to  care  sin  often  results  in  aggravated  manifestations  of  it.  The. 
sinful  heart  is  roused  to  antagonism.  Its  latent  enmity  to  God  comes  more  fullj  out. 
It  rages  in  its  opposition  to  his  servants.  When  the  commandment  comes,  sin  reTives 
(Bom.  vii.  9).  Temporary  amendment  is  followed  by  greater  outbursts  of  wickedness 
(oh.  vi.  8—10;  Luke  xi.  24—26). 

II.  Its  baleful  manifestations.  "  For  they  commit  falsehood ;  and  the  thief 
Cometh  in,  and  the  troop  of  robbers  spoileth  without"  (ver.  1).  We  have  here: 
1.  Falsehood.  Israel  was  guilty  of  falsehood  (1)  towards  God,  in  breaking  his 
covenant,  in  proving  faithless  to  their  vows  of  amendment,  and  in  "  speaking  lies  " 
concerning  him  (ver.  13);  (2)  towards  their  allies,  in  disregarding  treaty  engage- 
ments ;  and  (3)  towards  one  another.  Deceit  had  become  part  of  their  nature. 
When  falsehood  becomes  a  habit,  moral  recovery  is  scarcely  possible.  The  ingrained 
liar  is  an  almost  hopeless  subject  for  conversion.  2.  Bolhery.  Justice  is  itself  a 
species  of  truth,  and  with  the  loss  of  the  sense  of  truth  there  is  undergone  a  corre- 
sponding loss  of  the  sense  of  justice.  Each  regards  his  neighbour  as  his  lawful  prey. 
He  robs  him  if  he  can.  Thefts,  heartless  frauds,  organized  robberies,  are  of  frequent 
occurrence.  3.  Violence.  From  robbery  to  violence  the  transition  is  not  great.  When 
men  cease  to  live  by  honest  labour,  they  do  not  stick  at  trifles.  If  a  slack  state  of  the 
law  permits,  crimes  will  abound.  Where,  as  was  the  case  in  Israel,  the  throne  is  built 
on  murder,  it  need  not  surprise  us  that  lawlessness  spreads  in  the  community. 

III.  Its  pitifdl  delusion.  (Ver.  2.)  "  They  consider  not  in  their  hearts,"  etc. 
The  point  here  is  the  obliviousness  of  the  wicked  to  Ood's  knowledge  of  their  doings. 
They  extrude  God  from  their  thoughts.  "They  say.  How  doth  God  know?  and 
is  there  knowledge  in  the  Most  High?"  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  11).  On  this  notice:  1.  The 
ruicked  have,  in  secret,  more  knowledge  of  Ood  than  they  pretend.  Israel,  with  a 
prophet  like  Hosea  in  its  midst,  could  not  be  entirely  ignorant  of  God.  It  showed  that 
it  had  some  knowledge  of  him,  by  its  cries  to  him  in  trouble,  and  by  brief  periods  of 
amendment.  This  extrusion  of  him  from  the  thoughts  was,  therefore,  voluntary.  It 
was  Israel's  will  not  to  know  God.  Thus  there  lurks  in  the  sinner's  consciousness 
a  spark  of  knowledge  which  renders  him  inexcusable  for  his  habitual  forgetfulness. 
He  may  banish  God  fiom  his  thoughts,  and  try  to  persuade  himself  that  God  does  not 
remember  his  wickedness.  But  if  he  does  so,  it  is  because  he  prefers  to  live  in  a 
delusion  which  at  bottom  he  knows  to  be  such.  2.  ITie  wicked,  as  a  rule,  do  succeed 
in  expelling  God  from  their  thoughts.  '1  hey  get  their  own  way.  They  soon  perfect 
themselves  in  the  art  of  forgetting  their  Creator.  Like  the  ostrich,  which  is  fabled 
to  hide  its  head  in  the  sand  as  a  protection  from  the  hunters,  they  think  that  when 
they  have  succeeded  in  putting  God  out  of  their  remembrance  they  have  somehow  got 
rid  of  him.  3.  2'he  delusion  in  which  the  wicked  encourage  themselves  does  not  in  the 
least  alter  the  real  state  of  the  case.  Sinners  may  shut  out  the  thought  of  God's 
knowledge  of  their  doings,  but  none  the  less  is  God  cognizant  of  everything  they  are 
about.  "  Their  own  doings  have  beset  them  about ;  they  are  before  my  face."  This 
is  the  folly  of  sin;  it  cannot  by  its  forgetfulness  and  denials  alter  the  actual  state 
of  the  facts.  The  sinner's  deeds  are  his  own.  He  remains  answerable  for  every  one 
of  them.  With  all  his  doings  about  him,  he  stands  daily,  hourly,  constantly,  in  full 
view  of  the  eye  of  God  (Ps.  cxxxix.).    He  will  be  called  to  an  account. — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 7. — The  oven  and  the  baker.  High  and  low  united  in  the  wickedness 
which  has  been  described,  and  is  to  be  described.  The  example  of  the  king  and  court 
gave  the  key-note  to  the  subjects,  and  they  in  turn  pleased  the  king  and  his  princes 
by  a  hearty  imitation  of  their  vices.  "  They  made  the  king  glad  with  their  wicked- 
ness " — themselves  living  lives  of  debauchery  and  ungodliness ;  "  and  the  princes  with 
their  lies  "—offering  them  flattery,  and  siding  with  them  in  ridicule  of  the  prophet's 
teachings  A  new  image  is  here  employed  to  set  forth  the  enormity  of  the  wickedness 
which  prevailed — that,  viz.,  of  the  heated  oven  and  the  baker.  The  elements  of  the 
figure  may  be  thus  analyzed.  The  oven  is  the  heart;  the  fire,  unholy  lust,  appetite, 
or  passion ;  the  dough,  the  evil  intent  or  plan.  This  is  prepared  beforehand,  while  the 
fire  unoulders  beneath ;  when  it  is  matured  for  execution,  the  fire— luat  or  passioa— if 


CH.  vn.  1— le.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  233 

stirred  up  to  a  ilame,  and  the  act  of  wickedness  is  consumniated.  The  general  thought 
is  the  systematic  character  of  the  sin,  its  deliberateness  in  being  previously  conceived, 
planned,  prepared  for — the  soul,  thereafter,  being  held  as  it  were  in  readiness  for  its 
execution.  Three  illustrations,  though  the  figure  applies  strictly  only  to  the  first 
and  last. 

I.  The  heat  of  lust.  (Ver.  4.)  "  They  are  all  adulterers,  as  an  oven  heated  by 
the  baker,"  etc.  Their  debaucheries,  i.e.,  were  not  the  fruit  of  mere  impulse.  They 
were  gone  into  as  the  result  of  forethought  and  preparation.  Libidinous  thoughts 
were  encouraged.  New  gratifications  were  planned ;  the  matter  was  reflected  on  and 
matured ;  the  act  of  indulgence  was  anticipated  in  imagination.  Time  was  thus  given 
for  the  lustful  desire  to  permeate  the  whole  nature,  when,  like  dough  fully  leavened, 
the  evil  intent  was  ready  to  be  converted  into  deed.  Lust,  to  use  the  figure  of  James, 
conceives,  and  brings  forth  sin  (Jas.  i.  16).  Learn  :  1.  The  importance  of  guarding 
against  the  inception  of  lust.  It  is  in  its  beginnings  that  lust  is  most  dangerous.  The 
wrong  thought,  the  lustful  look,  the  dallying  with  desire, — it  is  there  the  evil  lurks. 
From  this  there  is  but  a  step  to  evil  intent.  The  fire  bums,  the  dough  is  prepared ;  it 
will  be  a  wonder  if  actual  sin  is  not  some  day  the  outcome.  2.  The  importance  of 
regulating  thought  as  a  means  to  the  control  of  the  passions.  Thought  can  be  so 
directed  as  to  feed  and  inflame  passion  ;  it  can  also  be  so  ruled  as  to  check  and  control 
it.  The  wicked  use  this  power  of  thought  for  a  bad  purpose  ;  nor  less  earnestly 
Bhould  we  attempt  to  use  it  for  a  holy  one.  It  is  only  through  care  of  the  thoughts, 
and  through  strict  control  exercised  over  them,  that  inward  and  outward  purity  can  be 
preserved. 

II.  The  heat  of  wine.  (Yer.  6.)  "  In  the  day  of  our  king  the  princes  have  made 
him  sick  [or, '  are  sick  *]  with  heat  of  wine,"  etc.  Boyal  feast  days  were  days  of  recog- 
nized and  premeditated  debauch.  Wine  maddens  and  inflames  the  nature.  1.  Drunken- 
ness stands  in  dose  relation  to  lust,  with  which  it  ia  here  brought  into  connection.  It 
is  lust's  most  powerful  auxiliary.  "  Whoredom  and  wine  "  (ch.  iv.  11).  Sensuality, 
in  turn,  predisposes  to  excess  in  drinking.  It  loosens  restraint.  It  destroys  self- 
control.  It  inclines  to  animal  indulgence  generally.  2.  Drunkenness  is  degrading  in 
its  oion  effects.  (1)  Degrading  to  the  body — "  made  sick."  It  sickens  and  bestializes. 
It  injures  health.  It  bloats  and  disfigures  the  countenance.  A  more  degrading 
spectacle  can  hardly  be  conceived  than  a  helplessly  intoxicated  man.  (2)  Degrading 
to  the  soul.  It  takes  from  it  its  self-respect.  It  begets  a  heartless,  scoffing,  irreverent 
disposition,  and  leads  to  association  with  those  who  are  of  this  character.  The  King 
of  Israel  is  here  represented  as  striking  up  fellowship  with  "  scorners  " — ^mockers  at 
Divine  things.  3.  Drunkenness  prepares  the  way  for  strife  and  plotting.  The 
drunkenness  is  the  nexus  between  the  adulteries  and  the  conspiracies.  Pot-companions 
are  rarely  stable  friends.  They  do  not  really  trust  each  other.  Carousals  lead  to 
quarrelling.  The  strong  and  unscrupulous  see  with  contempt  the  weaknesses  of  the 
rulers,  and  plot  against  them. 

III.  The  heat  op  anqeb.  ^Vers.  6,  7.)  "  They  have  made  ready  their  heart  like 
an  oven,  while  they  lie  in  wait,  etc.  We  hare  here  the  result  of  the  carousals  and  the 
scorning  in  plots  and  conspiracies.  These  are:  1.  Secretly  prepared ;  like  the  oven  got 
ready  beforehand,  the  dough  also  being  kneaded  and  leavened.  2.  Silently  waited 
upon.  It  takes  time  for  a  plot  to  mature,  as  it  takes  time  for  the  leaven  to  permeate 
the  dough.  A  good  example  is  furnished  in  the  case  of  Absalom,  who  first,  by  fair 
speeches  and  complaisances,  stole  the  hearts  of  the  people  Of  Israel ;  then,  after  the 
leaven  had  had  time  to  work,  got  leave  of  absence,  and,  with  two  hundred  men  accom- 
panying, had  himself  proclaimed  king  (2  Sam.  xv.  1 — 14).  3.  Sotly  executed.  There 
is  no  mercy  in  the  fierceness  which  at  length  breaks  out  in  bloody  deeds.  The  pent-tip 
heat  burns  like  an  oven.  The  anger  of  the  wicked  is  ruthless,  cruel,  unsparing.  It 
had  proved  to  be  so  in  Israel's  history.  Dynasty  after  dynasty  had  been  swept  away 
by  assassination.  Fekah,  probably  the  then  reigning  king,  was  himself  afterwards 
murdered  by  Hoshea.  Yet  Israel  refused  to  take  the  lesson,  **  There  is  none  of  them 
that  caUeth  upon  mo  "  (vei  7).  — J.  O. 

Vers.  8 — 10. — Mixing  with  the  fmgodly.  "Ephraim,  he  hath  mixed  himself  among 
tha  people  "—had  adopted  heathenish  ways,  had  set  at  nought  the  command  of  Qoa 


234  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  to.  1—16. 

requiriog  separation  from  the  ungodly,  had  intimately  associated  himself  with  the 
idolatrous  nations  around.  The  mixing,  as  Eeil  well  points  out,  was  an  inward  one 
before  it  became  an  outward  on«.  There  is  first  a  mixing  in  the  heart  with  the  spn't 
of  the  worli^,  then  comes  outward  worldly  confoimity.  It  is  this  which  Christians 
have  constantly  to  guard  against  (Bom.  xii.  2).  Their  calling  is  to  be  separate  (2  Cor. 
vi.  14 — 18).  They  need  to  remember  that  "  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with 
God  "  (Jas.  iv.  4),  and  that  "  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not 
in  him  "  (1  John  ii.  15).  Mixing  with  the  world — the  sin  of  the  Church  to-day,  as  it 
was  the  sin  of  Israel  of  old — has  its  effects. 

I.  SpntntTAL  iiscoKsiSTBNCY.  "  Ephraim  is  a  cake  not  turned  "—overdone  on  the 
one  side,  underdone  on  the  other;  not  of  a  piece  throughout;  one  side  "scorched  and 
black,  the  other  steamed,  damp,  and  lukewarm ;  the  whole  worthless,  spoiled  irre- 
mediably, but  only  to  be  cast  away  "  (Pusey).  The  unturned  cake  is  an  emblem  :  1. 
Of  partial  conversion.  We  have  this  where  the  Divine  life  has  not  penetrated  the 
nature,  but  affects  only  parts  and  sides  of  it.  The  conscience  is  sensitive  on  some 
points,  but  not  on  others.  Favourite  duties  are  attended  to,  while  others  not  less 
important  are  neglected.  The  conduct  in  some  things  shows  the  power  of  religion,  in 
others  it  appears  untouched  by  its  influence.  There  is  a  want  ot  pervaaion,  of  through- 
and-throughnesri  in  the  character.  An  illustration  is  affonled  in  what  Stanley  says  of 
Saul:  "Hebecauie  'another  man,' yet  not  entirely.  He  was,  as  is  so  often  the  case, 
half  converted,  half  roused.  His  mind  moved  unequally  and  disproportionately  in  its 
new  sphere.  Backwards  and  forwards  in  the  names  of  his  children  we  see  alternately 
the  signs  of  the  old  heathenish  superstition,  and  of  the  new  purified  religion  of  Jehovah. 
.  .  .  His  religion  was  never  blended  with  his  moral  nature.  It  broke  out  in  wild 
ungovernable  acts  of  zeal  and  superstition,  and  then  left  him  more  a  prey  than  ever  to 
his  own  savage  disposition."  2.  0/  teal  for  the  forms  of  religion  combined  with  denial 
of  its  power.  Pharisaism  was  an  instance  of  this.  We  have  other  examples  in  Judah 
and  Israel.  The  people  of  the  two  kingdoms  seem  never  to  have  failed  in  their  zeal 
for  the  outward  services  of  religion.  They  kept  up  sacrifices  and  ofieiings  (ch.  vi,  6) ; 
observed  the  feast  days  (ch.  iL  11 ;  Isa.  1.  11 — 14 ;  Amos  v.  21,  22) ;  were  unusually 
attentive  to  these  forms  when  trouble  seemed  impending.  With  all  this  they  were 
iniquitous  in  heart  and  life.  They  neglected  the  weightier  matters  of  the  Law — judg- 
ment, mercy,  and  faith  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).  With  excess  of  zeal  for  the  forms,  there  was 
no  zeal  at  all  for  the  reality.  For  this,  God  likens  them  to  an  unturned  cake.  3. 
Generally,  of  religious  profession,  with  inconsistency  of  conduct.  Beligiou  is  intended 
to  pervade  the  life.  It  should  be  as  manifest  on  week-days  as  on  Sundays ;  in  the 
ordinary  business  of  life  as  in  the  devotions  of  the  sanctuary.  Yet  how  many  fail  in 
thus  carrying  out  the  life  of  the  gospel  1  What  grievous  inconsistencies  are  seen  in 
their  conduct  I  They  maintain  their  profession,  yet  "mix  with  the  people,"  and  fall 
in  freely  with  the  world's  ungodly  ways.     Surely  this  is  to  be  "  a  cake  not  turned." 

II.  Spiritual  decay.  "Strangers  havedevonred  his  strength,  and  he  knoweth  it 
not :  yea,  grey  hairs,"  etc.  Ephraim  had  already  suffered  much  from  the  people 
among  whom  he  had  chosen  to  mi::  himself.  But  even  he  wag  not  aware  of  the 
amount  of  harm  they  had  done  him.  He  did  not  perceive  how  this  intercourse  with 
the  heathen  had  sapped  the  moral  strength  of  the  nation ;  had  deteriorated  its  politics ; 
had  beguiled  it  into  a  false  dependence  on  foreign  helpers  ;  had  given  a  mighty 
impetus  to  every  disintegrating  force  already  at  work  in  the  kingdom.  The  grey  hairs 
— significant  of  decay — were  thickly  strewn  upon  him,  but  he  perceived  it  not.  Dete- 
rioration inevitably  results  from  the  mixinp;  of  Christians  with  the  world.  1.  Worldly 
conformity  leads  to  a  decay  of  inward  religious  earnestness.  The  diversion  of  thought 
and  affection  from  spiritual  things  to  the  objects  about  which  alone  the  world  cares 
necessarily  brings  about  this  result.  The  temperature  of  the  spiritual  life  falls  in 
conformity  with  its  environment.  Interest  in  religion  gives  place  to  interest  in  the 
things  which  are  the  constant  subjects  of  thought,  talk,  and  concern  in  the  circlee  in 
which  we  move.  It  is,  besides,  soon  found  that  participation  in  the  world's  pleasures 
and  follies  is  incompatible  with  serious  attention  to  the  things  of  the  soul,  and  the 
latter,  accordingly,  is  soon  abandoned.  2.  Inward  spiritual  decay  revecUs  itself  by 
variom  outward  tokens.  As  grey  hairs  upon  the  head  reveal  the  gradual'  approach  of 
age.    Among  the  indications  of  decay  of  piety  we  may  notice  neglect  of  prayer,  and 


OH.  VII.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA,  2S6 

of  the  reading  of  God's  Word ;  aversion  to  reli^ous  conversation ;  the  preference  of  the 
society  of  the  worldly  to  the  society  of  God's  people ;  neglect  of  the  sanctuary ;  a 
light,  depreciating  way  in  speaking  of  religious  earnestness,  etc.  3.  The  progress  of 
spiritual  decay  is  often  not  noticed  by  the  sinner  himself.  It  comes  on  gradually. 
There  is  an  unwillingness  to  look  closely  into  the  spiritual  state.  The  power  of 
spiritual  perception  gets  lost, 

III.  Spiritoal  blindness.  Ephraim  did  not  know,  and  would  not  be  warned. 
Darkness  had  blinded  his  eyes.  "The  pride  of  Israel"  testified  to  his  face,  but 
Ephraim  understood  neither  (1)  the  plain  speaking  of  the  prophets;  (2)  the  signs 
of  internal  decay ;  (3)  the  voice  of  external  judgments.  "  For  all  this  "  he  would  nut 
return  to  God.  Sin  is  blindness,  fatuity,  folly.  The  worldly  conformist  speedily 
becomes  blinded.  The  god  of  this  world  blinds  him,  and  he  is  willing  to  be  blindod 
(2  Cor.  iv.  4).  He  "cannot  see  afar  off,  and  hath  forgotten  that  he  was  purged  fro  n 
his  old  sins"  (2  Pet.  i.  9).  "  He  knoweth  nothing,"  says  Pusey.  (1)  "  He  knoweth 
not  the  tokens  of  decay  in  himself,  but  hides  them  from  himself;  (2)  he  knoweth  ncit 
God,  who  is  the  Author  of  them;  (3)  he  knoweth  not  the  cause  of  them,  his  sirs; 
(4)  he  knoweth  not  the  end  and  object  of  them,  his  conversion ;  (5)  he  knoweth  nnt 
what,  since  he  knoweth  not  any  of  these  things,  will  be  the  issue  of  them,  his 
destruction."— J.  0. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — Ephraim's  flight  from  God.  Every  sinner  may  read  a  warning  in 
the  words  here  addressed  to  Ephraim. 

I.  Fleeino  from  God.  (Vers.  11,12.)  The  wicked  "say  unto  God,  Depart  from 
us;  for  we  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways"  (Job  xxi.  14).  They  themselves 
try,  though  vainly,  to  escape  from  God,  They  would  fain  put  a  great  distance  between 
him  and  them  (Jonah ;  the  prodigal).  1.  Fleeing  from  Ood  is  sin.  It  is  an  attempt 
on  the  part  of  the  creature  to  establish  an  independence  which  the  Creator  does  not 
allow.  Even  the  attempt  at  such  flight  God  must  check  and  punish.  2.  Fleeing 
from  Qod  is  folly.  It  is  foolish  (1)  because  it  is  an  attempt  at  the  impossible ;  and 
(2)  because,  if  the  wicked  could  succeed  in  the  attempt,  it  would  still  be  to  their  own 
hurt.  Abandoning  God,  the  soul  is  doomed  to  the  pursuit  of  vanity.  It  cannot  rest 
in  itself,  for  it  is  not  self-centred;  but  neither  can  it  rest  in  the  creature,  for  the 
creature  is  constantly  proving  itself  a  false  support.  Besides,  life  without  God  has  no 
longer  a  proper  aim.  The  soul  is  thus  smitten  with  restlessness;  its  movements 
become  vague,  methodless,  erratic.  "They  call  to  Egypt;  they  go  to  Assyria."  It 
flits  from  one  object  to  another,  and  finds  repose  in  none.  Existence  is  a  succession  of 
new  trials,  and  a  series  of  new  disappointments.  3.  Fleeing  from  God  is  destruction, 
God  declares  that  when  the  sinner  flees,  he  will  pursue  (ver.  12).  No  matter  how 
lofty  their  soarings,  he  will  spread  his  net  for  them,  and  bring  them  down.  He  has 
forewarned  them  of  this,  and  they  will  find  it  true.  Jonah  found,  when  he  tried  to 
escape,  that  God's  net  was  spread  for  him.  Every  sinner  will  find  the  same.  The  net 
which  God  spreads  for  the  haughty,  would-be  independent  ones  is  that  of  his  punitive 
justice.    Their  pride  will  end,  as  all  evil  ends,  in  destruction. 

II.  False  dealtno  with  God.  (Vers.  13 — 16.)  A  main  part  of  the  charge  against 
Ephraim  is  falsehood  (vers.  1,  3).  The  falsehood  is  primarily  falsehood  towards  God. 
We  have  here  three  phases  of  it.  1.  Insincerity  in  repentance.  "  They  have  not 
cried  with  their  heart,  when  they  howled  upon  their  beds,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  The  insin- 
cerity of  their  repentance  was  evinced :  (1)  By  the  very  noise  they  made  about  it^ 
"they  howled,"  etc.  (2)  By  their  unabridged  indulgence  in  sin:  "They  assemble 
themselves  for  corn  and  wine,  and  they  rebel  against  me."  They  insulted  God  by 
lying  protestations  of  a  desire  to  return  to  him,  while  openly  dishonouring  him  by 
their  wickedness.  It  is  not  loud  outcries,  but  changed  actions,  which  show  the  reality 
of  repentance  (Matt.  iii.  8).  2.  Speaking  lies  against  God.  (1)  God  had  attested  his 
willingness  to  redeem,  but  they  alleged  that  he  would  not  do  so.  "  I  would  redeem 
them,  but  they  speak  lies  against  me "  (ver.  13).  It  was  easier  to  profess  doubt  of 
God's  Word  than  to  fulfil  the  moral  conditions  necessary  for  the  securing  of  the  bless- 
ing. (2)  God  had  shown  himself  their  true  Helper — "  I  instructed  and  strengthened 
their  arms" — yet  they  plotted  alliances  with  heathen  powers,  disowning  his  past 
goodness.    "They  imagine  mischief  against  me"  (ver.  15).    Thus,  doubly,  Qiey  made 


236 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  tiu.  1 — 14 


God  a  liar.  But  their  whole  life  and  worship  wai  »  denial  of  his  Word.  They  gain- 
said the  Word  sent  them  hy  the  prophets,  denied  his  anger  at  their  sins,  changed  his 
truth  into  a  lie  in  the  worship  of  the  calves,  etc  3.  Faithlessnes*  in  promisu.  Even 
when,  for  a  brief  moment,  they  seemed  wishful  of  amendment,  their  goodness  did  not 
last  (oh.  vi.  4).  Their  promises  were  hroken.  They  did  not  keep  faith  with  God, 
They  were  as  "  a  deceitful  bow "  (ver.  16).  The  deceitful  bow :  (1)  Holds  out  a 
promise.  The  person  who  shoots  thinks  he  can  depend  upon  it.  It  seems  a  bow  that 
will  serve  his  ends.  (2)  Suggests  an  aim.  The  use  of  a  bow  is  to  drive  the  arrow  to 
the  point  aimed  at.  God  had  an  aim  in  the  calling  of  Israel.  It  was  his  desire  to 
reach  that  aim  through  the  obedience  of  the  nation.  He  has  an  aim  in  our  own 
creation,  calling,  and  moral  discipline.  (3)  Proves  treacherous  on  trial.  It  either  does 
not  shoot  at  all,  or  sends  the  arrow  but  a  little  way,  or  turns  it  off  in  a  different 
direction  from  that  which  the  shooter  intended.  In  any  case,  it  proves  not  to  be 
depended  on.  Confidence  cannot  be  placed  in  it.  It  deceives  and  disappoints.  Israel 
had  thus  repeatedly  disappointed  the  expectations  raised  by  repentances  and  vows. 

III.  A  LAUGHING-STOCK  TO  MEN.  (Vcr.  16.)  "  TIlis  shall  be  their  derision  in  the 
land  of  Egypt."  Their  princes  had  used  boastful  language—"  the  rage  of  their  tnngue." 
Once  their  pretensions  were  exposed,  they  would  become  a  mockery  to  tMone  fur  the 
sake  of  whose  friendship  and  help  they  bad  deserted  God.— J.  0, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  Vin. 
This  chapter  deals  with  the  pnnishment 
of  apostasy.  Once  more  the  gins  of  the 
northern  kingdom  are  enumerated  and  its 
approaching  fall  predicted.  There  is  a  close 
connection  between  the  verees  in  the  first 
section  of  the  chapter.  That  connection  is 
as  follows :  The  first  verse  begins  with  an 
exclamation  containing  Jehovah's  command 
to  the  prophet  to  act  as  his  herald,  putting 
the  trumpet  to  his  mouth  and  sounding 
the  alarm  about  coming  calamity.  In  the 
second  clause  of  the  same  verse  the  nature 
of  the  calamity  is  announced.  In  the  third 
and  last  clause  of  it  the  cause  of  the 
calamity  is  declared.  The  second  verse 
represents  Israel  in  their  extremity  crying 
to  God  for  deliverance ;  the  cry  is  very 
earnest,  and  proceeds  from  every  member  of 
the  community,  backed  also  with  the  asser- 
tion of  their  acquaintance  with  Jehovah. 
In  the  third  verse  Jehovah  rejects  their  cry 
and  refuses  to  interpose  between  them  and 
the  enemy,  because  their  knowledge  of  him 
was  merely  historical  and  neither  spiritual 
nor  practical,  as  their  dislike  of  what  was 
good  eontioned  unabated.  The  fourth  verse 
specifies  facts  in  proof  of  Israel's  renuncia- 
tion of  Jehovah.  The  fifth  verse  shows  • 
just  retribution,  for,  inasmuch  as  Israel 
disliked  what  was  good,  the  object  of  their 
idolatry  has  disgusted  Jehovah  or  oast  them  I 


off.  The  sixth  verse  eontaini  the  doom 
of  this  silly,  sinful,  and  disgusting  idoL 
In  the  seventh  verse  the  threat  of  suoh 
destruction  is  accounted  for  on  a  broad 
principle  taken  from  agricultural  life,  that 
the  harvest  will  correspond  to  the  seed 
sown :  and  so  Israel  shall  reap  the  fruit  of 
their  ungodliness. 

Ver.  1. — The  exclamation  In  this  verse, 
A  trumpet  to  thy  mouth,  supersedes  the 
necessity  of  supplying  a  verb.  The  alarm 
of  war  or  of  hostile  invasion  is  to  be  sounded 
by  the  prophet  at  the  command  of  Jehovah. 
The  (1)  trumpet  is  at  once  to  be  employed 
for  the  purpose.  Tlie  rendering  of  both 
the  Targum  and  Syriao  (2)  expresses  the 
same  idea,  though  under  a  different  form  ; 
the  former  has,  "  Cry  with  thy  throat,  as 
if  it  were  a  trumpet  j "  and  the  latter,  "  Let 
thy  mouth  be  as  a  trumpet."  According  to 
this  view,  the  Prophet  Hosea  expresses  here 
very  briefly  what  Isaiah  has  done  more 
fully  in  the  words,  "Cry  aloud  [Hebrew, 
'with  the  throat'],  spare  not,  lift  up  thy 
voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show  my  people 
their  transgression,  and  the  house  of  Jacob 
tijeir  sins."  (3)  The  LXX.  bore  deviates 
considerably  from  the  Massorotio  Hebrew 
text,  translating  ds  k6\vov  (^Vi)  airur. 
Its  7^,  of  the  meaning  of  which  Jerome 
acknowledges  his  ignorance,  though  he 
attempts  to  explain  it.  Cyril  connects  the 
words  with  the  concluding  part  of  the  pre- 
ceding chapter,  thus :  "  This  their  setting  at 
nought  (of  me)  in  the  land  of  Egypt  shall 
ooine  into  their  own  bosom.  As  the  land,  as 
the  eagle  against  the  bouse  of  tiie  Lord;" 


CH.  VIII.  1 — 14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


237 


while  his  explanation  is  ai  fbDows:  **  Since, 
though  I  preserved  them  and  instructed 
them,  and  gave  them  victory  over  their 
enemies  (for  I  strengthened  them),  they 
haye  impiously  set  me  at  nought,  worship- 
ping dejLions  for  gods,  and  have  trusted  to 
the  land  of  the  Egyptians,  and  have  fancied 
that  their  help  shall  he  sufBcieiit  for  their 
prosperity,  therefore  their  attempt  shall 
return  unto  their  own  bosom,  and  they 
shall  find  no  good  reward  of  their  temerity ; 
but  they  shall  receive,  as  it  were,  into  their 
bosom  the  deserved  punishment.  Fur  he 
shall  come,  he  shall  come  who  shall  lay 
them  waste — the  King  of  Assyria,  with  an 
innumerable  multitude  of  warriors,  and  he 
shall  come  to  them  as  the  whole  land  and 
region  and  country,  that  one  might  tliink 
that  the  whole  region  of  the  Persians  and 
Medes  had  wholly  migrated  and  had  come 
into  Samaria.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the 
whole  land  (lis  74).  He  ihall  likewise 
come  as  an  eagle  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord."  (He  shall  oome)  as  an  eagle  against 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  These  words  cannot 
mean,  (I)  as  Hitzig  thinks,  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  prophet  is  directed  to  convey  his 
tidings  of  alarm,  a*  if  it  were,  "Fly  [ran 
imperfect  being  supplied],  thou  prophet^  as 
an  eagle ; "  nor  yet,  with  others,  the  lond- 
nesB  of  the  alarm  be  was  to  sound.  The 
meaning  abruptly  though  vividly  expressed 
refers  (2)  to  the  approaching  invasion  of  the 
enemy,  though  there  is  no  need  to  supply 
ntnv  or  K3<.  It  is  the  substance  of  the 
prophet's  alarm.  As  an  eagle  the  enemy 
(as  is  evident  from  ver.  8)  shall  come 
against  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  enemy 
was,  in  all  probability,  the  Assyrian,  in 
whose  symboliiim  the  eagle  bulks  largely; 
while  the  gri£Su  vulture,  scenting  from  afar, 
and  coming  down  with  rapid  and  terrific 
swoop  upon  its  prey,  is  an  appropriate 
image  of  the  sudden  and  impetuous  character 
of  his  invasion.  The  house  of  the  Lord  is 
neither  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  for  the 
prophecy  relates  to  the  northern  kingdom; 
nor  the  temple  at  Samaria,  which  could  not 
be  called  Beth  Y'liovah,  but  Bethibamoth; 
nor  the  land  of  Israel,  which  could  not  with 
any  propriety  be  called  a  house ;  hut  the 
people  of  Israel,  which,  owing  to  God's 
covenant  relation  to  that  people,  is  called 
his  house,  as  in  Numb.  xii.  7,  "  My  servant 
Moses  is  not  so,  who  is  faithful  in  all 
mine  house."  The  figure  seems  an  echo  of 
Deut  xxviiL  49,  "The  Lord  shall  bring 
a  nation  against  thee  from  far,  from  the  end 
of  the  earth,  as  swift  as  the  eagle  flieth;" 
while  it  has  a  parallel  in  Matt.  xxiv.  28, 
"  For  wheresoever  the  carcase  is,  there  will 
the  eagles  be  gathered  together."  Because 
they  ^ve  transgressed  my  covenant,  and 
trespassed  against  my  Law.    These  words 


exhibit  the  cause  of  Israel's  being  exposed 
to  the  sudden  hostile  attack  which  the 
prophet  was  commissioned  to  proclaim 
The  provocations  of  Israel  consisted  in 
violating  the  covenant  which  God  had  been 
pleased  to  make  with  them,  and  in  proving 
unfaithful  to  that  Law,  obedience  to  which 
was  the  condition  of  the  covenant.  The 
explanation  of  the  whole  verse  thus  given 
is  confirmed  by  the  Hebrew  commentators; 
thus  Bashi  says,  "The  Shechinah  (or 
Divine  Majesty)  says  to  the  prophet,  '  Let 
the  voice  of  thy  palate  be  heurd  and 
sound  the  trumpet  and  say.  The  enemies 
fly  hither  as  the  eagle  flieth  and  come  unto 
the  house  of  the  Lord.'"  Aben  Ezra  more 
concisely  conveys  the  same  sense :  ''It  is  the 
words  of  Jehovah  to  the  prophet,  '  Set  the 
comet  to  thy  palate,  for  the  enemy  flieth  as 
'the  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord.' " 
Kimchi  differs  in  two  respects  from  his 
brethren,  understanding  the  address  to  be, 
not  that  of  Jehovah  to  the  prophet,  but  of 
the  pruphet  to  the  people;  and  the  house 
of  the  Lord  to  include  the  whole  land  of 
Israel  and  temple  at  Jerusalem :  "  The 
cornet  to  thy  palate,  as  he  said  above, 
*  Sound  the  trumpet  in  Gibeah.'  Many  a 
time  the  prophet  speaks  to  the  people  in  the 
singular  and  many  a  time  in  the  plural. 
He  says,  *  Put  the  trumpet  to  tliy  mouth, 
for  beljold  I  the  enemy  flies  hither  like  tlie 
eagle  over  the  house  of  Jehovah ; '  he  means 
to  say, '  Over  the  whole  land  and  also  over 
the  house  of  Jehovah,  in  order  to  destroy  it.' 
And  he  joins  the  trumpet  to  the  palate 
(and  yet  man  sets  the  trumpet  to  the  mouth) 
because  the  voice  passes  over  tlie  way  of  the 
palate  after  it  comes  out  of  the  throat." 

Yer.  2. — Israel  shall  cry  anto  me,  Uy 
God,  ve  know  thee.  The  more  literal  as 
well  as  more  exact  rendering  is,  to  me  will 
they  cry.  My  God,  we  kfww  thee,  we  Israel  I 
Notwithstanding  their  piovocation,  their 
unfaithfuluess^  to  the  covenant  of  God,  and 
their  disobedience  to  the  Law,  they  appeal 
unitedly  and  severally  to  God  in  the  day  of 
their  distress,  and  urge  two  pleas — tlieir 
knowledge  of  God,  or  acknowledgment  of 
him  as  the  true  God;  and  their  high  posi- 
tion as  his  people.  Thus  the  Ghaldee  para- 
phrase haa :  "  As  often  as  calamity  comes 
upon  them  they  pray  and  say  before  me. 
Now  we  acknowledge  that  we  have  no  God 
leside  thee ;  deliver  us,  because  we  are  thy 
people  Israel."  As  to  the  construction, 
either  "  Israel "  is  in  apposition  to  anachnu, 
the  subject  of  the  verb,  or  there  is  a  trans- 
position. Thus  Bashi :  "  We  must  transpose 
the  words,  and  explaiu, '  To  me,  cries  Israel, 
My  God,  we  know  thee ; '"  so  also  Kimch  i 
and  Aben  Ezra.  The  former  says, " '  Israel ' 
which  comes  after,  should  be  before,  after 
'r<^,  and  many  inversions  of  this  kind  oooui 


238 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  Tin.  1 — 14, 


in  Scripture,  u  Ezek.  xxxiz.  11  and  Pi. 
oxli.  10."  The  word  "  lirael "  is  omitted  by 
the  LXX,  and  Syriao,  and  In  many  mann- 
ecripts  of  Kennicott  and  De  BobbI. 

Ver.  3. — Israel  hath  oast  off  the  thing  that 
is  good :  the  enemy  shall  pnrsne  him.  This 
is  the  reply  of  Jehovah.  The  good  which 
Israel  rejected  is  not  exactly  God  the  One 
Good,  nor  Jehovah  the  greatest  Good,  nor 
the  Law,  which  was  good ;  but  all  the 
goodness  which  he  bestows  on  such  as  keep 
his  covenant.  This  Israel  rejected,  and  in 
turn  is  rejected  of  God  and  delivered  up 
into  the  hands  of  his  pursuers. 

Ver.  4. — ^They  have  set  up  kings,  hut  not 
by  me :  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew 
it  not.  Here  was  the  first  instance  and 
evidence  of  Israel's  rejection  of  Jehovah. 
Their  conduct  was  not  guided  by  Divine 
direction,  nor  in  obedience  to  the  Divine' 
will,  nor  with  the  Divine  sanction.  This 
state  of  things  began  with  Israel's  revolt 
from  the  house  of  David,  and  rebellion 
against  the  son  of  Solomon  their  legitimate 
sovereign,  and  was  repeated  in  subsequent 
usurpations.  Perhaps  we  may  go  further 
back,  even  to  the  appointment  of  the  first 
king  of  the  yet  undivided  kingdom,  when 
"  the  Lord  said  unto  Samuel,  Hearken  unto 
the  voice  of  the  people  in  all  that  they  say 
unto  thee :  for  they  have  not  rejected  thee, 
but  they  have  rejected  me,  that  I  should 
not  reign  over  them."  Usurpations  snch  as 
those  of  Zimri,  Omri,  and  Shallum  at  least 
are  comprehended  in  the  appointments  re- 
ferred to— appointments  on  making  which 
the  people  did  not  inquire  of  the  Lord,  nor 
act  under  his  'guidance,  nor  seek  his  sano- 
tiou.  Some  go  so  far  as  to  include  all  the 
kings  of  Israel  that  succeeded  Jeroboam. 
Thus  Cyril  says,  "He  denies  the  kingdom 
of  Israel  and  his  successors  on  the  throne 
of  Israel."  Aben  Ezra  also  extends  the 
statement  to  the  kings  of  the  northern 
kingdom  from  the  days  of  Jeroboam: 
"They  inquired  not  of  God  with  respect 
to  the  making  of  Jeroboam  king,  although 
it  is  written,  'Thou  Bhalt  in  any  wise  set 
him  king  over  thee  whom  the  Lord  thy 
God  shall  choose.'"  A  seeming  contra-' 
diction  here  exists  between  the  statement 
of  the  prophet  here  and  that  in  1  Kings  xi. 
37,  where  God  promises  by  the  Prophet 
Ahijah,  "  I  will  take  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
reign  according  to  all  that  thy  soul  desireth, 
and  shalt  be  king  over  Israel,"  and  the  fact 
of  Jehu's  anointing  being  ordered  by  the 
Prophet  Elisha,  who  sent  one  of  the  children 
of  the  prophets  for  that  purpose  with  the 
words,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  have 
anointed  thee  king  over  Israel."  The  plot- 
ting of  Jeroboam,  and  the  conspiracy  of 
Jehu  against  Joram,  and  the  conspiracies  of 
other  usurpers,  were  things  whioh  Qod  could   I 


not  approve;  and  lo  we  must  distinguish 
between  the  permission  and  approval  of 
Jehovah;  in  his  government  he  permits 
many  things  which  from  his  nature  we 
know  ho  does  not  and  cannot  approve. 
ITBTl  is  nsnally  and  properly  rendered, 
"  they  have  made  princes ;  "  but  Aben 
Ezra  and  Bashi  translate  it  as  n<Dn.  equi- 
valent to  "they  have  removed;"  while  the 
Hassora  reckon  ll^e^n  in  the  number  of 
those  words  which  are  written  with  shin 
but  are  read  and  explained  with  mmeeh. 
Some  manuscripts  also  of  Kennicott  and 
De  BoEsi  have  itdd.  Of  their  silver  and 
their  gold  have  they  made  them  idols,  that 
they  (literally,  it)  may  he  out  off.  This  is  a 
second  proof  of  ferael's  renunciation  of 
Jehovah.  They  used  their  gold  in  making 
the  idolatrous  calves,  and  their  silver  in 
supporting  their  idolatrous  worship ;  or  they 
made  the  idol-calves,  some  of  silver,  and 
others  of  gold.  The  consequence  rather 
than  the  purpose  is  the  destruction  of  it, 
namely,  the  gold  and  silver;  or  the  ruin  of 
the  kingdom  or  of  each  member  of  it;  or 
the  cutting  off  of  their  name,  according  to 
Kimchi.  The  word  jjd^,  like  iva  in  Greek, 
is  generally  telie,  denoting  "  purpose ; " 
nor  is  it  ecbatie  here,  denoting  "result," 
though,  according  to  the  Hebrew  mode  of 
thought,  design  and  consequence  often  coin- 
cide, its  meaning  here  is  well  explained 
by  Keil,  "''  describes  the  consequence  of 
this  condact,  which,  though  not  designed, 
was  nevertheless  inevitable,  as  if  it  had 
been  distinctly  intended." 

Ver.  5.— Thy  ealf,  0  Samaria,  hath  oast 
thee  off;  mine  anger  is  kindled  against 
them.  This  portion  of  the  verse  has  occa- 
sioned much  diversity  of  translation  and 
exposition,  and  yet  the  general  meaning  is 
much  the  same.  (1)  In  the  translation  (o) 
of  the  Authorized  Version  the  word  "  thee  " 
is  supplied ;  others  (6)  supply  "  me,"  mean- 
ing Jehovah,  thus,  "  Thy  ealf,  O  Samaria, 
hath  cast  me  off;"  while  (o)  EoseDmiiller 
prefers  supplying  "  them,"  viz.  the  Israel- 
ites: "  Thy  calf,  O  Samaria,  hath  oast  them 
off,"  i.e.  has  been  the  cause  of  their  rejec- 
tion, which  is  favoured  by  DZ  in  the  follow- 
ing clause.  The  meaning  of  (6)  is  plain, 
the  import  being  that  the  idol-worship  had 
led  to  the  rejection'  and  so  the  withdrawal 
of  Jehovah;  while  the  sense  of  (a)  conveys 
the  idea  that  the  golden  calf  which  the 
country  represented  by  its  capital  and  the 
government  had  established  at  Bethel  as 
the  symbol  of  their  worship,  so  far  from 
protecting  its  worshippers,  would  fall  itself 
into  the  hands  of  the  Assyrian  invader.  (2) 
The  Septuagint  translates  by  awirpe^m  rhv 
n6irxov  <rov  2oji<£p«io,  equivalent  to  "  Cast  off 
[as  if  rag  thy  calf,  O  Samaria;"  whioh  is 


OH.  vin.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA. 


an  exhortation  to  Samarisi  and  not  only 
Samaria,  but  the  entire  country,  with  the 
inhabitants  of  the  capital  at  its  head,  to 
oast  aside  the  calf-worship  by  which  they 
had  incurred  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty. 
Jerome,  reading  m;  (Pual),  renders,  "  Oust 
off  is  thy  calf."  (3)  Some  modem  scholars 
translate,  "  He  has  cast  off  thy  calf,"  and 
refer  it  to  the  enemy,  and  rather  in  the 
sense  of  carrying  off  the  golden  image  as  a 
spoil;  or  to  Jehovah;  thus  De  Wette  has, 
"[Jehova]  verwirft  dein  Calb,  Samarien,' 
wiilob  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  first  per- 
son in  the  next  clause.  (4)  Others  take  the 
yerb  intransitively,  and  give  it  the  meaning 
of  "smelling  bodily,"  "emitting  intolerable 
stench,"  "  being  loathsome  or  disgusting ; " 
thus  Keil  has,  "Thy  calf  disgusts,  O  Sa- 
maria." So  Wunsche :  "  Anekolt  dein  Calb." 
Israel  loathed  or  felt  disgust  at  pure  worsliip 
and  what  was  really  good ;  now  Jehovah  in 
turn  is  disgusted  with  their  golden  calf  and 
hateful  idolatry.  No  wonder  it  is  added, 
Mine  anger  is  waxed  hot  (has  burnt  or 
blazed  out)  against  (hem;  ie.  not  the  calf 
and  Samaria,  nor  the  (jalves,  but  their 
stupid,  sinful  worshippers.  How  long  will 
it  be  ere  they  attain  to  innocenoy  t  Or  it 
may  be  translated.  Bow  long  tcill  it  be  ere 
they  shall  ie  able  to  endure  (bear)  inno- 
cenoy (guiltlessness)?  The  verb  ^3'  has 
frequently  to  be  supplemented  by  another 
verb,  ■  as  in  Ps.  oL  5,  ^sw  S^,  "  A  proud 
heart  will  not  I  suffer;"  so  also  Isa.  i  13. 
The  speaker  here  turns,  as  it  were,  from 
unwilling  auditors  to  others  more  ready  to 
lend  an  ear,  and  asks,  "  How  long  are  they 
incapable  of  purity  of  life  instead  of  the 
abominations  of  idolatry  7  How  great  the 
madness  that,  while  I  allow  space  and  place 
for  repentance,  they  are  unwilling  to  return 
to  soundness  of  mind  I"  The  Authorized 
Version  rendering  is  supported  by  Aben 
Ezra  and  Kimchi.  The  former  explains: 
"  It  is  as  if  '1  were  written  double, '  Thee 
as  thy  calf  cast  off— thee  Samaria,  as  if  it 
has  rejected  thee,  for  the  city  shall  be  laid 
and  its  inhabitants  shall  go  into  captivity; ' " 
and  Kimchi  says,  "n  is  transitive,  and 
lias  the  meaning  of  '  remove,'  as  in  Lam.  ii. 
7.  He  says,  '  O  SamaMa,  thy  calf  has  re- 
moved thee,'  that  is,  on  account  of  it  thou 
art  removed  out  of  thy  land."  The  last 
clause  is  also  well  explained  by  Kimchi, 
though  in  a  different  sense  from  that  given 
above,  thus:  "How  long  are  they  unable 
to  purify  themselves  &om  this  guilt  (ie. 
idolatry)?" 

Yer.  6. — For  from  Israel  was  it  also :  the 
workman  made  it;  therefore  it  is  not  Ood, 
The  prophet  here  vindicates  the  justness  of 
Jehovah's  complaint  and  the  folly  of  Israel's 
conduct    The  first  clause  points  out  the 


origin  of  this  idolatry — iWs  god  of  gold  was 
out  of  Israel,  it  proceeded  from  them  and 
was  invented  by  their  kings.  The  second 
clause  shows  that  it  was  of  human  manu- 
facture ;  while  the  natural  inference  follows 
in  the  third  clause  to  the  effect  that,  having 
its  origin  with  man  and  being  made  by 
man,  it  could  not  be  God.  Or  if  the  render- 
ing, "  Thy  calf  disgusts,"  be  adopted,  the 
hi  introduces  the  explanation  of  the  disgust 
which  that  abomination  caused.  This  idol 
was  of  honje  manufacture,  not  imported 
from  abroad,  as  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  from 
the  Sidonians,  Chemosh  from  the  Moabitos, 
and  Moloch  from  the  Ammonites.  The 
Israelites  themselves  and  their  king  Jero- 
boam made  for  the  northern  kingdom  what 
had  been  learnt  in  Egypt.  Thus  Israel's 
god  was  a  creature  of  Israel's  own  devising. 
How  stupid  and  how  absurd  I  Israel's  god 
man-made,  how  enormous  and  abominable 
the  iniquity  I  But  the  oalf  of  Samaria 
shall  he  broken  in  pieces.  It  shall  become 
splinters;  the  hapax  legomenon  'iv  is  de- 
rived from  an  Arabic  root,  $haba,  to  cut; 
and  thus,  as  the  calf  at  Sinai  was  burnt  and 
pulverized,  the  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be 
broken  into  splinters  and  destroyed.  The 
whole  verse  is  well  explained  by  Kimchi : 
"  Now  ye  will  see  if  the  calf  is  able  to  de- 
liver its  worshippers ;  it  cannot  even  deliver 
itself,  for  it  shall  become  splinters,  as  if  he 
said  that  the  enemies  shall  break  it  up  and 
carry  it  away  for  the  worth  of  the  gold,  not 
for  any  utility  that  is  in  it  while  it  is  still 
in  the  form  of  a  calf,  'av  is  equivalent  to 
Qn3»  (broken  pieces,  shivers),  fragments." 
(2)  The  Septuagintal  rendering,  ir^avSn/,  ia 
probably  due  to  the  reading  aa'ie't  Micah  ii. 
4, "  turning  away." 

Ver.  7.— Por  they  have  sown  th«  wind, 
and  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind.  The 
harvest  corresponds  to  the  seed-time ;  their 
foolish  and  vain  idolatries  shall  have  cor- 
responding results.  This  proverbial  expres- 
sion imports  more  than  merely  labour  in  vain ; 
it  denotes  labour  that  has  an  injurious  and 
destructive  result.  It  haa  more  than  a 
negative  significancy  of  lost  labour ;  it 
conveys  the  idea  of  positive  detriment. 
"The  prophet,"  says  Kimchi,  "means  to 
Bay  that  they  will  weary  themselves  in  vain 
in  this  service  (of  idols),  just  as  if  a  man 
who  sows  the  wind,  in  which  there  ia  nothing 
substantial,  shall  only  reap  the  wind,  or 
even  still  less;  as  if  he  had  said,  '  Ye  shall 
not  obtain  the  least  enjoyment,  but  only 
injury.' "  If,  then,  the  wind  denote  the  vanity 
and  nothingness  of  human  effort,  the  whirl- 
wind is  the  image  of  destruction  and  an- 
nihilation, viz.  a  storm  or  hurricane 
remorselessly  tearing  all  away  with  it. 
Suphah  itself  intensifies  the  notion  included 
in  ruaoh,  while  the  paragogio  n  intensifies 


240 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  vni.  1 — 14. 


Btill  more,  so  bb  to  denote  a  etorm  of  greatest 
violence.  The  double  feminine  ending  is 
legiirded  by  most  as  Btrengthening  the 
sense  in  this  word  euphathah,  nnp\!«,  nnntjj, 
etc.  It  hath  no  stalk  (maigin,  danding 
corn) :  the  bud  shall  yield  no  meal ;  better, 
thoot  hrings  no  fruit.  This  is  a  further 
development  of  the  figure.  When  wind  is 
the  seed  sown,  destruction  represented  by 
tempest  is  the  harvest  reaped.  The  seed 
sown  proiluces  no  stalk,  or  at  least  no  stalk 
with  grain  in  it — no  standing  com.  If  the 
seed  shoot  up  at  all,  the  shuot  has  no  fruit. 
Here  the  play  on  words,  of  which  the 
Hebrews  were  so  fond,  is  obvious — the  tee- 
maeh  has  no  yemach;  the  halm  has  no 
malm ;  the  Sprost  no  Schoss ;  the  corn  no 
kern.  If  so  be  it  yield,  the  strangers  shall 
swallow  it  up.  When,  or  if,  any  fruit  is 
attained,  the  invasion  of  rapacious  foreigners 
swallows  it  up.  First,  then,  when  the  wind 
of  vain  human  efforts  is  the  sowing,  de- 
struction is  the  harvest.  If  the  seed  spring 
up  at  all,  the  ear  does  not  fill;  or  if  the 
ear  should  fill,  there  is  no  substance  in  it ; 
or  if  it  fill  and  have  substance,  the  rapacity 
of  hostile  invaders  consumes  it  Thus  a 
blight  falls  on  all  they  do.  Kimchi  ex- 
plains the  verse  fully  as  follows :  "  Because 
the  prophet  compares  their  works  to  one 
who  sows  the  wind,  he  adds  further  to  the 
same  image,  and  says, '  It  has  no  stalk,  it 
reaches  not  the  time  when  it  shall  be  stalk ' 
(or  '  standing  corn ').  Now  nop  is  the  name 
of  the  corn  when  it  stands  ready  for  the 
harvest,  from  which  the  husbandmen  (lite- 
rally, '  sowers ')  soon  expect  enjoyment^  t.e. 
after  harvest,  when  they  shall  make  it  into 
meal.  Yea,  even  at  the  time  they  expect 
profit  from  their  works,  they  shall  have 
none.  And  he  says  further,  *  The  shoot 
shall  not  produce  fruit  or  meal,'  as  if  he 
said,  'Even  should  the  seed  spring  np  after 
the  sowing.'  He  thus  represents  in  a  figure 
that  should  they  prosper  a  little  in  their 
works  after  they  have  begun  to  do  evil,  yet 
that  prosperity  will  not  last,  and  it  will  not 
come  to  perfect  enjoyment  (beauty)  like 
com  which  comes  to  harvest  and  to  grinding. 
And  if  it  should  yield,  strangers  devour  it. 
Perhaps  for  a  time  it  may  produce  so  as  to 
come  to  meal,  as  if  he  said  that,  should  they 
prosper  in  their  possessions  so  that  a  little 
enjoyment  should  be  accorded  to  them  at 
the  first,  then  stiangers  shall  come  and 
devour  it,  and  their  enjoyment  will  not  be 
complete." 

Ver.  8. — ^Israel  is  swallowed  np.  Not 
only  shall  the  productions  of  their  land  be 
swallowed  up,  but  the  persons  of  the  Is- 
raelites shall  be  consumed;  nor  is  the  event 
far  off  in  the  distant  future,  though  the 
Hebrew  commentators  translate  the  pnst  as 
prophetic  future;  already  has  the  process 


begun.  Such  ii  the  extension  of  the  pun- 
ishment. Now  shall  they  be  (rather,  ar» 
then  beeame)  among  the  Oentiles  as  a  vessel 
wherein  is  no  pleasure.  The*  prosperity, 
population,  property,  and  even  nationality, 
are  swallowed  up— engulfed  as  in  some 
abyss,  so  as  to  be  undiscoverable  to  tlie 
present  time;  while  their  reputation  has 
suffered  so  sorely  that  they  are  despised  as 
a  worthless  household  vessel — a  vessel  unto 
dishonour,  never  of  much  worth,  but  now 
east  away  as  entirely  unfit  for  use. 

Yer.  9. — For  they  are  gone  np  to  Assyria, 
a  wild  ass  alone  by  himself:  Ephraim  hath 
hired  lovers.  All  their  misery  and  mis- 
fortune they  have  brought  upon  themselves. 
They  have  prepared  this  fate  for  them- 
selves, and  made  themselves  meet  for  their 
fata  The  second  clause  is  correctly  ren- 
dered, a  wild  ass  goes  alone  by  itself;  and 
this  clause  is  an  independent  statement— not 
connected  by  3  of  comparison  either  with 
the  clause  preceding  nor  with  the  succeeding 
one.  Instead  of  saying  that  Ephraim,  that 
is,  Israel,  went  up  to  Assyria  like  a  stubborn 
wild  ass  alone  by'itself,  or  that  like  a  wild 
ass  going  alone  Ephraim  hired  (sued  for) 
lovers,  the  statement  stands  independent 
and  in  a  measure  detached,  the  meaning 
being  that  even  a  wild  ass,  stupid  and  stub- 
born as  that  animal  is,  keeps  by  itself  to 
secure  its  independence.  The  conduct  of 
Israel,  however,  appears  to  disadvantage  in 
contrast  with  that  of  a  stupid  wild  ass ;  it  is 
more  stupid  and  senseless;  their  folly  is 
seen  by  the  comparison:  it  maintained  its 
independence  by  going  alone,  Epiiraim  lost 
independence  by  soliciting  help  from  heathen 
allies.  What,  then,  was  the  object  to  the 
attainment  of  which  this  foolish  conduct 
was  directed?  In  other  words,  why  did 
Israel  go  on  this  stupid  mission  to  Assyria  ? 
What  did  they  seek  to  gain  by  it?  The 
third  clause  contains  the  answer :  they 
sought  help  and  succour  from  the  Assyrians. 
Thus  the  first  clause,  giving  a  reason  for 
their  calamity,  shows  it  was  self-procured 
by  Ephraim  going  up  to  Assyria ;  the 
second  clause  exposes  the  folly  of  sucU 
conduct  in  seeking  prohibited  and  pernicious 
foreign  alliances ;  the  third  clause  specifies 
the  precise  object  of  Ephraim's  sinful  and 
foolish  mission,  namely,  the  procuring  of 
succour  from  Assyria.  The  above  explana- 
tion, (I)  which  is  in  substimoe  KeU's,  and 
which  is  a  contrast  between  the  indepen- 
dence of  the  wild  ass  and  Ephraim's  servile 
suing  for  foreign  help,  is,  we  think,  simpler 
and  more  correct  than  (2)  the  common  one, 
which  is  a  comparison  of  the  wilfulness, 
waywardness,  and  wantonness  of  the  wild 
ass  roaming  solitarily  by  itself  with  Ephraim's 
wilful  waywardness  in  going  up  to  Assyria 
for  succour,  and  wantonness  in  suing  for 


(H.  vm.  1— li.J 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


M 


idolatiouB  alliances.  The  expreesioii, "  going 
np,"  alludei  to  going  to  the  interior  of  the 
country,  or  to  the  capital  of  the  monarch 
Assyria  now  owned  as  sovereign,  or  to  a 
place  of  refuge.  The  hiring  of  lovers,  or 
lover,  by  Ephraim  Btigmatizea  their  shameful 
conduct  as  that  of  a  shameless  harlot,  who, 
instead  of  receiving,  bestows  presents  on 
lovers,  or  as  the  reward  of  endearments. 

Ver.  10. — ^Yea,  thongh  they  have  hired 
among  the  nations,  now  will  I  gather  them. 
Instead  of  "have  hired,"  "sue"  would 
make  the  sense  more  obvious.  But  who 
are  they  of  whom  it  is  here  said,  "  I  will 
gather  them"?  (1)  The  nations,  among 
whom  Ephraim  has  been  suing  for  endear- 
ments from  paramours,  shall  be  gathered 
together  to  effect  the  hurt  or  ruin  of 
Ephraim;  while  for  this  explanation  Ezek. 
xvi.  37,  is  cited  as  parallel-:  "Behold, 
therefore,  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers,  with 
whom  thou  hast  taken  pleasure,  and  all 
them  that  thou  hast  loved,  with  all  them 
that  thou  hast  hated;  I  will  even  gather 
them  round  about  against  thee,  and  will 
discover  thy  nakedness  unto  them,  that 
they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness."  But  (2) 
others  maintain  that  the  persons  gathered 
are  the  Ephraimites  whom  the  Lord  will 
gather,  that  is  to  say,  (a)  will  bring  them  all 
together  among  the  nations,  leading  them 
thither ;  and  to  this  exposition  oh.  ix.  6  is 
thought  to  furnish  a  parallel,  at  least  as  far 
as  the  meaning  of  the  verb  "to  gather"  is 
concerned :  "  Egypt  shall  gather  them  up, 
Memphis  shall  bury  them."  (6)  Or  the 
Ephraimites  shall  be  gathered  together  to 
be  led  away  in  chains  and  dispersed  among 
the  nations;  (c)  or  shall  be  gathered  for 
death  and  to  perish  by  sword  and  famine ;  or 
(d)  to  be  gathered  together  unto  Samaria  and 
other  fortified  cities,  in  order  to  be  taken  to- 
gether andcarried  by  tlieir  enemies  away  into 
captivity.  (3)  Bashi  understands  the  gather- 
ing together  of  Israel,  but  in  the  sense  of  a 
promise :  "  Though  they  have  sued  for 
endearments  among  the  nations,  I  will 
gather  them  out  of  the  nations  among 
which  they  have  been  dispersed,  as  the 
same  verb,  yap,  is  used  in  Isa.  liv.  and  Jer. 
xxzi.  10,  viz.  *I  will  not  delay  their  de- 
liverance.' "  This  exposition  is  not  in 
harmony  with  the  context,  from  which  we 
expect  a  threat  of  punishment  rather  than 
a  promise  of  reward.  Both  Eimchi  and 
Aben  Ezra  favour  exposition  (1) :  "  What 
benefit  is  it  to  them,  asks  the  prophet,  that 
they  sue  among  the  nations?  Eor  soon  I 
will  gather  the  nations  agaiast  them  to 
carry  them  into  captivity."  Thus  Kim- 
chi  and  somewhat  similarly  Aben  Ezra. 
Whether  we  take  the  verb  as  pointed  with 
daghesh  in  the  tav,  and  so  from  )n],  to  give, 
that  is,  gifts  to  lovers,  or  withont  daghesh, 
HOBXA. 


and  fo>m  ran  eqnlTalent  to  njnH  )ri],  to 
hire  or  bargain,  makes  little  d^erence  in 
the  general  sense  of  the  clause.  And  they 
shall  sorrow  a  little  for  the  burden  of  the 
king  of  princes.  This  fixes  with  more  defl- 
niteness  the  meaning  of  the  foregoing 
member  of  the  verse.  According  to  (1) 
this  rendering  of  i^n;  (Qeri)  Hiph.  from  wi, 
"a  little  "would  require  to  be  taken  ironi- 
cally; it  is  better,  therefore,  to  render  it 
"  in  a  little  time."  The  burden  is  not  that 
of  taxation  or  even  deportation,  but  of 
oppression  in  exile.  The  oppressor  is  the 
monarch  of  Assyria,  who  asks  boastingly, 
"Are  not  my  princes  altogether  kings?" 
Another  (2)  translation  is, "  They  will  begin 
to  diminish  on  account  of  the  burden  of  Uie 
king  of  princes."  According  to  this  the 
verb  i^nn  is  future  of  Hiph.  linn  from  Vfn, 
to  begin,  and  D^^  is  either  an  infinitive  for 
BVP,  or  rather  a  verbal  adjective ;  and  the 
sense  is  that  they  begin  to  he  or  beoome 
fewer  in  consequence  of  the  Assyrian's 
oppression.  But  (3)  taking  the  verb  from 
the  same  root  hbn  cognate  with  Greek  x«- 
\da>,  loose,  set  free,  Gesenins  translates, 
"  And  they  (the  hostile  nations)  shall  pre- 
sently force  them  from  the  burden  (<.«.  the 
unpleasant  dominion)  of  the  king."  lie 
Septuagint  (4)  read  n^QO  instead  of  taroo, 
and  acopulahetween,  i.e. "  and  princes;"  and 
lender,  Kol  Koici(rov<rt  fuKphv  toS  xp^ftv  PaaiKea 
Ka\  &pxorTta,  equivalent  to  "  And  they  shall 
cease  a  little  to  anoint  a  king  and  princes." 
Our  choice  must  lie  between  (I)  and  (2)  in 
interpreting  this  difficult  clause ;  there  is  u 
modification  of  (1)  worth  mentioning ;  it  is : 
"  They  shall  in  a  little  while  sorrow  for  the 
burden  which  they  pay  (f.e.  the  triboto 
which  they  pay)  kings  and  princes,"  viz. 
all  of  them,  the  two  concluding  words  being 
thus  in  apposition  to  the  subject  of  the 
verb.  On  the  whole,  we  prefer  the  rendering 
of  the  clause  in  the  Authorized  yersion,  as 
both  grammatical  and  supplying  a  sense 
consistent  with  the  context.  The  prophet 
foretells  that  Israel  would  ere  long  feel 
painfully  the  sorrowful  consequences  of 
their  going  to  Assyria  and  suing  there  for 
help.  Oppressed  by  a  yearly  tribute  to  the 
Assyrian  king,  they  would  smart  under  the 
yoke,  and  long  to  be  free. 

Vers.  11, 12. — These  two  verses  are  closely 
connected  with  the  preceding  verse  and  with 
each  other.  Ver,  11  not  only  accounts  for, 
but  justifies,  the  threat  of  punishment  an- 
nounced in  ver.  10  by  reference  to  Ephraim's 
sin ;  and  ver,  12  shows  the  inexcusableness 
of  Ephraim  in  thus  sinning.  Because 
Ephraim  hath  made  many  altars  to  sin, 
altars  shall  be  unto  him  to  sin.  Instead  of 
the  one  sanctuary  with  its  altar  in  the  place 
which  the  Lord  their  God  would  ohooae  out 


242 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  vm.  1—14. 


et  all  their  tribes  to  pat  his  Xame  there 
and  to  accept  the  offerings  of  bis  people, 
they  multiplied  altars  contrary  to  the 
cxiiress  command  of  Ood ;  while  those 
altars  which  they  erected  in  any  places  that 
pleased  them  were  not  for  the  service  of  the 
true  God,  but  for  the  worship  of  idols, 
the  calves,  Baal,  and  other  vanities  of  the 
Heathen.  Thus  they  multiplied  their  sin 
by  every  altar  they  reared  and  every  idol 
tliey  worshipped.  Their  altars,  instead  of 
proving  their  piety,  plunged  them  in  greater 
sin  and  deeper  guilt.  I  have  written  to 
him  the  great  things  of  my  law,  but  they 
were  oouuted  as  a  strange  thing.  For  the 
Athenians,  whose  city  Paul  found  full  of 
idols,  and  which  in  addition  to  its  many 
other  altars  had  one  to  an  unknown  gad, 
there  was  some  excuse,  for  they  were  not 
privileged  with  a  revelation  of  the  Divine 
will  in  a  written  Law ;  but  for  Israel  no 
such  apology  was  possible.  This  verse 
proves  plainly  that,  in  their  sinning  by 
multiplying  idols  and  altars,  they  were 
entirely  witbout  excuse.  The  kethio  or 
textual  reading  has  ribbo  for  ribloth  by  the 
omission  of  tav  and  equivalent  to  msi,  that 
IS,  ten  thousand,  or  myriads ;  the  Qeri  or 
Massoretic  correction,  <an,  plural  of  2-\,  mul- 
titudes. The  idea  conveyed  is  the  numerous 
directions,  preceptive  and  prohibitive,  of 
the  Pentateuch;  the commandmen ta,  so  full 
and  explicit,  comprehending  alike  the  great 
things  and  the  little ;  the  details,  so  minute 
as  well  as  manifold,  that  there  was  no 
possibility  of  mistake,  provided  there  was 
any  mind  to  be  informed.  Still  more,  these 
commandments,  directions,  and  details  were 
not  only  communicated  verbally  and  orally 
to  Israel;  they  were  commitled  to  writing, 
and  thus  placed  permanently  on  record. 
And  yet,  notwithstanding  all  this,  the  ^rent 
things  of  God's  Law  were  regarded  by  many 
or  most  of  those  to  whom  they  weie  ad- 
dressed as  instructions  foreign  to  their 
interest,  with  which  they  had  no  concern, 
and  which  consequently  had  no  claim  on 
their  attention  and  deserved  no  place  in 
their  recollection.  The  variety  of  names 
for  the  Divine  commands  is  very  noteworthy. 
There  are  commandments,  equivalent  to  all 
precepts  of  which  the  motives  are  assigned, 
as  of  circumstance  to  distinguish  Israel 
from  other  people;  statutes,  for  which  no 
motives  are  assigned,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  red  heifer,  prohibition  against  wearing 
garments  of  mixed  material,  and  ceremonial 
prescripts  in  general ;  testimoniei,  precepts 
intended  to  keep  up  the  memory  of  any 
event  or  hot,  m  the  Passover  to  remind 


of  the  departure  from  Egypt ;  preeepts, 
rational  injunctions,  left,  so  to  say,  to  our 
intelligence,  as  the  unity  of  the  Deity  and 
the  fact  of  his  being  the  Creator ;  and  judg- 
ments, judicial  directions  relating  to  buying 
and  selling,  inheritances,  and  such  like. 

Vers.  13,  14. — For  the  Baorifice  of  mine 
offerings,  they  sacrifice  flesh  and  eat  it ;  but 
the  lord  acoepteth  them  not.  The  mention 
of  altars  naturally  suggests  that  of  sacri- 
fices, and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  with  the 
multiplication  of  those  altars  they  multi- 
plied their  sacrifices,  so  that  the  latter  kept 
pace  with  the  former,  and  a  due  propor- 
tionateness  maintained  between  them.  And 
yet,  numerous  as  those  sacrifices  were,  they 
were  not  real  sacrifices ;  they  were  no  more 
and  no  better  than  slaying  so  many  animals 
and  feasting  on  their  fiesh ;  the  spirit  of 
devotion  was  absent,  therefore  God  did  not 
accept  them.  Now  will  he  remember  their 
iniquity,  and  visit  their  sins:  they  shall 
return  to  Egypt.  The  turning-point  was 
now  reached,  their  iniquity  was  full,  and 
the  time  of  punishment  had  arrived.  God 
had  delivered  their  fathers  out  of  the 
bondage  of  Egypt;  now  he  will  send  their 
posterity  into  a  bondage  similar  to  or  even 
worse  than  that  of  Egypt.  For  Israel  hath 
forgotten  his  Maker,  and  buildeth  temples 
(or,  palaces).  Here  Israel's  sin,  with  the 
consequent  suffering,  is  traced  to  its  source. 
The  origin  of  all  was  their  forgetfulness 
of  God  and  false  confidence  in  man — them- 
selves and  others  or  both.  And  Jndah  hath 
multiplied  fenced  cities.  Israel  forgot  his 
Maker,  and  built  shrines  on  high  places, 
"consecrating,"  as  Jerome  says,  "whole 
hills  and  mountains  and  shady  trees  to 
Baal  and  Ashlarnth  and  other  idols." 
J  udah  also,  though  aware  that  Israel  had 
renounced  the  love  of  Jehovah  and  had 
been  punished  for  their  sins,  did  not  return 
to  God,  but  trusted  in  fenced  cities.  But  I 
win  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities,  and  it  shall 
devour  the  palaces  thereof.  To  the  word 
for  "  city"  the  masculine  sufiSx  is  attached ; 
while  with  "palaces"  the  feminine  suffix 
is  employed.  With  the  proper  names  of 
peoples  either  gender  is  used :  (o)  the  mas- 
culine with  reference  to  the  people  or 
population,  and  the  feminine  in  relation 
to  the  country ;  or  the  reference  may  be  to 
Israel  and  Judah,  the  masculine  referring 
to  their  respective  peoples,  and  feminine  to 
their  lands;  though  (6)  Aben  Ezra  refers 
the  feminine  sufiSx  of  "palaces  "to  TP,  city, 
which  is  feminine,  (o)  The  Septuagint  haJ 
Tck  6en4\ta,  foundations,  instead  of  palaces. 


OH.  Tin.  1— U.]  THE  BOOS  OF  HOSEA.  243 


H0MILETIC8. 

Yen.  1 — 3. — Mwisterial  faithfulness.  The  prophet  ii  represented  m  •  messenget 
with  alarming  tidings,  or  sentinel  at  his  post  to  give  warning  of  the  enemy's  approach, 
or  rather  as  a  herald  commissioned  to  declare  war.  Earthly  kings  have  heralds  or 
s[iecial  messengers  for  this  purpose,  and  here  the  King  of  kings  charges  the  prophet  as 
liis  herald  to  proclaim  war.  "  Go,  then,  and  let  the  Israelites  know,  not  now  by  thy 
month,  but  even  by  thy  throat,  by  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  that  I  am  an  enemy  to 
them,  and  that  I  am  present  with  a  strong  army  to  destroy  them."  The  presence  of 
a  herald  on  such  occasions  presupposed  the  preparation  of  the  enemy — that  they  were 
ready  to  take  the  field,  or  were  actually  on  the  march.  As  the  prophets  of  old,  so 
ministers  still  require  to  act  boldly,  bravely,  with  earnestness  and  faithfulness  in  rebuk- 
ing sin,  warning  men  of  approaching  peril  and  punishment,  and  calling  on  them  loudly 
and  fearlessly  to  repent  and  return  to  God. 

L  FmosHMENT  IK  FUBsuiT  ov  TBB  GUILTT.  Even  »  heathen  poet  has  sung, 
"  Seldom  does  punishment,  though  lame  of  foot,  quit  the  criminal  who  goes  before." 
Sometimes  the  prophet  is  summoned  to  declare  the  people's  sin,  showing  them  its  guilt 
and  dangerous  consequences;  sometimes  to  denounce  its  punishment.  We  have  a 
notable  example  of  the  former  in  a  passage  a  good  deal  like  the  opening  verse  of  this 
chapter ;  thus  Isaiah  is  commanded  by  God  in  the  words,  "  Cry  aloud,  spare  not,  lift 
up  thy  .voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  show  my  people  their  transgression,  and  the  house  of 
Jacob  their  sins."  But  the  Prophet  Hosea  is  here  enjoined  to  proclaim  the  punishment 
which  the  sin  of  Israel  was  surely  and  swiftly  bringing  upon  them :  "  He  shall  come  as 
an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord."  The  abruptness  imparts  vigour  to  the  expres- 
sion, while  it  indicates  the  sad  and  sudden  reality.  When  the  cup  of  a  people's  iniquity 
is  brimful,  calamity  is  just  at  hand ;  when  they  are  ripe  for  judgment,  the  enemy  is 
ready  to  execute  it ;  when  the  day  of  vengeance  has  arrived,  no  distance  can  secure 
them  from  it.  Prom  the  far-distant  land  of  Assyria,  the  Assyrian  eagle,  Shalmaneser, 
like  the  great  Babylonian  eagle,  Nebuchadnezzar,  of  a  later  date,  "  with  great  wings, 
long-winged,  full  of  feathers,"  came  from  afar,  swift  in  his  advance,  sudden  in  his 
approach,  sure  of  his  prey,  and  savage  in  rending  it  No  boasted  privileges  can  delay 
that  day  of  disaster,  nor  deliver  when  it  comes;  even  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  not  be 
exempt.  Israel,  though  God's  people,  his  house  and  family,  shall  fall  by  the  assault  of 
the  Assyrian.  God  usually  speaks  before  he  strikes,  and  warns  before  he  pours  down 
his  wrath ;  nor  does  he  either  threaten  or  strike  until  he  has  been  provoked  by  sin. 

II.  Thb  fbgoubino  oause  of  Israel's  punishment.  "  Because  they  have  trami- 
gressed  my  covenant,  and  trespassed  against  my  Law ; "  such  is  the  cause  which  God 
assigns  for  the  threatened  punishment.  God  thus  indicates  his  proceedings,  exhibits 
his  justice,  asserts  his  patience  and  long-suffering,  declares  his  hatred  of  sin,  and  gives 
to  all  a  solemn  warning  against  its  commission.  Here  again  the  mercy  of  God  is  made 
manifest.  Notwithstanding  God's  supreme  right  over  men  and  mbsolute  authority  to 
dispose  of  them  as  he  pleases,  yet  he  graciously  condescends  to  enter  into  a  covenant 
with  his  creatures,  stipulating  promise  of  reward  to  obedience,  and  penalty  in  case  of 
disobedience.  Nor  could  Israel  plead  ignorance  of  the  conditions  of  this  covenant;  for 
the  Law,  with  its  commandments,  exhibited  those  conditions,  explicitly  declaring  all  the 
duties  of  the  covenant.  They,  however,  broke  the  commandment,  and  so  prepared  the 
way  for  breaking  the  covenant ;  they  trespassed  against  the  Law,  and  so  tranigiessed  the 
covenant.  They  violated  the  commandments  of  the  Law  that  taught  them  their  duty 
to  their  neighbour ;  they  broke  the  covenant  that  bound  them  to  their  God.  Usually 
men  proceed  from  omissions  to  commissions,  and  frequent  violations  of  the  Law  make 
way  for  the  final  and  entire  renunciation  of  the  covenant. 

III.  PaoFESBiON  WITHOUT  PBACTioE  18  MERE  PRETENOB.  Israel  had,  no  doubt,  more 
knowledge  of  the  true  God  than  any  of  the  neighbouring  nations.  God's  Name  was 
known  among  them ;  to  Israel  belonged  "  the  adoption,  the  glory,  and  the  covenants." 
They  depended  much  on  this,  and  in  their  adversity  they  urged  with  much  vehemence 
the  plea,  "  My  God,  we  know  thee."  So  at  last  many  will  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to 
us ; "  or,  "  Lord,  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  Name,  and  in  thy  Name  cast  out 
devils,  and  in  thy  Name  done  many  wonderful  works  ?  "  But  this  plea  shall  only  meet. 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  Tin.  1—14. 

as  it  merits,  the  indignant  response,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity."  Here 
is  tlie  secret  of  their  rejection :  their  profession  was  not  supplemented  by  practice.  They 
pretend  to  know  God  in  the  day  of  their  distress ;  but  as  long  as  they  basked  in  the 
sunshine  of  prosperity,  they  neither  desired  the  knowledge  of  G-od'a  ways,  nor  delighted 
iu  the  duties  required  of  them  ;  nay,  they  despised  practical  piety.  They  had  a  name 
to  live,  but  were  dead ;  they  had  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denied  its  power  in  their  heart 
and  life.  Alas !  how  many  professors  of  religion  are  in  this  same  state.  "  What  stead  will 
it  stand  a  man  in  to  be  able  to  say, '  My  God,  I  know  thee,'  when  he  cannot  say, '  My 
God,  I  love  thee,'  and '  My  Gad,  I  serve  thee,  and  cleave  to  thee  only '  ?  "  Israel  Ii^  cast 
off  the  thing  that  is  good ;  they  had  cast  off  God,  the  supreme  Good.  There  is  nothing 
truly  great  but  God,  and  nothing  really  good  but  God;  and  in  rejecting  Gud  they  rejected 
all  that  is  good.  God  is  the  Author  of  all  goodness,  and  nearness  to  him  is  the 
sure  way  of  getting  good.  "  Whatsoever  any  man  hath  or  enjoys  of  good,  is  from  his 
lelation  to  him,  his  nearness  to  him,  his  congruity  with  him."  Israel  cast  off  the  Law 
of  God,  though  that  Law  was  holy  and  just  and  good ;  they  cast  off  his  worship,  though 
that  conduced  both  to  their  temporal  and  eternal  good ;  they  abandoned  his  service, 
though  it  was  good  for  all  the  relations  of  life ;  they  had  cast  over  everything  good  and 
upright,  just  and  true ;  and  now  in  turn  they  are  cast  off.  The  contrast  is  observable ; 
they  had  driven  away  from  all  that  was  good,  and  now  the  enemy  drives  in  hot  pursuit 
after  them. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  cause*  of  the  Divine  judgments  art  more  particularly  specified.  The 
first  sin  which  brought  down  the  Divine  displeasure  was  their  civil  apostasy,  as  it  has 
been  called,  or  change  of  civil  government. 

I.  NaTUBB   of   the   FIB8T    SIN    BY    WHICH    ISBAEL    INOCEEED     DiVINE    WBATH.       By 

this  we  are  not  to  understand,  with  some,  the  election  of  S  lul,  because,  this  political 
offence,  if  we  may  lightly  so  term  it,  included  the  twelve  tribes  in  common,  wheieas  it 
is  the  ten  tribes  of  the  northern  kingdom  with  which  the  prophet  here  deals ;  neither 
are  we,  according  to  others,  to  confine  the  sin  with  which  Israel  is  here  charged  to 
certain  usurpers  who,  by  treacheVy,  or  conspiracy,  or  assassination,  forced  their  way  to 
the  throne,  for  this  was  long  after  the  disruption,  and  was  the  sin  of  a  few  individuals 
rather  than  of  the  whole  people,  though  undoubtedly  the  whole  people  suffered  by  the 
transgression  of  these  particular  persons.  It  is  to  the  separation  of  Israel  from  the 
Davidic  dynasty  and  the  southern  kingdom  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  that  the  prophet 
refers. 

II.  The  same  thins  done  and  not  done  bt  God.  An  objection  is  sometimes 
urged  against  the  severity  with  which  Israel  is  reproved  for  uie  disruption  of  the 
kingdom  of  David,  seeing  that  God  had  predestined  and  promised  it.  1.  It  is  true, 
indeed,  that  God  had  predicted  the  rending  of  the  kingdom  of  Solomon ;  it  is  true  he 
bad  promised  ten  tribes  to  Jeroboam  by  Abijah  the  Shilonite ;  it  is  true  also  that  he 
had  even  predetermined  the  whole.  How,  then,  can  it  be  said  to  have  taken  place 
without  God's  consent?  Or  why  should  Israel  be  so  sharply  rebuked  for  the  sin? 
God  had  determined  to  punish  Solomon  by  rending  ten  tribes  from  the  kingdom  of  his 
son  and  successor,  thcugt  he  himself  was  allowed  to  retain  the  government  of  the  whole 
till  the  end  of  his  days,  and  by  handing  them  over  to  Jeroboam.  The  part  enacted  by 
the  people  was  not  with  the  Divine  knowledge,  that  is,  the  Divine  consent,  approval. 
They  did  not  consult  God  about  the  matter,  or  the  manner  of  it,  or  the  time  of  it ;  they 
did  not  wait  for  bis  command  to  do  it ;  they  did  not  seek  his  approbation  in  doing  it ; 
they  were  no  way  concerned  about  executing  the  Divine  purpose — nothing  was  further 
from  their  thoughts.  They  revolted  from  the  house  of  David  not  in  order  to  obey  God  ; 
of  this,  as  far  as  the  history  shows,  they  never  thought.  What  they  did  was  done  from 
a  spirit  of  sedition ;  what  they  aimed  at  was  a  relief  from  oppressive  taxation.  They 
had  no  regard  to  the  Divine  mind  in  the  whole  movement.  They  were  bent  on  carrying 
out  their  own  cherished  project,  and  yet  unwittingly,  unintentionally,  they  were  carrying 
out  the  purpose  and  promise  of  God,  though  without  any  reference  to  the  mind  andwiU 
of  God.  2.  The  following  illustration  of  this  dif&cult  subject  is  given  by  Calvin. 
"  God,"  he  says,  "  designed  to  prove  the  patience  of  his  servant  Job.  The  robbers  who 
took  away  his  property,  were  they  excusable  ?  By  no  means.  For  what  was  their 
object,  but  to  enrich  themselves  by  injustice  and  plunder  ?  Since,  than,  they  purchased 


OH.  vin.  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  245 

their  advantage  at  the  expense  of  another,  and  unjustly  robbed  a  man  who  had  neTci 
injured  them,  they  were  destitute  of  every  excuse,  The  Ijord,  however,  did  in  the 
mean  time  execute  by  them  what  he  had  appointed,  and  what  he  had  already  permitted 
Satan  to  do.  He  intended  that  his  servant  should  he  plundered  ;  and  Satan,  who 
influenced  the  robbers,  could  not  himself  move  a  finger  except  by  the  permission  of 
Qod — nay,  except  it  was  commanded  him.  At  the  same  time,  the  Lord  had  nothing 
in  common  or  in  connection  with  the  wicked,  because  his  purpose  was  far  apart  from 
their  depraved  lust.    So  also  it  must  be  said  of  what  is  said  here  by  the  prophet." 

III.  Thb  second  cause  op  Divine  judgment.  The  second  sin  and  cause  of  judg- 
ment was  their  religious  apostasy  in  the  worship  of  the  calves.  1.  The  first  sin,  as  so 
often  happens,  led  to  the  second.  The  idolatry  of  the  calves  was  intended  by  Jeroboam 
to  help  and  uphold  his  usurped  sovereignty.  Not  only  had  the  national  religion  fallen 
into  decay,  but  it  had  degenerated  into  superstitious  will-worship.  Next  to  the  sub- 
version of  the  Davidic  kingdom  came  the  perversion  of  the  legitimate  priesthood.  2.  The 
sin  of  their  apostasy  was  aggravated  by  their  abuse  of  the  wealth  which  God  had  given 
them.  All  they  had  they  owed  to  God,  and  were  in  duty  bound  to  employ  it  for  his 
honour;  instead  of  doing  so,  they  dishonoured  him  by  making  idols  of  their  silver  and 
gold.  Men  are  sometimes  found  to  be  more  lavish  of  their  gold  and  silver  in  support  of 
a  false  religion  than  in  maintaining  the  pure  worship  of  the  true  Q«d.  Israel  might 
pretend  that  their  calves  of  gold  were  .only  representations  of  Jehovah ;  but  Jehovah 
refuses  to  be  so  represented,  forbidding  men  to  make  any  graven  image  of  metal,  or  stone, 
or  wood,  standing  out  prominently  and  in  high  relief,  or  any  likeness  of  anything  on  a 
flat  surface  as  a  picture,  for  the  purpose  of  doing  it  homage  by  worship  or  serving  it  by 
sacrifice.  If,  then,  men  neglect  the  Divine  prohibitions  or  precepts,  they  must  remember 
that  God  will  not  be  mocked  by  their  professions  or  pretences,  but  will  estimate  them 
by  their  practice  in  the  light  of  his  Law.  3.  Israel  was  destroying  himself  by  this 
sinful  idolatry.  "  That  he  may  be  out  off; "  such  is  the  literal  sense,  as  though  it  meant 
the  whole  nation  as  one  man — one  and  all.  Such  was  the  tendency  of  their  conduct, 
though  it  was  not  their  intention ;  such  was  the  inevitable  end  of  their  course,  though 
they  were  not  aware  of  it.  "  So  a  man  chooses  destruction  or  hell,  if  he  chooses  those 
things  which,  according  to  God's  known  Law  and  Word,  end  in  it.  Man  hides  from  his 
own  eyes  the  distant  future,  and  fixes  them  on  the  nearer  objects  which  he  has  at  heart." 
Some  take  the  clause  to  mean  that  the  gold  and  silver  so  sadly  misused  and  sinfully 
perverted  would  be  cut  off ;  it  appears  rather  to  refer  to  the  persons  who  were  the 
possessors  thereof;  in  any  case  their  money  would  perish,  either  passing  out  of  their 
possession  or  along  with  the  possessors. 

IV.  Theib  bin  and  consequent  suffbbino  abb  insisted  on.  The  striking  ampli- 
fication of  the  same  subject  seems  designed  to  impress  on  the  people's  mind  that  they 
themselves,  and  no  other,  had  wrought  their  ruin,  and  that  they  need  not  try  to  transfer 
the  fault  to  others,  or  charge  God  foolishly.  Nor  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  a  calf 
had  been  set  up  at  Samaria,  or  that  one  of  those  at  Dan  and  Bethel  had  been  removed 
thither.  Samaria  was  the  metropolis  of  the  northern  kingdom,  and  as  such  took  a 
leading  part  in  the  calf-worship  and  contributed  largely  and  liberally  to  its  support.  Of 
the  different  renderings  of  the  first  clause  of  ver.  5,  all  tending  pretty  much  in  the  same 
direction,  we  may  safely  adhere  to  that  of  the  Authorized  Yeision  as  affording  a  good 
sense.  Israel,  we  read  in  ver.  3, "  had  cast  off"  God  and  goodness;  now  the  calf  which 
they  had  set  up  as  their  god  had  cast  them  off,  left  them  in  the  lurch,  or  caused  their 
removal  to  another  and  a  foreign  land;  thus  their  sin  and  its  punishment  are  linked 
together  by  the  same  word,  "cast  off"  (nil).  The  thing  is  represented  in  the  past 
because  sure  of  accomplishment ;  they  had  renounced  God,  and  now  the  thing  which 
they  substituted  for  God  had  abandoned  them.  L  So  shall  it  ever  be ;  whatever  object 
men  make  an  idol  of,  and  set  it  up  in  their  heart  instead  of  God,  giving  it  that  place  in 
their  afiections  which  belongs  to  God  alone,  will  one  day  assuredly  cast  tbem  off,  desert 
them  in  their  sorest  need,  and  leave  them  in  distress.  Is  wealth  our  idol  ?  Do  we  make 
gold  our  god,  and  fine  gold  our  confidence  ?  That  calf  of  gold  will  cast  ua  off ;  for 
riches  make  themselves  wings  and  fly  away,  as  has  been  the  sorrowful  experience  of 
thousands.  Is  fame  the  god  we  follow?  Is  popular  applause  the  idol  we  worship? 
Are  worldly  greatness  and  its  accompanying  gbry  the  idols,  the  objects,  of  our  idolatry, 
and  dear  to  us  as  the  calves  at  Dan  and  Betiiel  were  to  Israel  ?    This  calf  of  vain-glory 


24«  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  viu.  1— U. 

will  surely  cast  us  off;  for  fame  is  a  bubble  that  bursts  before  it  goes  far  along  the  stream 
of  time ;  popularity  is  often  false,  always  fickle  as  the  breeze.  The  words  of  Wolsey 
prove  with  wondrous  power  how  the  calf  of  worldly  glory  casts  off  its  worshipper!. 

**  Farewell,  s  long  farewell,  to  all  my  g^reatnessl 
This  is  the  state  of  man :  To-day  he  puts  forth 
The  tender  leaves  of  hope,  to-morrow  bloBsoms, 
And  bears  his  blushing  honours  thick  upon  him  t 
The  third  day  comes  a  frost,  a  killing  frost; 
And, — when  he  thinks,  good  easy  man,  full  surely 
His  greatness  is  a-ripening, — ^nips  hia  root, 
And  then  he  falls,  as  I  do.    I  have  ventured. 
Like  little  wanton  boys  that  swim  on  bladders, 
This  many  summers  in  a  sea  of  glory ;  ■ 
But  far  beyond  my  depth :  my  high-blown  pride 
At  length  broke  under  me ;  and  now  has  left  me^ 
Weary,  and  old  with  service,  to  the  mercy 
Of  a  rude  stream,  that  must  for  ever  hide  me. 
Vain  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  I  hate  ye  I " 

Do  tlie  pleasures  of  sin  engross  our  affections,  and  are  they  the  idol  on  which  our  heart 
dotes?  Our  idol  will  cast  us  off.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  short-lived;  they  last  but  for 
a  season,  and  that  season  is  at  most  and  best  a  short  one ;  nor  do  they  satisfy  while  they 
last.  Is  beauty  the  object  of  our  idolatry  ?  This  calf,  so  greatly  admired  and  much 
beloved,  in  a  little  while  casts  off  and  disappoints  its  many  worshippers.  For  beauty  is 
a  fair  but  fleeting  flower ;  it  fades  and  fails.  "  All  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of 
man  as  the  flower  of  grass.  The  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  thereof  falleth  away." 
The  heir  to  or  actual  owner  of  a  large  estate,  with  its  broad  acres  and  princely  mansion, 
sets  his  heart  on  his  splendid  possessions;  his  magnificent  property  becomes  his  idol, 
but  his  calf  casts  him  off.  If  only  heir,  he  may  never  enter  on  the  actual  possession, 
and  so  he  is  disappointed  of  it ;  if  already  owner,  he  may  in  many  ways  be  disappointed 
in  it,  or  he  may  Ise  deprived  of  it  by  force,  or  fraud,  or  casualty,  or  death ;  in  either  case 
the  calf  casts  off  the  idolatrous  worshipper.  The  hereditary  estate,  secure  it  as  men 
will  by  deeds  and  settlements,  shall  change  proprietorship  and  be  taken  away ;  there  is 
no  real  fixity  of  tenure  here  on  earth.  The  baronial  residence  shall  in  time  become  a 
ruin  grey,  round  which  the  ivy  twines.  2.  But  why  does  the  calf  of  Samaria,  or,  generally 
speaking,  men's  idol,  prove  so  unsatisfactory,  blighting  men's  hopes  and  blasting  their 
expectations,  so  that  they  are  left  a  prey  to  disappointment,  disgust,  distress,  or  even 
despair?  Just  because  God's  anger  is  kindled  against  it.  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and 
will  not  give  his  glory  to  another,  or  his  praise  to  graven  images.  Whatever  course  of 
sin  men  pursue  becomes  like  a  conductor  of  electricity,  and  brings  down  the  scathing 
lightning  of  the  Divine  wrath  upon  their  guilty  heads.  3.  But  the  anger  of  God  is  not 
only  kindled  against  them ;  it  is  aggravated  and  intensified  by  their  obduracy  of  heart 
and  persistent  course  of  evil.  "  How  long,"  asks  God,  "  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to 
innocency  ?  *  that  is  to  say,  how  long  will  they  persevere  in  their  present  evil  ways, 
neither  purging  themselves  from  the  sin  of  idolatry  and  putting  away  their  idols,  nor 
striving  to  attain  to  purity  of  life  and  uprightness  of  character  ?  The  omniscient  One 
himself  in  asking  this  question  seems  surprised — with  reverence  be  it  spoken — at  their 
suicidal  obstinacy,  as  if  bent  on  their  own  destruction  and  rushing  on  their  own  ruin. 
He  waits  to  be  merciful,  but  they  repel  the  overtures  of  his  grace;  ho  stretches  out  his 
hand  to  receive  and  welcome  them,  but  they  refuse  to  return.  No  wonder  our  blessed 
Lord,  during  the  days  of  his  flesh,  is  reported  in  a  certain  place  to  have  "  marvelled 
because  of  men's  unbelief."  4.  We  are  further  shown  in  the  following  verse  the  just- 
ness of  God's  indignation  against  those  stupid  calf-worshippers.  This  worship  was 
no  institution  of  God ;  it  was  Israel's  invention.  They  could  not  lay  the  blame  of 
it  on  others.  Sinners  sometimes  feel  a  miserable  satisfaction  or  even  palliation  in 
endeavouring  to  make  others  the  scapegoat  of  their  own  iniquities.  This  is  an  old 
story.  Adam  laid  the  fault  of  his. eating  the  forbidden  fruit  on  Eve;  Eve  in  turn 
transferred  it  to  the  serpent.  No  doubt  a  load  is  lightened  when  it  is  laid  on  the 
shoulders  of  several  persons  instead  of  a  single  individuaL    Not  so  with  Israel  in  this 


OH.  vm.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  247 

case.  No  prophetic  intimation  induced  Israel  to  adopt  the  oalf-idolatry,  neither  conld 
they  find  fault  with  their  neighbours  for  seducing  them  into  it.  It  was  their  own 
device,  and  had  its  origin  with  their  king  and  themselves.  How  sad  that  Israel  shonld 
make  themselves  so  vile! — ^that  Israel,  forgetful  of  their  high  lineage;  that  Israel, 
unmindful  of  their  great  progenitor,  whose  title  of  nobility  was  "prince  with  God;"  that 
Israel,  whom  God  had  taken  into  covenant  to  be  his  peculiar  people,  and  who  at  the  foot 
of  Sinai  avouched  the  Lord  to  be  their  God,  should  prove  so  unspeakably  sottish  as  to 
worship  a  man-made  God,  having  "  changed  their  glory  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that 
eateth  grass  "  I  But  those  calves  of  Dan  and  Bethel,  or  this  calf  of  Samaria,  in  its  col- 
lective sense  comprehending  all  and  considered  by  them  as  a  "  sort  of  tutelary  deity  of 
the  ten  tribes,"  was  as  contemptible  in  its  end  as  at  its  beginning.  Made  by  man's  hand, 
it  was  to  be  unmade  by  the  same ;  fashioned  by  man,  it  was  doomed  to  be  broken  into 
fragments  by  man,  and,  like  Aaron's  calf  at  Sinai,  broken  into  pieces  and  ground  to 
powder. 

v.  A  XOBAL  SEBD-TiMB  AND  ITS  BABVE3T.  The  account  of  Israel's  punishment  is 
continued  in  two  striking  similitudes,  one  of  which  presents  the  positive  side  and  the 
other  the  negative.  The  positive  side  is  that  of  a  man  sowmg  the  wind  and  reaping 
the  whirlwind,  as  if  a  person  took  immense  pains,  toiling  and  labouring  like  a  husband- 
man when  he  sows  his  seed ;  but  the  seed  sown  is  wind,  a  thing  of  nought  and  unsub- 
stantial— mere  empty  sound,  and  nothing  more  or  better ;  then  when  harvest  comes,  ai 
might  in  such  circumstances  be  expected,  there  is  grievous  disappointment,  and  not 
only  disappointment,  but  destruction,  utter  destruction,  represented  by  a  fearful  whirl- 
wind (the  double  termination  intensifying  the  meaning).  "  If  it  may  be  supposed," 
says  Pococke,  "  that  a  man  should  sow  the  wind  and  cover  it  with  earth,  or  keep  it 
there  for  a  while  penned  up,  what  could  he  expect  but  that  it  should  be  enforced  by  its 
being  shut  up,  and  the  accession  of  what  might  increase  its  strength  to  break  forth  again 
in  greater  quantities  with  greater  violence  ?  "  Israel  expended  gold  and  silver  on  their 
idols,  and  were  assiduously  laborious  in  their  worship  ;  but  instead  of  reaping  any  benefit 
from  them,  or  increasing  their  prosperity  by  them  so  as  to  equal  the  idolatrous  nations 
around,  they  laboured  in  vain  and  wearied  themselves  for  very  vanity.  Nor  was  that 
all;  they  reaped  ruin,  being  swept  away  by  the  whirlwind  of  Divine  wrath.  The  nega- 
tive side  exhibits  three  degi:ees  of  development,  or  three  stages  of  progress.  They  sow, 
and,  as  the  husbandman  expects  a  crop,  so  they  look  for  a  harvest  of  peace,  plemty,  and 
prosperity.  But  lo !  the  seed  they  sow  never  comes  up,  it  has  neither  blade  not  stalk  j 
or  if  it  should  spring  up,  produce  a  stalk  or  standing  corn  and  develop  an  ear,  it  never 
reaches  maturity — the  ear  does  not  iill,  there  is  no  ripe  corn  in  the  ear,  and  so  the  bud 
yields  no  meal ;  or  suppose  it  to  advance  yet  further,  and  to  ripen  and  yield  meal,  it 
becomes  a  spoil  to  the  enemy,  for  strangers  swallow  it  up.  How  many  every  year, 
every  month,  every  week,  ay,  every  day,  are  sowing  in  this  way  foolishly  and  even 
fatally,  being  doomed  to  reap,  not  only  disappointment,  but  destruction!  The  apostle 
tells  us  that  they  who  sow  to  the  flesh  sliall  reap  corruption.  It  is  observable  that  in 
the  passage  referred  to  (Gal.  vi.  8)  there  is  a  distinction :  the  seed  (i  ylip  ihv  melp^)  and 
the  soil,  or  the  field  (»i  rV  aJpKo),  and  that  which  is  sown  in  it.  The  field  is  the  flesh, 
or  sensuality  in  general :  in  that  field  some  sow  the  seed  of  licentiousness,  and  they  reap 
rottenness ;  some  sow  intemperance,  and  they  reap  corruption. 

VI.  The  bad  sequel  of  Isbabi,'b  sin.  The  figure  now  resolves  itself  into  a  fact — a 
threefold  fact — namely,  Israel's  consumption,  captivity,  and  contempt.  1.  They  are 
swallowed  up  as  a  victim  is  swallowed  by  a  beast  of  prey,  and  consumed  from  being  a 
nation.  And  yet  this  consifmption  is  not  annihilation,  nor  extinction,  as  we  learn  from 
the  remainder  of  the  verse.  It  is  rather  impoverishment — their  substance  devoured  by 
strangers,  and  the  produce  of  their  land  eaten  up.  The  expression  may  be  paralleled 
by  the  Homeric — 

*  Friam  and  all  his  house  and  all  his  hoit 
Alive  devour ;  then,  haply,  thou  wilt  resL" 

More  appropriate  still  is  the  Scripture  parallel,  "  Have  aU  the  worker*  of  lIl.^qulty  no 
knowledge  ?  who  eat  up  my  people  as  they  eat  bread."  2.  Their  dispersion  and  captivity 
in  Gentile  lands  were  soon  and  certainly  to  come  to  pass.  Driven  from  their  own  country, 
and  deprived  of  those  ordinances  whicL,  when  they  might  have  enjoyed  and  profited  by 


S48  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

them,  were  abused  and  despised,  they  shall  ere  long  find  themselves  strangers  in  a 
foreign  land  and  among  heathen  people ;  for  "now  shall  they  be  among  the  Gentiles." 
3.  In  addition  to  captivity,  they  are  doomed  to  contempt,  like  vessels  put  to  the  vilest 
use,  and  into  which  the  filthiest  things  are  poured.  They  have  been  vessels  of  dishonour, 
despised  broken  vessels,  in  which  there  is  no  pleasure.  And  has  it  not  been  so  with 
Israel  for  nearly,  or  perhaps  we  might  say  for  more  than,  two  thousand  years?  Not- 
withstanding the  eminence  to  which  individuals  of  that  race  have  risen  in  the 
different  professions  and  in  various  walks  of  life,  they  have  as  a  people,  in  the  lands  of 
their  dispersion,  been  subject  to  outrage,  treated  with  contumely,  scorned  and  spoiled 
and  peeled.  4.  Though  these  calamities  were  peculiar  to  Israel  in  a  special  manner, 
yet  less  or  more  they  have  been  common  to  sinners  at  all  times  and  in  all  lands.  Those 
that  corrupt  religion  or  contemn  its  privileges  are  not  unfrequently  deprived  of  them  ; 
gospel-despisers  are  deprived  of  the  gospel ;  those  that  dishonour  God  are  dishonoured 
by  tlieir  fellow-men,  for  "them  that  honour  me,"  Bays  God,  "I  will  honour;  and  they 
that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed." 

Vers.  9 — 13. — Thejusttce  of  tJie  Judgments  threatened  with  further  additiont.  Their 
errand  to  Assyria  added  to  their  sin ;  they  sought  heathen  helpers  to  uphold  them  in 
their  apostasy  and  idolatry,  increasing  their  sin. 

I.  One  sinful  act  is  prolific  of  many  more.  One  sinful  course  draws  on 
another,  just  as  one  lie  necessitates  one  or  more  to  make  it  plausible,  or  prop  it  up  or 
cloak  it.  The  revolt  from  the  Davidio  dynasty  was  a  wrong  step  and  a  sinful  one ; 
the  idolatry  of  the  calves  was  still  more  wicked.  The  progression  was  from  bad  to 
worse;  but  to  have  recourse  to  foreign  allies  to  secure  them  in  their  twofold  national 
iniquity  was  yet  another  step  down  the  steep  incline  of  sin. 

IT.  Sm  18  AT  ONCE  A  FOOLISH  AND  BXPENsivB  THINO.  1.  Ephraim's  conduct  was 
as  perverse  in  this  regard  as  the  headstrong  wild  ass  that  refuses  all  restraint,  and 
stubbornly  pursues  its  own  headlong  course  through  the  desert;  or,  if  it  be  a  contrast 
and  not  a  comparison,  the  folly  of  Ejihraim  is  reproved  by  the  wild  ass,  which  is 
sufficiently  wise  to  roam  at  large  in  its  own  solitary  way,  keeping  aloof  from  all  inter- 
ference with  its  liberty  and  retaining  its  independence.  2.  But  Ephraim's  folly  cost 
them  dear.  Like  a  shameless  wanton,  wooing  and  not  waiting  to  be  wooed,  they  resorted 
to  sinful  helps  which  were  as  much  adultery  as  idolatry  itself;  they  hired  help  by  such 
adulterous  alliances.  The  help  they  thus  procured  in  reality  helped  them  not;  they 
submitted  to  the  suzerainty  of  Assyria,  and  became  subject  to  imposts  and  tribute.  To 
escape  one  master,  men  sometimes  put  themselves  in  the  power  of  a  worse,  repeating 
the  experience  of  the  poet's  fable — 

"  A  lordly  stag,  arm'd  with  superior  force, 
Drove  from  their  common  field  a  vanquish'd  horse, 
Who  for  revenge  to  man  his  strength  enslaved, 
Took  up  his  rider  and  the  bit  received  ; 
But,  though  he  conquer'd  in  the  martial  strife, 
He  felt  his  rider's  weight,  and  champ'd  the  bit  for  life.* 

III.  God  alone  ib  the  bore  Refuge  of  his  people  in  theib  straits.  In  time 
of  trouble  men  often  sin  against  God,  and  sin  against  their  own  soul  by  going  elsewhere 
in  search  of  help.  If  in  their  straits  they  seek  help  of  Gud,  all  will  be  well  with  them 
in  the  end.  When  tiouble  comes,  when  affliction  comes,  whin  we  are  in  distress, 
instead  of  simple  shifts  we  are  to  seek  help  from  God;  instead  of  putting  confidence  in 
creaturely  succours,  we  must  apply  to  the  Creator.  To  neglect  him  and  sue  for  reliel 
elsewhere,  is  forsaking  our  own  mercies  and  turning  our  back  on  God;  to  depart  from 
God  and  depend  on  sinful  meaus  of  help,  is  hurtful  in  the  effort  and  in  the  effect,  as  well 
in  the  emergency  as  in  the  issue  and  end.  Nor  need  we  ever  distrust  his  care  or  doubt 
his  kindness,  if  only  in  earnest  we  apply  to  him ;  his  help  is  real,  his  help  is  effectual ; 
he  bestows  it  without  stint  and  without  fee  or  reward,  without  money  and  without 
pric«i     As  the  psalmist  sings  so  beautifully— 

*  God  is  our  Itefuge  and  our  Strength, 
In  straits  a  present  Aid ; 
Tliorefore,  although  the  earth  remoT*^ 
We  shall  not  be  afraid." 


00.  Tm.  1-14]  TUK  BOOK  OF  HOSKA.  ii» 

IV.  Wronq  uSaks  of  help  prove  BuiNons.  The  help  which  Israel  hired  among 
the  heathen,  so  far  from  availing  them,  put  them  in  a  worse  position  than  heforOt 

1.  God  would  frustrate  their  purpose,  gathering  their  hired  allies  against  them,  or 
themselves  as  exiles  among  aliens  and  enemies.  If  "  a  little  "  be  not  referred  to  time 
nor  understood  ironically,  it  may  mean  that  heavy  as  was  the  tribute  imposed  I^  the 
Assyrian  monarch,  and  grievous  to  be  borne  so  that  it  caused  revolt,  it  was  the  source 
of  little  grief  compared  with  what  followed,  when  first  a  portion  and  then  the  whole  of 
the  nation  were  carried  into  Captivity.  2.  Partly  similar  and  partly  dissimilar  is  the 
following  exposition  of  Eimchi :  "  They  at  first  murmured  and  complained  on  account 
of  the  burthen  of  the  king  and  the  princes,  as  is  written  in  the  Book  of  Kings  that  the 
kings  of  the  nations  imposed  tribute  on  them ;  and  this  the  prophet  calls  a  trifle  in 
comparison  with  the  Captivity."  The  taxes  and  burdens  with  which  they  were 
oppressed  were,  indeed,  mere  trifles,  and  easily  borne  in  respect  of  the  Captivity  and  the 
calamities  that  succeeded.  3.  '*  A  people,"  says  an  old  expositor,  "  who  have  sufiered 
under  lesser  trouble,  and  yet  have  made  no  right  use  of  it  to  prevent  more,  or  have 
used  sinful  means  to  be  rid  of  it,  may  expect  no  other  issue  but  that  the  Lord  will 
send  a  greater  trouble  to  make  them  forget  the  former ;  for  this  had  been  their  carriage 
under  their  tribute  and  burdens,  and  they  are  therefore  told  they  shall  sorrow  a  little 
for  the  burden  of  the  king  of  prioces."  Further,  the  means  that  men  use  will  be  of 
little  avail  so  long  as  they  refuse  to  acknowledge  God,  while  the  most  prudent  plans 
of  their  own  devising,  if  unsanctioned  and  unblessed  by  him,  end  in  disappointment 
and  disaster ;  what  they  hire  for  their  preservation  becomes  their  undoing,  and  issues  in 
destruction.  Israel  had  applied  to  Assyria,  and  as  the  result  of  that  application  "  began 
to  be  minished  through  the  burden  of  the  king  of  princes"  (according  to  one  rendering 
of  the  clause).  First  came  the  exactions  of  Put,  then  the  captivity  of  Qilead  by 
Tiglath-pileser,  and  in  the  end  the  deportation  of  all  Israel  by  Shalmaneser. 

V.   A   SHOW   OP   RELIGION   WITHOUT  THE   SUBSTANCE   SBBVBB  ONLY   TO   IN0BEA8B  BIN. 

God  had,  from  the  time  of  Moses,  appointed  one  altar  at  Jerusalem ;  and  when,  in  the 
days  of  Joshua,  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes  were  thought  by  their  brethren  to  have  built 
an  altar  in  violation  of  the  Divine  appointment,  it  called  forth  a  most  vigorous  remon- 
strance :  "  What  trespass  is  this  that  ye  have  committed  against  the  God  of  Israel,  to 
turn  away  this  day  from  following  the  Lord,  in  that  ye  have  builded  you  an  altar,  that 
ye  might  rebel  this  day  against  the  Lord?"  It  was  only  on  receiving  an  explanation 
that  it  was  not  a  sacrificial  but  monumental  altar  that  the  western  brethren  were  recon- 
ciled. 1.  Kow,  however,  they  had  so  far  degenerated  that  beside  the  once  central  altar 
at  Jerusalem  they  had  one  at  Dan,  another  at  Bethel,  and  others  on  every  high  hill  and 
any  other  place  that  pleased  them.  This  multiplication  of  altars  had  the  appearance  of 
religion,  but  only  the  appearance ;  these  many  altars  were  in  all  likelihood  made  for  the 
ostensible  purpose  of  ofi'ering  expiatory  sacrifices  for  sin,  but  were  actually  an  augmen- 
tation of  the  people's  sin,  each  altar  becoming  an  additional  element  in  the  national 
transgression.  2.  They  had  turned  aside  from  God  for  human  help ;  next  they  turned 
aside  from  the  divinely  appointed  mode  of  worship  to  human  methods,  substituting  for 
the  pure  service  of  the  Most  High  the  miserable  semblsince  of  self-devised  religiousness. 
They  had  made  many  altars,  which,  however  intended,  resulted  in  the  commission  of 
sin ;  and  now  these  many  altars,  instead  of  expiating  their  sins  or  making  amends  for 
their  transgressing  God's  express  command,  are  counted  to  them  for  sin  and  bring  them 
in  guilty  before  God,  not  to  speak  of  the  fact  that  the  multiplication  of  altars  to  the 
true  God  would  occasion  the  further  sin  of  dedicating  altars  to  other  and  strange  gods. 
If  men  corrupt  religion,  however  plausible  their  pretext,  they  do  it  at  unspeakable  peril 
to  their  own  soul  and  the  souls  of  others. 

VI.  There  is  no  reasonable  excuse  tob  bin.  This  was  specially  the  case  with 
Israel,  and  still  more  particularly  with  ourselves.  If  Israel  had  been  left  in  heathen 
darkness,  if  they  had  been  ignorant  of  the  Divine  statutes  and  judgments,  if  they  had 
not  enjoyed  the  high  privilege  of  being  made  the  custodians  of  God's  living  oracles, 
there  might  have  been  some  excuse  for  them,  though  indeed  natural  reason  is  BufBcient 
to  leave  even  the  heathen  without  any  reasonable  excuse  for  idolatry.  1.  But  how 
different  it  was  with  Israel  I  God  had  made  known  to  them,  and  that  in  permanent 
written  record,  the  many  lessons  of  his  Law;  but  much  as  God  had  done  for  the  people 
of  Jewry,  still  more  has  he  dona  fw  the  peoples  of  Ohristeudom,  for  while  the  Law 


260  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

came  by  Moses,  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ.  We  bave  in  our  hands,  and  for 
daily  perasal,  the  wondrous  things  of  the  Law  and  the  gracious  things  of  the  go^l ; 
the  twin  lips  of  God's  great  oracle  speak  to  us.  2.  Many  and  great  are  the  lessons  of  the 
written  Word.  Many  as  they  are  in  number,  they  are  yet  greater  in  importance — great 
in  their  origin,  for  they  come  from  God  and  are  given  by  inspiration  of  his  Spirit ;  great 
in  their  utility  to  man,  for  they  make  him  acquainted  with  the  things  that  pertain  to 
lilo  and  godliness ;  great  in  their  issues,  for  the  interests  of  eternity  are  intertwined  with 
them  and  depend  on  them  ;  great  as  revealing  the  one  living  and  true  God,  the  way  of 
his  worship,  his  well-beloved  Son  our  only  Saviour,  and  the  plan  of  salvation  by  him. 
3.  Proportionately  great  is  the  sin  of  neglecting  them.  Israel,  though  God  had  been  at 
pains  to  write  to  them  the  great  things  of  his  Law,  turned  their  back  upon  them  as 
something  strange  in  which  they  had  no  concern,  and  with  which  they  were  disinclined 
to  intermeddle,  and  which,  even  if  attended  to,  could  prove  of  little  moment.  These 
things,  in  greater  measure  and  with  greater  fulness,  have  been  handed  on  to  us ;  for, 
though  written  long  ago,  they  were  written  for  our  learning.  What  a  terrible  responsi- 
bility rests  on  us  if  we  neglect  these  things  from  indifference,  or  slight  them  from 
contempt,  or  refuse  to  be  directed,  guided,  and  governed  by  them,  or  reject  them  alto- 
gether as  unworthy  of  our  observance  and  obedience,  or  as  unsuitable  to  •  progressive 
u,ge  and  present  circumstances! 

VII.  Selfish  services  abb  void  of  bignifioance.  "  Most  part  of  worshippers 
follow  the  external  duties  of  religion  no  further  than  their  own  ends  lead  them ;  and 
men's  own  advantage  is  the  upholder  of  all  false  religion,  for  they  sacrifice  and  eat  it." 
1.  'J'hey  feasted  on  their  sacrifices.  This  was  allowable  in  the  case  of  peace  offerings  and 
thank  offerings ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  burnt  offerings  they  were  wholly  consecrated  to 
God,  and  ascended  (according  to  the  import  of  the  name)  in  the  altar-smoke  to  heaven. 
Israel  was  not,  it  is  probable,  careful  to  mark  the  distinction  or  restrict  their  appetite 
in  the  case.  It  is  right  and  proper  that  wo  should  carry  our  religion  into  our  business, 
but  decidedly  wrong  to  carry  our  business,  with  all  its  selfishness  or  greed  of  gain,  into 
our  religion.  2.  Their  worship  was  a  lifeless,  soul-less,  unspiritual  service.  Besides 
being  offered  in  the  wrong  place  and  by  the  wrong  persons — that  is,  in  places  forbidden 
and  by  unauthorized  persons,  such  as  Jeroboam's  priests — they  were  offered  without  the 
right  aim  or  right  end,  or  any  true  devotion  of  spirit.  It  was  mere  external  worship, 
without  spiritual  affections,  or  spiritual  dispositions,  or  spiritual  life;  and  therefore  such 
sacrifices  wanted  the  proper  qualities  and  necessary  characteristics  of  sacrifice;  they 
were,  in  fact,  only  flesh,  and  the  victims  only  carcases,  and  consequently  the  Lord 
could  not  away  with  them  ;  he  accepted  them  not.  3.  A  proper  spirit,  a  pure  heart,  and 
clean  hands  are  among  the  conditions  of  acceptable  service.  God,  by  the  Prophet  Isaiah, 
after  affirming  his  respect  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  trembling 
at  the  Divine  Word,  adds  in  relation  to  the  opposite  character,  "  He  that  killeth  an  ox 
is  as  if  he  slew  a  man ;  he  that  sacrificeth  a  lamb,  as  if  he  cut  off  a  dog's  neck ;  he 
that  offereth  an  oblation, as  if  he  offered  swine's  blood;  he  that  burneth  incense,  as  if 
he  blessed  an  idol."  So  in  the  New  Testament  we  are  required  to  present  "reasonable 
service,"  or  service  in  which  the  soul  and  spirit  are  engaged,  as  opposed  to  what  is  merely 
outward  and  corporeal.  4.  Unhallowed  services  only  remind  God  of  the  offences  of  the 
worshippers,  whose  sins  in  consequence  he  remembers,  not  to  pardon  them,  but  to 
punish  them.  The  God  that  redeemed  them  and  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  will  send 
them  back  into  bondage,  in  Assyria  or  elsewhere,  equal  to  or  worse  than  that  of  Egypt. 
Some  literally  and  actually  went  to  Egypt,  and  found  a  grave  there. 

Ver.  14. — Israel  and  Judah  loth,  in  the  transgression.  In  this  closing  Terse  of  the 
chapter  God  takes  Judah  to  task  as  well  as  Israel  for  forgetfulfaess  of  God ;  while  that 
forgetfulness  of  his  Maker  on  the  part  of  Israel  manifested  itself  in  idolatry,  and  so 
in  building  idol-temples,  but  on  the  part  of  Judah  by  carnal  confidences,  and  so  in 
multiplying  fenced  cities.  The  one  set  up  idols  in  the  place  of  God,  the  other  confided 
in  outward  means  of  defence  and  safety  instead  of  trusting  in  God ;  thus  the  heart  of 
both  was  far  from  God  and  the  remembrance  of  his  Nameu  The  sin  here  recorded 
occurred  in  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  who  sought  to  secure  Judah  br  fortified  cities,  dreading 
the  incursions  of  Assyria  (Isa.  xxii.  8 — 11).  The  punishnient  was  inflicted  by 
Sennacherib  (Isa.  xxxvi.  1). 


OH.  Tin.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  251 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1—4. — A  trumpet-blast  of  judgment.  In  this  passage  the  announcement  of 
Israel's  doom  is  still  more  direct  than  it  has  hitherto  boen.  Up  to  this  point  the 
prophet's  message  has  been  principally  one  of  complaint,  with  threatening  of  punish- 
ment in  the  future;  now,  however,  he  speaks  of  the  judgment  as  immediately  about  to 
fall  upon  the  sinful  nation. 

I.  Thepkoclamation  op  judgment.  (Ver.  1.)  Rosea  is  here  abruptly  addressed 
by  the  Spirit  as  a  sentinel  or  watchman.  Being  the  herald  of  Jehovah,  he  is  to  proclaim 
with  the  trumpet  of  prophecy  the  near  approach  of  the  day  of  vengeance.  His  immediate 
message  is  that  Shalmaneser,  the  Assyrian  king,  is  soon  to  descend  u^on  Israel  as  with 
the  fell  swoop  of  an  eagle,  and  to  carry  the  ten  tribes  captive.  Beyond  that,  however, 
and  little  more  than  a  hundred  years  later,  Nebuchadnezzar,  "  a  great  eagle  with  great 
wings"  (Ezek.  xvii.  3),  is  to  fall  similarly  upon  Judah.  And  yet  again,  in  the  year 
70  A.D.,  when  Jerusalem  shall  have  become  a  "  carcase,"  the  Roman  eagles  under  Titus 
shall  assemble  around  it,  perch  victoriously  upon  the  crest  of  Moriah,  and  take  away 
from  the  Jews  "  both  their  place  and  nation."  By  means  of  such  judgments  as  these 
was  the  wonderful  prediction  of  Moses  to  be  fulfilled,  in  which  the  Lord  threatened  to 
"  bring  a  nation  against  Israel  from  far,  as  swift  as  the  eagle  flieth  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  49). 
Even  yet,  however,  in  these  times  of  the  gospel,  must  the  Lord's  prophet  "  set  the 
trumpet  to  his  mouth"  to  warn  wicked  nations  of  the  doom  which  national  sin  entails, 
and  to  remind  the  sinner  of  "  the  wrath  to  come  "  which  shall  overwhelm  the  impeni- 
tent. The  "  silver  trumpet "  of  the  gospel  jubilee  is  to  announce,  not  only  the  salvation 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  brought  at  his  first  coming,  but  also  the  judgments  which 
are  to  overtake  unbelievers  at  the  second  advent,  and  which  shall  then  be  heralded  by 
the  dread  "  trumpet "  of  the  resurrection. 

II.  The  cause  op  the  judoment.  It  was  apostasy.  This  is  stated  generally  in 
ver.  1,  and  more  specifically  in  ver.  4.  Israel  had  "  transgressed  the  covenant "  (ver.  1) 
that  Jehovah  had  made  with  them  at  Sinai ;  they  had  done  so  by  "  trespassing  against 
his  Law,"  as  written  in  "  the  book  of  the  covenant"  (Bxod.  xxiv.  7).  They  had  forsakeu 
God  in  two  ways :  by  rebelling  against  the  royal  house  of  David,  and  by  rejecting  the 
priestly  order  of  Aaron  (ver.  4).  1.  Israel  maintained  a  schismatic  kingdom.  In 
revolting  under  Jeroboam,  they  consulted  only  their  own  evil  self-will,  and  not  the  will  of 
Jehovah.  During  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  that  the  northern  kingdom  lasted, 
the  throne  was  occupied  by  six  or  more  wretched  dynasties,  and  by  nineteen  unhappy 
monarohs,  all  of  whom  were  apostates  from  God  and  tyrants  over  the  people.  Not  one 
of  the  kings  of  the  ten  tribes  did  Jehovah  recognize  as  his  vicegerent.  Dethronements 
and  assassinations  and  usurpations  followed  one  another,  and  he  "knew  it  not." 
2.  Israel  embraced  a  false  religion,  "  They  made  them  idols,"  and  went  astray  into 
calf-worship  and  Baal-worship.  Not  only  did  the  political  apostasy  lead  to  the  adop- 
tion of  these  heathen  practices ;  the  tribes,  apart  from  that,  had  at  this  period  of  their 
history  strong  leanings  towards  idolatry.  The  people  found  it  pleasant  to  employ  as 
objects  of  worship  what  they  could  see  and  touch.  They  desired  to  be  like  the  nations 
around  them  that  served  graven  images.  So  they  gave  freely  of  their  wealth  (ver.  4) 
for  the  maintenance  of  their  idol  temples.  In  our  age,  too,  the  Lord's  prophet  must 
point  to  apostasy  from  him  as  the  cause  of  spiritual  ruin.  The  gospel  trumpet  is  to 
emphasize  the  counsel  of  the  ajMstle,  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols  " 
(I  John  V.  21).  The  pulpit  ought  to  warn  men  that  the  one  sure  result  of  persistently 
setting  any  creature — whether  money,  or  power,  or  fame,  or  any  earthly  love — in  the 
place  of  the  Creator,  will  be  the  irreparable  loss  and  everlasting  shame  of  the  soul. 

III.  The  false  plea  which  Israel  would  use  to  deprecate  the  judgment. 

SVers.  2,  3.)  Their  affliction  would  drive  the  people  to  pray,  and  to  plead  that  "  we, 
srael,  have  knovm  thee."  But  such  a  declaration  on  their  part  were  pretentious  and 
hypocritical.  It  was  irrelevant,  and  it  would  be  unavailing.  For,  after  all,  it  rested 
only  upon,  their  natural  descent  as  the  chosen  race,  and  upon  the  historical  information 
about  God  which  they  possessed.  The  plea  is  that  the  Lord  must  protect  his  own 
people ;  but  he  does  not  recognize  as  such  those  who  can  say  nothing  more  than  that 
"  they  hare  Abraham  for  their  fother."    He  regards  mere  head-knowledge  of  himsell 


262  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vm.  l—K 

as  dead  knowledge.  Israel  "  professed  that  they  knew  God,  but  in  works  they  denied 
him  "  (Titus  i.  16).  "Israel  hath  cast  off  good  "  (ver.  3)— thrown  it  from  him  with 
loathing  and  contempt.  He  had  rejected  God's  salvation,  by  "  transgressing  his  cove- 
nant "—in  token  whereof  he  had  separated  himself  from  the  dynasty  of  David  and  from 
the  priestly  house  of  Aaron.  And  he  had  rejected  Jehovah  himself  as  the  chief  Good, 
by  seeking  a  portion  fur  himself  in  idolatry.  Inevitably,  therefore,  "  the  enemy  shall 
pursue  him;"  the  Assyrian  must  crush  the  northern  kingdom  under  his  iron  heel,  and 
utterly  destroy  it.  But  these  verses  sound  still  in  our  ears  the  warning,  to  beware 
lest  we  trust  in  spiritual  privilege,  as  if  that  were  personal  piety ;  or  in  the  faith  of  our 
godly  ancestors,  as  if  that  could  be  imputed  to  us ;  or  in  our  knowledge  of  theology 
merely,  as  if  that  were  synonymous  with  heart-religion.  There  is  a  strong  tendenoyln 
human  nature  towards  such  vain  confidence ;  and  Satan  plies  us  with  subtle  tempta- 
tions in  this  direction.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  warned  us  that  when  the  last  "  trumpet " 
shall  sound,  aud  the  great  assize  shall  be  held,  this  same  false  plea  shall  be  presented 
by  multitudes  (Matt.  vii.  22 ;  Luke  xiii.  25 — 27),  To  many  who  shall  then  cry,  "  My 
God,  we  know  thee,"  the  reply  of  the  Judge  will  be,  "I  never  knew  you;  depart  from 
me,  ye  that  work  Iniquity.''  We  must  during  the  present  life  calmly  accept  Christ, 
and  live  by  the  faith  of  him ;  we  must  have  his  Spirit  reigning  in  our  hearts,  and  devote 
ourselves  to  the  pursuit  of  righteousness,  if  we  would  "  not  be  ashamed  before  him  at 
his  coming." — 0.  J. 

Vers.  5 — ^14. — Sin  its  own  punishment.  These  verses  exhibit  (1)  the  root  of 
rin,  viz.  forgetfulness  of  God  (ver.  14);  (2)  its  folly  (ver.  6);  (3)  its  fruitlessnest 
(ver.  7) ;  and  (4)  the  ruin,  which  it  entails  (vers.  8, 10, 13, 14).  But  perhaps  the  most 
prominent  thought  in  the  passage  is  that  of  the  self-punishing  nature  of  sin,  as  illus- 
trated in  the  early  history  and  the  later  fortunes  of  Ephraim.  We  see  this  fact 
reflected — 

I.  In  thb  NATioNAii  OALF-woRSHiP.  (Vors.  6—7.)  Samaria  had  "  cast  off  good " 
(ver.  3)  by  departing  from  the  pure  ritual  which  Jehovah  had  prescribed ;  and  therefore 
the  "  calf"  which  she  had  set  up,  and  in  which  she  gloried,  had  "  cast  her  off."  There 
was  no  help  in  the  golden  god  during  the  crisis  of  the  country's  periL  How  could  there 
be? — ^for  "the  workman  made  it."  Instead, -therefore,  of  interposing  to  save  their 
worshippers  from  exile,  the  two  calves  were  themselves  taken  to  Nineveh  as  a  spoil. 
Tiglath-'pileser  carried  away  the  calf  of  Dan,  and  Shalmanesor  that  of  Bethel.  The 
worship  of  Jeroboam's  images  proved  the  ruin  of  the  nation.  It  was  a  sowing  of  the 
wind.  For  the  breach  of  the  second  commandment  paved  the  way  for  the  violation  of 
the  first,  and  for  contempt  of  the  whole  Decalogue ;  and  then  Israel  "  reaped  the 
whirlwind." 

II.  In  the  multiplication  op  altars  and  bacbipiobs.  (Vers.  11—14.)  The 
Divine  will  had  appointed  but  one  central  sanctuary  and  place  of  sacrifice  (L)eut.  xii. 
5—14).  But  Israel  evinced  the  corruption  of  her  worship  by  multiplying  temples  all 
over  the  land,  not  only  to  Jehovah,  but  to  the  gods  of  heathendom.  The  people 
protested,  indeed,  that  they  did  not  deny  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  even  when 
they  called  upon  Baal  (ch.  ii.  11).  But  Jehovah  could  not  accept  a  divided  homage; 
he  regarded  their  altars  as  set  up  only  "  to  sin,"  and  he  rejected  the  sacrifices  which  they 
laid  upon  them.  The  temples  which  the  men  of  Ephraim  built,  thus  became  a  millstone 
round  their  neck  to  drag  them  to  destruction  (ver.  11).  What  a  pathetic  word-picture 
of  a  dead  ritualism  is  sketched  with  one  slight  touch  in  ver.  14,  "  Israel  hath  for- 
gotten his  Maker,  and  huildeth  temples  "  I  Yet  these  shrines  were  not  true  temples  after 
all,  for  there  was  no  Divine  presence  in  them.  Without  the  presence  of  God  the  most 
splendid  cathedral  is  not  a  sanctuary,  but  a  sepulchre. 

III.  In  the  political  flirtations  with  Assyria.  (Vers.  8 — 10.)  Again  and 
again  the  kingdom  of  Israel  endeavoured  to  bolster  itself  up  by  abject  vassalage  to  the 
King  of  Assyria,  and  by  paying  heavy  tribute  to  buy  off  his  invading  armies.  To  this 
adulterous  policy  Rosea  refers  in  the  words,  " Ephraim  hath  hired  loveis."  But  such 
expedients,  so  far  from  contributing  to  the  safety  of  the  nation,  served,  rather  to 
precipitate  and  aggravate  its  ruin.  First  of  all,  the  tribute  imposed  upon  the  people 
caused  them  to  "  sorrow "  (ver.  10) ;  and  at  length  Israel  was  entirely  "  swallowed 
up"  by  the  invader.    The  nation  Mcame,  in  ita  headstrong  obstinacy  of  disobedience^ 


CH.  rm,  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA-  263 

like  the  solitary  "wild  ass"  of  the  desert;  and  it  fell  an  easy  prey  to  tha  Anyrian 
lion. 

IV.  In  the  confidencb  of  the  people  in  matebial  defenois.  (Vet.  14.)  Hosea 
ascribes  this  particular  sin  to  Judah  rather  than  to  Israel.  The  Jews  "  trusted  in  their 
lenced  cities "  (Jer.  v.  17).  A  fortified  city  is  certainly  a  place  of  refuge  from  the 
invading  host.  But  the  motto  of  such  should  be,  "  Nisi  Doininus  frvstra ; "  for, 
"  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,"  it  will  be  quite  defenceless,  in  spite  of  its  fortifications. 
Judah s  battlements  were  not  the  Lord's;  so  they  attracted  the  thunderbolts  of  the 
Divine  vengeance,  and  were  at  last  burned  with  fire  by  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xriii.  13), 
and  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings  xxv.  9, 10).  His  cities  and  towers  had  been  erected, 
Babel-like,  in  proud  self-confidence ;  and  thus  they  ultimately  became  his  destruction. 

ConcIjUSIOn.  1.  What  was  true  of  Ephraim  will  be  true  also  of  England,  so  soon 
ns  the  national  life  of  oui  land  shall  resemble  his.  If  we  claim  that  the  spiritual 
promises  made  to  Ephraim  apply  to  England,  we  ought  also  to  acknowledge  that  the 
(ienunoiations  directed  against  Ephraim  may  possibly  be  deserved  by  England  too.  2. 
If  Ephiaim's  sin  turned  out  to  be  its  own  punishment,  it  is  the  same  also  with  that  of 
e»ch  individual  sinner.  Betribution  falls  upon  the  wrong-doer  in  the  course  of  natural 
law.  For  Providence  is  just,  and  "  of  oai  pleasant  vices  makes  instruments  to  plague 
us."— 0.  J. 

Ver.  7. — Reaping  the  whirlwind.  The  figure  here  is  extremely  striking ;  it  is  one 
of  the  most  forcible  and  vivid  of  Hosea's  images.  It  suggests  the  folly  and  unprofit- 
ableness of  a  life  of  sin ;  those  who  live  such  a  life  "  sow  the  wind."  And  it  empha- 
sizes the  fact  that  while  the  harvest  must  be  the  same  in  kind  as  the  seed  sown,  the 
increase  will  be  tremendous,  both  in  strength  and  volume.  The  whirlwind  of  the  desert 
tears  along  with  a  roar  like  a  cataract,  and  carries  in  its  wings  violent  and  sweeping 
destruction ;  it  is,  therefore,  a  fit  metaphor  for  the  issue  of  a  career  of  sin.  Let  us 
inquire  who  are  some  of  those  that  thus  reap. 

I.  Idolaters.  It  is  of  such  that  the  prophet  is  more  immediately  speaking.  The 
people  of  the  ten  tribes  were  "sowing  the  wind"  wiien  they  prayed  to  the  golden 
calves  for  abundant  harvests ;  and  they  would  presently  "  reap  the  whirlwind  "  in  the 
three  years' siege  of  Samaria  by  Shalmaneser,  in  the  successive  deportations  into  exile, 
and  in  the  final  ruin  of  the  nationality  of  Ephraim.  The  generation  that  came  out  uf 
Egypt  seven  centuries  before  had  reaped  a  sad  harvest  from  the  calf-worship  at  Horeb. 
"  There  fell  of  the  people  that  day  about  three  thousand  men  "  (Exod.  xxxii.  28).  And 
ever  since  that  time  the  idolatries  of  Israel  had  been  a  standing  grief  to  Jehovah  their 
Redeemer  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  8 — 16) ;  until  at  length  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  the  two 
hurricanes  of  captivity,  which  respectively  swept  the  ten  tribes  into  Assyria,  and  the 
remaining  two  into  Ballon.  All  heathendom,  m(reover,  "reaps  the  whirlwind  "  still 
as  the  fruit  of  its  idolatries — a  harvest  (as  Paul  tells  us  in  Rom.  L  18 — 32)  of  moral 
corruption  and  vileness,  overhung  by  the  storm-cloud  of  the  Divine  wrath. 

II.  Despots.  The  tyrant  makes  an  idol  of  his  own  evil  will,  and  "  sows  the  wind  " 
of  ambition,  and  pride,  and  vain-glory,  and  disregard  of  the  rights  of  others.  Universal 
history  teems  with  illustrations  of  the  fact  that  those  kings  and  grandees  of  the  earth 
who  will  not  give  God  the  glory  are  doomed  to  reap  a  harvest  of  whirlwind.  Take,  e.g., 
from  sacred  history  such  cases  as  Pharaoh,  Ahab  and  Jezebel,  Sennacherib,  Haman, 
Herod.  Or,  from  profane  history,  such  illustrations  as  the  Stuart  kings  of  England,  the 
Bourbon  kings  of  Prance,  and  the  fate  of  the  two  Napoleons.  Some  tyrants  have 
foreseen  the  harvest  before  it  began  to  be  gathered  in;  like  Louis  XY.,  when  he  said  to 
his  courtiers,  "  After  me,  the  deluge." 

III.  Cabbless  fabents.  All  who  neglect  the  godly  upbringing  of  their  children 
"  sow  the  wind."  There  are  well-meaning  heads  of  households  who  fail  to  maintain  a 
firm  and  resolute  as  well  as  kindly  family  government.  They  allow  their  young  people 
to  cherish  self-will,  or  to  follow  pleasure  as  if  it  were  the  business  of  life,  and  neglect 
to  exercise  due  restraint  over  them.  This  was  the  sin  of  Eli  (1  Sam.  iiL  13) ;  and  he 
reaped  the  tornado  in  the  disgrace  which  was  thus  brought  upon  the  priesthood,  together 
with  the  destruction  of  his  own  house.  There  are  parents,  dso,  who  in  their  own 
personal  character  fail  to  set  a  consistent  godly  example  before  their  sons  and  daughters. 
David's  great  sin  entailed  evil  upon  his  family  like  a  whirlwind ;  some  of  bis  sons 


254  THE  BOOK  OF  IIOSEA.  [oh.  viii.  1— U 

became  arrowi  in  his  heart,  instead  of  "  arrows  in  his  hand."  The  historian  shows  us 
the  poor  king  reaping  his  dismal  hanrest  in  the  pathetic  scene  in  which  he  bewailed 
the  fate  of  Absalom  (2  Sam.  xviii.  33). 

IV.  Vicious  men.  The  young  man  who  "wastes  his  substance  with  riotous  living" 
has  his  career  described  in  our  text.  In  following  the  impulse  of  his  wild  hot  passions 
he  "  sows  the  wind."  The  sensualist,  the  drunkard,  the  gambler, — ^how  profitless  all 
their  sowing  "  to  their  own  flesh  "  I  And  what  a  harvest  of  torment  and  terror  and 
shame  they  are  compelled  to  reap  1  It  has  been  so  even  with  men  of  the  most  brilliant 
genius,  as  e.g.  the  poets  Byron  and  Burns.  A  career  of  sinful  pleasure  produces  the 
whirlwind  as  its  natural  harvest.  It  unilermines  the  fountlations  of  morality  within 
the  soul  (eh.  iv.  11).  The  appropriate  epitaph  for  such  a  life  is,  on  the  one  side  of  the 
tombstone,  "Vanity  of  vanities;"  and  on  tlie  other,  "Vexation  of  spirit." 

V.  All  unbelievers.  For  even  the  man  of  good  moral  character  "  sows  the  wind," 
if  he  neglects  the  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ.  Every  one  who  lives  without  God  is 
without  hope.  He  who  believes  that  the  only  real  life  is  a  life  of  sense,  and  who 
therefore  shuts  his  eyes  to  the  world  of  the  unseen,  shall  one  day  be  fully  undeceiveci. 
Should  no  whirlwind  arise  within  his  conscience  during  the  present  life,  he  shall  find 
himself,  when  he  passes  into  eternity,  at  once  involved  in  tremendous  wreaths  of  storm. 
He  "shall  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own  way,"  and  his  "destruction  shall  come  as  a 
whirlwind"  (Prov.  i.  24 — 33).  What  a  dreadful  tempest  is  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Eev.  vi.  12 — 17)1  Yet  the  ungodly  shall  be  exposed  to  all  its  fury.  They  sliall "  reap 
the  whirlwind;"  or,  rather,  the  whirlwind  shall  reap  them;  they  are  "like  the  chaff 
which  the  wind  driveth  away  "  (Ps.  i.  4). 

Lessons.  1.  This  life  is  the  seed-time  of  eternity,  and  all  are  sowers.  2.  The 
harvest  depends  upon  the  seed ;  hence  the  importance  of  sowing  good  seed.  3.  To  sow 
sin  is  a  policy  of  wretched  infatuation ;  it  is  like  "  sowing  wind."  4.  The  harvest  of 
sin  is  not  only  profitless,  but  terrific  and  destructive;  it  is  "  the  whirlwind."  5.  All 
men  have  "  sown  the  wind,"  for  all  are  sinners ;  but  there  is  "  a  Man "  who  is  able  to 
shelter  us  fiom  the  whirlwind  (Isa.  xxxii.  2). — C.  J, 

Ver.  12. — Holy  Scripture,  and  man's  neglect  of  it.  The  complaint  contained  in  this 
verse  may  reasonably  be  addressed  to  multitudes  still.  With  even  more  reason, 
indeed,  than  to  Bphraim  seven  centuries  before  Christ ;  for  our  completed  Bible  contains 
a  xnuch  richer  revelation  ot  Divine  truth  than  those  earlier  Scriptures  which  are  here 
referred  to. 

I.  God's  qbbat  gift  op  Holt  Scripture.  "  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things 
of  my  Law."  1.  What  is  QocFs  "Law"f  The  word  is  used  in  various  senses. 
Sometimes  it  denotes  the  ten  commandments  alone ;  sometimes  the  five  books  of  Moses 
as  distinguished  from  the  prophets;  sometimes  the  Mosaic  economy,  in  distinction 
from  the  gospel ;  and  sometimes  the  whole  will  of  God  as  published  in  Holy  Writ  to 
determine  man's  faith  and  to  control  his  conduct.  Hosea  in  this  verse,  without  doubt, 
refers  immediately  to  the  Pentateuch ;  but,  in  applying  the  passage  to  ourselves,  we 
must  extend  the  application  of  the  term  "  Law  "  so  that  it  shall  cover  the  whole  Bible. 
2,  What  are  "  the  great  things"  of  God's  Law  ?  These  can  be  nothing  else  than  those 
matters  which  constitute  the  substance  of  revelation.  The  Bible  discloses  truths 
which  are :  (1)  Great  in  themselves.  The  Book  is  a  revelation  of  God — his  nature,  his 
trinity  in  unity,  his  ways  in  providence,  his  love  to  sinners.  It  unveils  to  man  his 
own  origin  and  destiny ;  shows  him  the  greatness  of  his  nature,  despite  its  ruins ; 
supplies  him  with  the  perfect  standard  of  moral  purity;  and  satisfies  his  lufticst 
aspirations.  The  Book  grapples  with  the  problem  of  sin,  and  reveals  the  way  of 
salvatioUj  through  the  mediation  of  the  Son  of  God,  his  incarnation,  his  obedience  unto 
death,  his  resurrection  and  exaltation  (1  Tim.  iii.  16),  and  the  ministry  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It'  anticipates  "  the  last  things" — the  universal  triumph  of  the  gospel,  the  final 
resurrection,  the  general  judgment,  and  the  blessedness  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.  (2) 
Great  in  their  importance  to  man  For  the  Bible  tells  man  what  he  most  needs  to 
know,  in  order  to  his  highest  well-being.  It  answers  to  all  the  wants  of  his  many-sided 
nature — his  desire  of  knowledge,  his  admiration  of  what  is  noble,  his  yearning  after 
sympathy,  hig  need  of  inward  rest,  his  hunger  for  immortality.  Holy  Scripture  is  % 
lamp  unto  his  feet.    It  is  the  storehouse  of  his  spiritual  food.    It  is  the  fountain  of 


OH.  vni.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  266 

life  (see  Ps.  xix.  7 — 11).  (3)  Great  in  their  comprehensiveness.  Some  read  the  clause 
thus :  "  I  wrote  to  him  the  myriads  [or,  '  the  fulnesses ']  of  my  Law ; "  the  reference 
heing  to  the  almost  numberless  iadividual  ordinances  connected  with  the  Mosaic  institu- 
tions. This  thought  may  well  remind  us  of  the  inexhaustible  supplies  of  knowledge 
of  all  kinds — facts,  doctrines,  ethical  principles,  precepts,  promises,  predictions,  etc. — 
which  are  stored  up  in  Holy  Scripture.  The  Book  evinces  its  greatness  in  this  respect, 
that  it  affords  us  sure  rules  and  directions  for  our  life  under  all  circumstances.  3.  In 
what  sense  has  God  "  written  "  these  great  things  t  In  the  same  sense,  surely,  in  which 
a  man  reveals  his  thoughts  through  the  medium  of  his  writings.  The  Lord  himself  is 
the  Author  of  the  Bible.  Its  teachings  rest  upon  his  authority.  Whatever  is  declared 
by  inspired  men  to  be  part  of  Divine  truth  or  of  human  duty,  God  declares  to  be  such. 
Christians  may  and  do  differ  regarding  theories  of  inspiration,  but  every  believer 
accepts  the  fact  that  the  books  of  Scripture  are  the  Word  of  God. 

II.  Man's  shameful  neglect  of  this  gift.  "  But  they  were  counted  as  a  strange 
thing."  The  people  of  the  ten  tribes  treated  the  precepts  of  the  Pentateuch  as  if  they 
were  a  matter  which  did  not  concern  them.    Holy  Scripture  is  treated  similarly  still : 

1.  By  worldly  mem.  Some  refuse  to  receive  it  as  a  Divine  revelation.  They  reject 
the  supernatural,  ignore  the  whole  realm  of  faith,  and  particularly  dislike  the  distinc- 
tive doctrines  of  Christianity.  Many  more,  however,  have  an  orthodox  intellectual 
belief  in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God ;  but  their  faith,  such  as  it  is,  does  not  affect  the 
conscience  or  the  heart.  When  they  read  from  the  inspired  volume,  its  words  do  not 
"come  home  to  their  business  and,  bosoms."  "They  do  not  realize  the  grand  evil 
which  the  Bible  has  come  to  cure,  and  they  have  not  a  heart  to  the  blessings  which  it 
offers  to  bestow.  The  film  of  a  fallen  nature,  self-maintained,  is  upon  their  eyes  while 
they  read  "  (Dr.  John  Ker).  So,  they  neglect  "  the  great  things  of  God's  Law  "  for  the 
little  matters  of  sense  and  worldly  vanity.  Many  see  no  further  grandeur  in  the  Bible 
than  its  literary  beauty.  Others  prize  it  simply  as  a  book  of  moral. culture,  and  nothing 
more.  The  baser  sort  profane  Divine  revelation  by  jesting  with  its  holy  subjects,  and 
using  its  most  sacred  words  as  idle  oaths.  2.  By  many  professing  Christians.  Are 
there  not  such,  to  whom  the  Bible  is  "  a  strange  thing,"  because  they  very  seldom  sit 
down  to  read  it?  And  of  those  who  do  regularly  read  "  their  chapter,"  how  many  do 
so  merely  to  pacify  conscience,  and  thus  make  little  or  no  effort  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  passages  read  !  Some  sincere  believers  confine  their  attention  to  a 
few  pet  chapters  which  contain  what  they  call  "  the  simple  gospel,"  and  ignore  the  rest, 
although  the  Scriptures  are  full  of  "the  manifold  wisdom  of  God."  This  very 
prophecy  of  Hosea,  as  one  has  said,  is  "too  often  a  deserted  well;"  but  those,  ho\\ever, 
who  come  and  dra,w  from  it  find  it  full  of  living  water.  One  of  the  wants  of  the  age 
among  professing  Christians  is  a  more  adequate  acquaintance  with  the  contents  of  the 
Bible,  The  man  who  would  enjoy  robustness  of  spiritual  life  must  study  the  Sciiptures 
book  by  book,  that  he  may  discern  the  drift  and  scope  of  each  book,  apprehend  its 
paiticular  place  in  the  scheme  of  truth,  and  at  the  same  time  appropriate  and  assimilate 
its  teaching  for  the  nourishmeut  of  his  souL 

III.  How  WE  ought  to  USB  Holt  Sokipturb.  (See  Westminster  Shorter  Catechism, 
Question  90.)  If  we  would  avoid  incurring  the  censure  of  this  text,  we  must :  1. 
Beceive  the  Book  with  a  believing  and  thankful  heart ;  treat  it  with  deep  reverence  as 
the  Divine  Word ;  and  make  what  effort  we  can  to  circulate  it  throughout  the  world. 

2.  "  Search  the  Scriptures  "  with  regularity  and  system,  that  our  intellectual  acquaint- 
ance with  them  may  be  both  accurate  and  comprehensive.  3.  Meditate  upon  Bible 
teaching  with  self-application  in  our  leisure  hours,  that  our  minds  may  be  imbued 
with  its  principles  of  truth  and  duty,  and  that  conscience  and  affections  and  will 
may  become  subject  to  their  power,  4.  "Keep"  God's  Word  incur  daily  acts,  and 
in  the  habits  which  we  form,  so  that  it  may  mould  our  character,  and  make  us 
Christ- like.  "My  mother  and  my  brethren  are  these  which  hear  the  Word  of  God, 
and  do  it"  (Luke  viii.  21).  5.  And  in  all  our  use  of  Scripture  we  must  pray 
for  the  promised  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  which  our  best  efforts  will  be  in  vain. 
— C.J. 

Ver.  2. On  knowing  God.     Ignorance  of  God  or  forgetfulnesB  of  him   leads  to 

moral'depravity.    This  may  be  illustrated  both  by  national  history  and  by  individual 


258  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh,  vm.  1—14 

experience.  Israel  was  an  example  of  this  truth.  The  people  had  forsaken  Ood,  had 
turned  to  idols,  and  were  therefore  sunk  in  the  licentiousness  of  pagan  worship. 
Thdr  only  hope  of  moral  restoration  and  of  future  blessedness  lay  in  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise,  "  Israel  shall  cry  unto  me,  My  God,  we  know  thee."  The  converse  of  our 
first  statement  is  equally  true.  The  habitual  consciousness  that  God  is  near  cannot 
but  give  simplicity,  dignity,  reverence,  and  holiness  to  life.  This  was  the  source  of 
Abraham's  magnanimity,  of  Joseph's  purity,  of  Moses'  dignity,  of  Daniel's  heroism. 
"  They  endured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  Our  hope  is  to  be  found  in  the  same 
source :  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee,"  etc 

I.  Thb  keans  op  knowing  God.  They  can  be  seen  in  the  experience  of  Jacob, 
who  first  won  for  himself  the  name  "  Israel."  1.  Ilepentanee  is  the  first  step  in  such 
knowledge.  Ko  one  can  see  goodness  while  gazing  on  sin,  or  know  God  while  absorbed 
in  self.  A  moral  change,  not  a  mental,  is  required  of  us  as  of  Israel.  The  teaching 
of  Christ  was  not  too  abstruse  for  comprehension,  but  it  was  too  Divine  for  those 
absorbed  in  earthliness.  Els  foes  "loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their 
deeds  were  eviL"  Paul  was  surrounded  by  men  of  culture,  yet  declared  "  the  natural 
man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  God  .  .  .  neith»  can  he  know  them,  for  they  are 
spiritually  discerned."  John  knew  the  advantages  of  intelligent  study,  but  he  said, 
"  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God."  The  change  from  sin  to  holiness  involves,  in 
the  spiritual  realm,  the  change  from  ignorance  to  knowledge.  Exhibit  this  in  the 
vision  Jacob  had  at  Mahanaim.  He  knew  God's  Name  after  he  had  repented  of  his 
old  sin  against  Esau,  and  of  the  habitual  subtlety  it  revealed.  Then  as  Israel  he 
could  say,  "  My  God,  I  know  thee."  2.  Prayer  is  the  outcry  of  repentance.  "  brael 
shall  cry  to  me."  We  know  a  man  by  fellowship  with  him,  and  thus  we  may  know 
God ;  and  he  who  speaks  to  God  oftenest  knows  him  best.  How  infinite  the  con- 
descension that  permits  this,  the  love  that  encourages  it  I  None  can  make  God  known 
to  others  unless  they  .know  him  themselves.  Hence  the  special  need  of  prayer  on  the 
part  of  all  who  speak  of  him.  The  Divine  teachers  of  the  race  have  been  those  who 
have  come  from  the  presence  of  the  Eternal.  Illustrations  found  in  the  great  lawgiver, 
who  had  spoken  to  God  in  Midian  and  on  Sinai  _;  in  David,  whose  psalms  show  the 
agony  of  his  prayer,  the  intensity  of  his  worship ;  in  the  prophets,  who  saw  visions  of 
God ;  in  the  apostles,  who  were  prepared  for  service  by  being  with  Jesus,  and  not  by 
rabbinical  culture ;  in  reformers  and  others,  whose  spiritual  power  '  has  been  pro- 
portionate to  their  intimacy  with  God.  If  all  professing  Christians  could  say,  "  My 
God,  we  know  thee,"  a  human  priesthood  would  be  abolished,  and  the  scepticism  of  the 
world  would  be  paralyzed.  It  is  true  of  this  knowledge,  as  of  all  the  higher  blessings, 
"  He  that  asketh  receiveth." 

IL  The  jots  of  KNOwnfo  God.  1.  The  tense  of  personal  relationship  to  him, 
"  My  God."  He  who  can  say,  "  My  God,"  implies  such  blessings  as  these :  (1)  Thou 
art  the  Pardoner  of  my  sin ;  e.g.  David  in  Ps.  li.  (2)  The  Bearer  of  my  burdens :  Esther 
and  Nehemiah.  (3)  The  Source  of  my  strength :  Paul,  "  I  can  do  all  things,"  etc. 
(4)  The  Place  of  my  safety :  Koah  and  Elijah.  (5)  The  Spring  of  my  hope :  John 
in  Patmos.  (6)  The  Crowner  of  my  life:  Paul,  "  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up,"  etc. 
2.  TAe  sense  of  saintly  association,  "  Israel  shall  cry."  In  this  cry  the  people  of 
Hosea's  time  were  associated  with  their  forefathers.  The  God  of  their  fathers  was  their 
God.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Hence  the  helpfulness  of 
the  Scripture  histories,  which  tell  us  what  God  has  been  to  others.  Dwell  on  the 
advantages  of  the  history  and  the  memories  of  the  past.  Show  how  the  saints  were 
accustomed  to  strengthen  themselves  for  their  present  need  by  recalling  former  help. 
David  recalled  his  experience  as  a  shepherd ;  the  exiles  their  former  glory ;  the  Jews 
their  early  deliverances,  etc.  Christian  fellowship  enlarges  the  possibilities  of  this. 
The  experience  of  one  is  enriched  by  the  memories  of  others.  The  joy  of  heaven  will 
consist  partly  in  the  remembrances  the  redeemed  have  of  the  loving-kindness  of  God. 
Associations  with  the  saintly  are  the  noblest  and  most  abiding. 

IIL  Thk  eesponsibilitieb  op  knowing  God.  They  who  know  him  are  called 
upon  :  I.  To  wait  on  him  in  lowly  prayer.  If  he  be  God,  he  demands  our  constant 
homage.  2.  To  serve  him  with  loyal  heart,  with  no  reserve  of  thought,  or  wish,  or 
love.  3.  To  learn  of  him  by  constant  thought.  To  one  who  knows  him  he  says,  "  I 
will  guide  thee  w^h  mine  eye."    His  glance,  his  whisper,  is  enough  for  us.    4.  To 


an.  viii.  1— H,]  THE  BOOK   JF  HOSE  A.  25 1 

r^resent  him  hy  consecrated  life.  When  Moses  came  from  the  presence  of  Gbd  his 
face  shone  with  heavenly  light.  When  the  Sanhedrim  saw  the  courage  and  wisdom  of 
Peter  and  John,  they  saw  that  they  had  heen  with  Jesus.  So  he  who  is  hahitually 
with  God  will  have  ahout  him  something  of  heaven's  atmosphere  and  of  Christ's  Spirit. 
CoNOLUSioN.  "  No  man  knoweth  the  Father  but  the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son 
shall  reveal  him." — A.  R. 

Vers.  3, 5  (fiarts).— Sin's  mockery  of  the  sinner,  "  Israel  hath  cast  off  the  thing  that 
is  good.  .  .  .  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off."  The  power  of  the  human  will 
to  clioose  good  or  evil.  This  evidenced  by  the  representation  Hosea  gives  of  a  people 
resolved  on  iniquity,  whom  God  was  longing  to  save.  Refer  to  the  teaching  of  our 
Lord  upon  this  subject ;  e.g.  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me  that  ye  might  h&,ve  life ;"  or, 
"  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together  as  a  hen  doth  gather  her 
brood  under  her  wings,  hut  ye  would  not ! "  Appeal  to  experience  for  proof  of  our 
power  to  receive  or  reject  good.  Our  text  describes  a  fallacious,  sinful,  and  fatal  choice. 
The  sin  for  which  sacrifice  was  made  ultimately  sacrificed  the  sinner.  Look  at  the 
two  sides  of  this  moral  picture. 

L  Thb  CASTisa  OFF  OF  THB  GOOD.  "  Israel  hath  cast  off  the  thing  that  is  good." 
Illustrate  this  by  a  delineation  of  the  depraved  condition  of  Israel  at  this  period.  Show 
that  what  they  cast  off  is  still  being  cast  off  by  multitudes  in  modern  life ;  e.g. :  1. 
Faith  in  the  nearness  of  Qod.  It  was  the  loss  of  this  which  led  Israel  to  form  fatal 
alliances  with  the  heathen.  In  our  day  materialism  and  Positivism  are  enervating, 
and  sometimes  destroying  faith.  The  symbol  of  the  spiritual  is  becoming  the  sub- 
stitute for  it.  This  may  be  traced  both  in  the  teachings  of  a  school  of  philosophy,  and 
in  the  sensuousness  of  ritualistic  worship.  Many  have  cast  off  the  old  faith — "  the 
thing  that  is  good" — instead  of  believing  where  they  cannot  prove.  2,  Fidelity  in 
witnessing  for  Qod.  It  had  been  the  glory  of  Israel  to  proclaim,  both  by  its  worship 
and  in  its  history,  the  unity,  the  invisibility,  and  the  holiness  of  God.  By  turning  to 
the  worship  of  visible  idols,  diverse  in  their  attributes,  yet  all  hideous  in  their  impurity, 
they  had  deliberately  repudiated  this  Divine  commission.  Still  it  is  man's  peculiar 
dignity  to  appear  as  the  witnesser  and  the  worshipper  of  God,  in  whose  image  he  was 
created,  and  over  whose  works  he  rules.  Pre-eminently  he  may  be  the  Divine  witness 
by  the  moral  character  and  the  spiritual  life  inwrought  in  him  by  the  Divine  Spirit, 
who  conforms  us  to  the  image  of  God's  Son.  Falling  short  of  this,  man  fails  (as  Israel 
failed)  to  fulfil  his  destiny.  Hence,  in  proportion  as  a  man  refuses  the  grace  of  God,  he 
casts  off  the  thing  that  is  good.  3.  Obedience  to  the  Law  of  God.  Show  from  pagan 
history,  and  from  the  condition  of  modern  heathen,  as  well  as  from  the  growing  degra- 
dation of  those  to  whom  Hosea  spoke,  that  idolatry  brings  with  it  moral  deterioration. 
The  man  who  ignores  the  first  table  of  the  Law  will  of  necessity  ignore  the  second 
also.  Religious  faith  and  moral  rightness  stand  or  fall  together.  When  Israel  turned 
from  Jehovah  to  Baal  and  Astarte,  the  nation  gradually  but  surely  became  false, 
self-seeking,  ambitious  in  its  political  alliances,  and  hideously  corrupt  in  its  inward 
social  condition.  Israel  had  cast  off  the  thing  that  was  good.  4.  Loyalty  to  sacred 
resolves.  The  people  often  appeared  about  to  repent,  but  their  goodness  was  transient 
as  the  morning  cloud.  How  frequently  now  right  impressions  and  even  holy  vows 
are  cast  off!  How  jealously  all  should  guard  themselves  against  the  subtle  influence 
of  a  busy  life,  or  of  an  alluring  pleasure,  or  of  an  ill-cliosen  companionship  1  There  are 
many  whose  hearts  are  hard,  and  whose  lives  are  godless,  respecting  whom,  in  memory 
of  their  early  promise,  it  may  be  truly  and  sadly  said,  "  They  have  cast  off  the  thing 
that  is  good." 

II.  Thb  oastinq  off  of  thb  binnbb.  "  Thy  calf,  O  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off." 
History  shows  that  Israel  was  ruined  by  trusting  to  Egypt  and  to  its  own  martial 
prowess,  instead  of  confiding  in  God  and  simply  doing  righteousness.  Jeremiah's 
words  were  fulfilled,  "  Cursed  is  .the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his 
arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord."  Casting  off  good,  Israel  was  oast  off 
by  evil.  See  how  often  this  principle  is  exemplified  in  the  broader  sphere  of  human 
life.  That  which  men  put  in  the  place  of  Grod  sooner  or  later  fails  them.  1.  Plea- 
sures fail  to  give  satisfaction.  When  the  soul  tries  to  quench  its  thirst  with  these, 
the  words,  of  Isaiah  are  fulfilled,  "It  shall  even  be  as  when  a  hungry  man  dreamcih, 
BosEA.  s 


268  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vm.  1—14. 

and,  Miold,  he  cateth;  but  he  awaketh,  and  his  aoul  is  empty."  The  awakening 
comes  ultimately  to  every  man,  and  it  is  well  when  it  does  not  come  too  late.  2. 
InteUect  /aO$  to  find  spiritual  truth.  Spiritual  things  are  spiritually  discerned,  and 
the  unrest  of  many  arises  from  the  fact  that  they  have  cast  off  the  yoke  of  him  who 
alone  wai  able  to  say, "  I  am  the  .  .  .  Truth."  3.  Self-righteousness  fails  to  bring 
lalvation.  See  our  Lord's  words  respecting  the  Pharisees.  The  house  built  on  the 
sand  stands  side  by  side  with  the  house  founded  upon  the  rook  ;  but  the  testing-time 
oomes  to  both.  4.  The  world  fails  to  afford  a  home.  Whether  we  will  or  not,  the 
world  must  fail  us  at  last.  If  we  make  it  our  servant,  we  shall  rule  like  kings ;  if  we 
make  it  our  god,  in  our  hour  of  helplessness  it  will  cast  us  off. 

GoNOLUSiON.  "  There  be  many  that  say.  Who  will  show  us  any  good?  Lord,  lift 
thou  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  us."— A.  B. 

Ver.  7  (first  clause). — "  What  shall  the  harvest  het'  In  Scripture  "  the  wind  *  Is  an 
emblem  of  vanity  or  folly,  and  "  the  whirlwind  "  of  sudden  aad  unexpected  destruc- 
tion. Here  the  latter  is  declared  to  be  the  product  of  the  former.  As  a  gentle 
"  wind  "  may  be  the  precursor  of  the  "  whirlwind,"  so  the  foolish  policy  of  Israel  would 
be  followed  by  resistless  disaster.  By  a  change  of  figure  in  the  following  clause,  Hosea 
announces  that  plans  which  at  first  seemed  successful  would  bring  no  ultidlate  advan- 
tage. The  clause  may  be  thus  paraphrased  :  "  That  which  is  sown  produces  no  stalk, 
or  even  if  it  does  the  stalk  will  yield  no  grain ;  or  if  so  he  it  does  yield  any,  foreiiiii 
armies  shall  swallow  it  up."  The  principle  which  underlies  this  teaching  is  sufficiently 
evident  in  the  first  clause,  the  consideration  of  which  suggests  the  following  truths : — 

I.  That  men  shall  heap  as  they  have  sown  is  a  Divine  and  universal  law. 
I.  2%M  law  is  seen  to  nature.  Sow  wheat,  and  without  further  anxiety  you  are  con- 
fident that  you  will  reap  wheat,  and  not  something  else.  And  not  in  kind  only,  but 
in  quantity,  whether  abundantly  or  sparsely,  you  will  reap  as  you  sowed.  The  child  is 
surprised  to  see  his  own  name  appear  written  in  living  green ;  but  he  who  sowed  the 
seed  in  that  form  sees  in  it  only  what  is  natural  and  usual.  2.  This  law  asserts  itself 
in  social  life.  If  a  nation  allows  its  children  to  be  brought  up  without  regard  to  the 
sanctities  of  life,  it  finds  its  retribution  in  crowded  jails  and  asylums,  in  political 
insecurity,  in  death-bringing  pestilence,  etc.  Having  sown  the  wind,  it  reaps  the  whirl- 
wind. So  is  it  with  the  methods  adopted  by  despotic  tyranny.  History  shows  how 
often  repressive  measures,  excessive  and  uncertain  punishments,  etc.,  have  culminated 
in  the  whirlwind  of  revolution  which  has  overwhelmed  and  wrecked  orderly  society. 
3.  This  law  is  visible  in  the  culturs  tf  the  mind  and  the  occupations  of  life.  Contrast 
the  destiny  of  the  indolent  shifty  ichoolboy  with  that  of  the  steady  student  who 
yearly  growe  in  intellectual  capacity.  4.  This  law  never  fails  in  the  morod  and  religious 
sphere.  Suppose  a  man  resolves  to  do  that  which  will  pay,  in  a  financial  sense.  He 
deliberately  abjures  righteousness  for  expediency,  resolving  at  all  costs  to  win  wealth. 
He  does  win  it.  He  reaps  according  to  the  seed  he  has  sown,  but  it  is  no  wonder  if  in 
his  moral  being  he  is  "  given  over  to  a  reprobate  miiid."  On  the  other  hand,  the 
religious  man  gives  up  a  profitable  practice  because  he  believes  it  to  be  immoral.  The 
result  is  that  he  fails  to  reap  riches  because  he  has  not  sown  for  them,  but  he  does 
reap  the  bliss  of  having  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  Qod  and  towards  men. 

IL  That  this  law  bohetiheb  ahbbts  itself  in  the  bad  experience  of  sinners 
RTIH  a  THIS  pbebbnt  lipb.  "Even  h  I  have  seen,  they  that  plough  iniquity,  and  sow 
wickedness,  reap  the  same  "  (Job  iv.  8).  Retribution  often  comes  (as  it  came  to  Israel) 
through  the  sin  that  at  first  brought  nothing  but  success.  The  notorious  life  of  James 
Fisk,  of  New  Tork,  was  a  remarkable  illustration  of  the  declaration, "  The  wicked  shall 
fall  by  their  own  wickedness."  1.  Examples  from  Scripture,  (1)  Eanvm  plotted 
against  Mordecai  to  his  own  destruction.  His  was  the  vaulting  ambition  that  over- 
leaps itself.  (2)  DaniePsfoes  were  themselves  cast  into  the  lion  s  den.  (3)  The  men 
of  Said  resolved  to  defy  God  by  the  power  of  social  combination ;  but  tlieir  scheme 
wu  the  means  of  their  scattering.  (4)  The  Pharisees  found  that  the  cross  to  which 
they  triumphantly  nailed  our  Lo^  was  at  once  the  means  of  their  confusion  and  of  his 
victory  over  the  world.  2.  Examples  from  experience.  Pope  Alexander  VI.  tried  to 
poison  his  friend  Cardinal  Adrian.  Through  the  mistake  of  his  cupbearer  he  himself 
died  by  the  cup  which  was  meant  t«  destroy  another.    The  Regent  Morton  was 


OB,  Tm.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA,  259 

another  example.  So  was  Thomas  Cromwell,  of  whom  Macaulay  says,  "No  one  ever 
made  a  more  unscrupulous  use  of  the  legislative  power  for  the  destruction  of  his  foes ; " 
and  it  was  by  these  means  he  was  himself  destroyed.  3.  Common  proverbs  iUustrata 
the  text,  "  Ashes  always  fly  in  the  face  of  him  who  throws  them."  "  Harm  watch, 
harm  catch,"  etc.  Thus,  even  in  outward  circumstances,  the  words  of  the  text  have 
been  fulfilled ;  but  how  much  more  terribly  in  that  inward  retribution  which  is  veiled 
evea  from  the  victim's  dearest  friends  1  The  anxiety  that  fears  detection,  the  loss  of 
self-respect,  the  horror  of  being  aloae,  the  failure  of  hope,  the  growing  dread  of  the 
future,  have  caused  many  a  man,  even  on  earth,  to  know  what  it  is  to  "  reap  the 
whirlwind."    But  observe  finally — 

III.  That  this  law  will  ultimately  proolaim  itself  with  unmibtaeablb 
DISTINCTNESS.  Sin's  retribution  is  not  always  seen  here.  Human  laws  may  be  power- 
less to  reach  a  recognized  offender.  Social  morality  may  be  too  degraded  to  rebuke 
his  sin.  For  these  and  other  reasons  much  is  necessarily  left  to  the  future,  when 
crooked  things  will  be  made  straight.  Perhaps  it  is  well  that  it  should  be  so.  It  is 
for  our  profit  that  we  should  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  God  does  not  append 
instant  pain  to  every  act  of  disobedience.  He  deals  with  us  as  men,  not  as  children. 
To  do  right  not  because  it  pays,  but  because  it  is  right,  is  the  obedience  of  the  wise 
man,  not  that  of  the  petted  child ;  and  it  is  the  higher  God  ever  seeks.  Hence  he  has 
contented  himself  with  giving  a  few  signs  that  his  Law  cannot  be  broken  with  impunity, 
ind  these  point  us  on  to  the  day  when  righteousness  and  truth  shall  be  crowned,  and 
wrong  and  falsehood  cursed  amidst  the  "  Amens"  of  the  universe.  In  such  events  as 
those  to  which  we  have  referred,  we  see  a  few  ripening  ears  which  tell  us  what  the 
harvest  wUl  he  when  those  who  have  sown  the  wind  shall  reap  the  whirlwind.  This 
experience,  so  far  as  it  refers  to  the  future  retribution,  denotes :  1.  That  it  is  sudden  in 
its  arrival.  (See  Matt.  xxiv.  37—39 ;  Prov.  xxix.  1 ;  1  Thess.  v.  2.)  2.  That  it  it 
resistless  in  its  approach.  Who  can  arrest  the  whirlwind  (see  Ps.  1.  4;  Bev.  vi.  15)? 
3.  That  it  is  terrible  in  its  effects.  Compare  the  destruction  of  men's  works  by  a  whirl- 
wind, with  the  desolation  of  the  worldling's  hopes  by  death. 

Conclusion.  1.  Show  how  close  is  the  connection  between  this  life  and  the  life  to 
come.  That  is  the  reaping  of  this  sowing.  Therefore  do  not  wait  till  haivest-time 
before  beginning  to  sow  in  righteousness.  2.  Show  how  possible  it  is,  through  Ood's 
goodness,  to  reap  a  harvest.  Both  of  Christian  character  and  of  Christian  work  the 
promise  is  true,  "  He  that  soweth  jind  he  that  reapeth  will  rejoice  together." — ^A.  B. 

Ter.  12. — The  inspiration  of  Scripture.  This  is  an  emphatic  declaration  of  the 
Divine  origin  of  Scripture.  If  it  required  utterance  in  Hosea's  day,  it  equally  demands 
our  earnest  consideration.  The  accessibility  and  cheapness  of  God's  Word  has  tended 
to  its  neglect.  Because  it  is  less  rare  it  appears  to  many  less  precious.  In  the  reign 
of  Edward  I.  a  copy  would  cost  £37,  and  as  a  labourer  earned  only  three  half-pence  as 
his  daily  wage,  it  represented  to  him  the  product  of  fifteen  years'  work.  How  different 
now  1  Probably  the  abundance  of  religious  and  other  literature  has  also  done  some- 
thing to  divert  attention  from  the  Bible.  In  fear  of  this  Luther  wished  that  his  own 
books  were  burnt,  "  because,"  said  he,  "  I  fear  lest  they  should  hinder  men  from  read- 
ing the  Bible,  that  Book  of  books,  in  comparison  whereof  all  the  books  in  the  world 
are  but  waste  paper."  If  all  were  convinced  that  Scripture  is  a  revelation  from  God, 
such  neglect  would  be  less  frequent ;  and  therefore  it  may  be  well  to  consider  our 
belief  in  Divine  inspiration,  which  the  occult  influence  of  materialistic  philosophy  has 
done  much  to  weaken.  May  the  Spirit  of  truth  give  us  definiteness  of  conception,  and 
may  the  Spirit  of  love  give  us  generosity  of  tone  1 

I.  That  i\spiration  is  consonant  with  beason.  If  it  be  admitted  that  God 
exists  as  the  Creator  of  man,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  he  would  so  far  direct  and 
control  the  human  mind  as  to  secure  the  ends  of  moral  government.  We  do  not  believe 
that  the  laws  of  physical  necessity  are  paramount.  We  refuse  to  throw  the  reins  to 
the  modern  Phaeton,  who  drives  he  knows  not  whither,  and  who  cares  not  though  the 
whole  world  of  Christian  thought  and  of  moral  life  be  burnt  to  ashes.  The  theory  that 
the  universe  is  a  vast  machine,  governed  only  by  the  laws  of  material  organization,  and 
that  all  its  affairs  are  carried  on  by  its  own  concreated  powers,  leads  ultimately  to  the 
abasement  of  man  and  to  the  abolition  of  God ;  and  from  the  abyss  of  despair  to  which 


266  THE  BOOK  OP  H08EA.  [Oh.  vm.  1—14. 

FoaitlTlsm  leads  ns  we  recoil  with  horror.    Our  loul  k  lomethiiig  more  than  the 

concatenation  of  physical  causes  and  effects;  thought  is  not  the  mere  product  oi 
movements  in  the  particles  of  brain-matter ;  and  love  to  each  other  and  to  God  is 
higher  than  the  gauglionic  affection  with  which  it  may  he  associated.  We  believe  that, 
though  we  are  endued  with  freedom,  God  has  not  renounced  all  control  over  us ;  that 
side  by  side  with  our  plans  is  a  concurrent  Providence  evolving  good ;  that  the  words 
are  profoundly  true,  "  in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being."  It  is  to  those 
with  such  a  belief  we  are  addressing  ourselves,  and  say  the  inspiration  of  Scripture  is 
what  you  might  reasonably  expect.  If  Gk)d  control  the  physical  world,  it  is  not 
incongruous  that  he  should  present  to  human  minds,  and  incline  them  to  regard,  and 
to  communicate  truths  which  relate  to  man's  future  destiny.  If  he  make  his  sun  to 
rise  and  flood  the  natural  world  with  light,  he  will  not  leave  the  intellectual  creation 
in  darkness.  In  this  thought  lies  the  essential  truth  of  inspiration.  We  shall  not 
attempt  to  enumerate  all  the  methods  of  Divine  revelation.  God's  ways  are  various 
in  this,  as  in  the  natural  world.  He  can  hurl  up  an  island  by  volcanic  force,  or  he 
can  build  it  by  the  multitudinous  labours  of  coral  insects.  He  can  split  a  rock  by  the 
crash  of  the  sea,  or  let  a  tiny  stream  trickle  through  it  till  it  falls  asunder.  So  in  his 
revelations.  Sometimes  a  voice  has  spoken,  as  on  Sinai,  and  daring  the  ministry  of 
our  Lord.  Sometimes  angels  have  appeared  to  speak  to  Abraham  in  his  tent,  or  to  the 
women  at  Christ's  grave.  The  future  has  been  revealed,  now  in  dreams,  as  to  Joseph ; 
now  in  visions,  as  to  Ezekiel.  But  we  speak  not  of  these  revelations  (diroicox%i)»  but  of 
inspiration  (eeoiri'e^Tio),  the  direct  internal  suggestion  given  to  men  who  wrote  and 
spoke  for  God,  giving  to  us  in  Scripture  an  authoritative  rule  of  fiiith  and  practice. 

n.  That  inspiration  m  claimed  fob  itself  by  Sobiptubb.  1.  These  writers,  who 
were  evidently  modest,  Tiumlle  men,  declare  that  they  were  imbued  with  sujpernatuial 
knowledge ;  that  they  knew  what  they  could  not  recognize  by  intellectual  research, 
being  wrought  on  directly  by  the  Holy  Ghost;  e.g.  2  Sara.  xxilL  2;  Matt.  x.  20; 
1  Pet.  i.  11,  etc.  2.  Ihe  truths  they  uttered  justify  such  pretensions.  Think  fairly  ol 
any  one  of  these  men,  consider  his  previous  culture,  his  mental  capacity,  the  condition 
of  the  world  around  him,  mentally  and  morally,  and  see  whether  the  dignity  of  Mosaic 
theology,  the  devout  wisdom  of  tiie  psalms,  the  pregnancy  of  prophecy,  the  nobility  of 
moral  tone  throughout  Scripture,  could  find  source  in  the  writers  themselves.  Above 
and  behind  them  all  a  voice  says, "  I  have  written  the  great  [or, '  multitudinous ']  things 
of  my  Law."  3.  We  may  rest  our  hdief  in  the  inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament  on 
eledarations  in  the  New.  And  these  ultimately  depend  on  the  authority  of  Christ,  the 
everlasting  Word  of  God.  Our  Lord  refers  to  several  writers  by  name,  appealing  to 
them  as  of  Divine  authority,  and  using  their  utterances  in  his  great  conflict  in  the 
wilderness.  He  habitually  spoke  of  "  the  Law  and  the  prophets  "  as  giving  a  revelation 
of  Gtod's  will,  saying  about  these, "  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfiL"  His 
promises  also  to  his  disciples  give  authority  to  their  utterances  (comp.  John  xiv.  17, 
26 ;  zvL  13).  (Note  the  effects  produced  in  human  society  by  the  direct  and  indirect 
influence  of  Scripture.) 

III.  That  inspibation  ib  to  be  distinquished  both  feom  (1)  genius  and  (2) 

FBOU  THE  ORDINAET  WOBK  OF  OKAOK  IN    THE  HEART  OF  MAN.      L  Job  XXXii.  8  ig  a 

declaration  that  intellectual  gifts  are  of  QoA ;  and  some  speak  of  Shakespeare  and  of 
others  as  " inspired  "  men.  In  Job's  sense  they  were  inspired;  but  their  thought  is 
not  parallel  with  the  thought  of  Scripture.  The  Bible  writers  were  not  men  of  extra- 
ordinary ability ;  nothing  in  their  history,  or  claims,  or  writings  would  indicate  that 
they  were ;  and  sometimes  they  affirm  that  It  was  by  ^ving  up  their  own  thinking  for 
trust  and  prayer  that  they  knew  God's  will.  2.  Nor  must  the  inspiraiion  of  the 
sacred  writers  be  considered  as  identical  with  that  being  "filled  with  the  Spirit,"  etc., 
of  which  we  often  read.  It  was  even  given  sometimes  independently  of  character,  as 
to  Balaam — though  (as  there  is  congruity  in  all  God's  works,  so  there  was  in  this) 
usually  it  was  associated  with  sanctified  character.  The  two  were  separable,  yet  true 
men  spoke  of  truth,  pure  men  of  purity,  devout  men  of  God.  "  Holy  men  of  God 
spake  as  they  wore  mm  ed  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  They  were  not  unconscious  instruments 
—fntrt  automata.  God  employed  their  faculiies,  but  did  not  supersede  them.  Each 
man  retained  his  own  individuality.  It  is  well  for  us  that  it  was  so.  We  read  the  psalms 
and  hear  the  voice  of  God  ;  yet  we  hear  also  in  them  the  sobs  aud  songs  of  man.    W* 


OB.  vm.  1—14.]  THB  BOOS  OF  HOSBA.  261 

find  Divine  truth  in  Paul's  Epistles ;  yet  it  ii  commended  to  lu  in  Paul's  human  argu- 
ment. Whether,  however,  it  be  in  the  thunder  of  Isaiah  or  in  the  tremhling  of  Jeremiah, 
whether  in  the  logic  of  Paul  or  the  mysticism  of  John,  we  hear  throughout  all  the  deoIara> 
tion  of  God,  "  /have  written,"  etc.    "  All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God." 

Ck)NaLUSiON.  Never  account  God's  Word  "  a  strange  thing,  1.  We  may  do  so  by 
applying  its  precepts  and  promises  to  others  and  not  to  ourselves,  m  if  they  were  foreign 
to  ua,  2.  We  may  do  so  by  allowing  God's  Word  to  lie  beside  ui  unread.  Illustrate 
PUT  duty  bjr  the  itory  of  the  conversion  of  St.  Augustine. — ^A.  S. 

Ver.  2. — IsraeTsertf.  It  could  not  be  that,  however  tempted  and  however  iinful, 
the  children  of  the  covenant  should  lose  all  remembrances  of  the  mercies  shown  to 
them  and  the  blessings  promised  to  them.  God  had  not  forgotten  them,  neither  did 
tiiey  altogether  forget  God.  This  cry,  represented  as  rising  to  Heaven  from  Israel's 
lips,  seems  natural  enough :  "  My  God,  we  know  thee." 

I.  When  a  obt  of  htfoobist,  feab,  ob  selfishness,  it  was  taiv.  Alas!  it 
was  often  this.  Superstition  led  the  people  to  conjoin  the  worship  of  Jehovah  with  the 
worship  of  idols.  It  would  seem  that,  in  their  ignorant,  selfish,  worthless  religiousness, 
they  wished  to  stand  well  with  both.  There  was  a  measure  of  truth  in  the  cry  ;  for 
the  children  of  Abraham  had  a  right  to  look  to  Jehovah  and  say,  "  My  Qod,"  and 
they  could  justly  add,  "  We  know  thee."  Yet,  occupying  the  position  they  did,  their 
utterance  was  unheard  by  and  unacceptable  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts. 

n.  When  a  obt  of  sikcebitt  and  faitb,  it  was  acoeftablb.  It  was  no£  that 
the  words  were  wrong  in  themselves ;  it  was  the  spirit  that  was  defective  and  blam- 
•ble.  When  such  words  came  from  filial,  grateful,  spiritual  natures,  most  welcome 
were  they  to  the  ear  of  the  Supreme.  The  language  admits  of,  nay,  it  nnturally 
expresses,  devoutness — a  joyful  appropriation,  heartfelt  commumon.  It  rejoices  in  an 
honourable  and  blessed  relationship ;  it  aclcnowledges  a  happy,  elevating,  and  unbroken 
familiarity. — T. 

Ver.  6,— The  broken  idol.  The  calf-worship  in  northern  Palestine  is  an  example  of 
the  inconsistencies  to  which  human  nature  is  liable,  and  the  declensions  incident  to 
social  and  national  life.  The  indignation  of  the  prophet  is  a  fit  expression  of  the  dis» 
pleasure  of  Jehovah.  And  the  threat  conveyed  in  the  language  of  the  text  must  have 
been  felt  by  those  to  whom  it  was  addressed  to  l)e  as  righteously  deserved  as  it  was 
certain  to  be  executed.  The  lesson  of  the  passage  is  a  more  general  and  extensive  one 
than  appears  upon  the  surface.    We  are  reminded  of— 

I.  Man's  pbonenisss  to  set  otheb  objects  in  thb  sufbeme  flaox  which  of 
BioBT  is  God's.  Every  object,  every  being,  every  pursuit,  which  men  place  in  the 
position  which  is  God's  alone,  becomes  an  idol.  Thus  idolatry  is  a  sin  of  all  times. 
Pleasure,  fame,  learning,  power,  etc.,  aU  by  turns  assume  the  throne  of  the  heart,  stand 
in  the  shrine  of  Deity. 

IL  Such  idolatry  can  only  ibbos  or  mTHAN  disapfointuent.  The  vanity  of 
trusting  to  the  works  of  their  own  hands  was  impressed  again  and  again  upon  Israel, 
until  at  length  idolatry  was  rendered  for  ever  impossible  to  them.  How  much  of  the 
Old  Testament  consists  of  warnings  that  to  trust  in  other  refuges,  in  other  helpers,  than 
in  Jehovah  is  the  way  to  shame,  confusion,  and  destruction  I  "  Confounded  be  all  they 
that  serve  graven  images."  Who  is  there  that  has  forsaken  God,  and  sought'  another 
deliverer,  but  has  been  miserably  disappointed  ? 

ZEL  The  Divine  disfleabubb  is  manifested  towabds  such  as  fobsakb  God  fob 
OTHBB  helpebs.  His  honour  he  will  not  give  to  another.  He  sent  prophets  to  Israel, 
and  inspired  them  to  upbraid  and  to  denounce  the  unfaithful  and  apostate.  The  greater 
the  mercies  the  Hebrew  nation  had  enjoyed,  the  greater  the  Divme  indignation  with 
those  who,  having  been  so  favoured,  had  so  rebelled. 

IV.  DOOH  AND  DESTBUOnON  ABE  PBONOUNOED  BOTH  UPON  IDOLS  AND  UPON  THOSIS 

WHO  TBUST  nr  THEM.  "  The  calf  shall  be  broken  in  pieces."  The  reed,  upon  which 
the  faithless  leans,  shall  pierce  his  side.  He  shall  see  the  hosts  in  which  he  trusted 
melt  into  nothingness  before  his  eyes.  Riches  shall  take  wings  and  fiy  away.  The 
bubble  of  honour  shall  burst  and  vanisli.  The  blossom  of  power  sliaU  lie  nipped,  or  the 
fruit  Aall  Ml  unripe.    Man  is  but  man,  and  not'  God. 


262  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [ch.  Viii.  1—14 

V.    ThS   PUEPOSB  op  THI3   PROVISION  18  TO  LEAD  TO   BBPENTANCB   AND    TO    EETUEN 

UNTO  THE  Lord.  Declarations  of  displeasure  and  denunciations  of  wrath  afford 
no  pleasure  to  the  Divine  mind  that  authorizes  them,  God's  threat  to  destroy  all 
rivals  to  his  authority  and  supremacy  must  indeed  be  literally  fulfilled.  But  for  those 
who  return  to  the  God  they  have  forsaken,  there  are  open  arms,  there  is  a  heart  of 
mercy,  there  are  words  of  pardon,  there  is  welcome,  restoration,  and  life. — T. 

Ver.  7. — Sowing  the  wind  and  reaping  the  whirlwind.  Sowing  and  reaping  in  the 
natural  world  are  processes  of  husbandry  so  closely  and  vitally  connected,  that  they 
obviously  suggest  corresponding  connections  in  the  spiritual  realm.  "  Whatsoever  a 
man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Such  is  the  great  moral  law.  Tet  there  is  a 
characteristic  of  the  working  of  this  law  which  is  very  suggestive.  Whilst  the  kind 
remains  the  same,  the  measure  of  what  is  reaped  largely  exceeds  the  measure  of  what 
is  sown.  This  is  the  lesson  of  the  text.  What  is  soum  is  the  iimid ;  what  is  reaped  is 
the  whirlwind. 

L  In  what  8BNSB  SINNERS  SOW  THE  WIND.  The  sins  for  which  Israel  was  chiefly 
denounced  by  the  prophet  were  idolatry  and  heathen  alliances,  in  both  of  which  the 
Lord's  honour  was  given  to  another,  and  the  confidence  due  to  him  was  unrighteously 
and  foolishly  transferred.  Now,  the  wind  is  the  emblem  of  emptiness  and  unsubstantial 
vanity.  Accordingly,  the  language  of  the  text  teaches  that  the  conduct  of  Israel  was 
foolish  and  vain.  And  this  may  be  asserted  of  all  who,  by  vice,  or  crime,  or  irreligion, 
depart  from  God. 

11.  In  what  sense  sinners  eeap  the  whtblwind.  Under  the  government  of  a 
just  and  almighty  Buler,  it  could  not  be  that  Israel  or  any  nation  could  forsake  the 
true  religion  and  abandon  lofty  principles,  without  suffering  the  consequences  in  the 
penalties  attached  to  disobedience  and  rebellion.  But  the  point  of  the  text  is  to  be 
found  in  the  apparent  disproportion  between  the  offence  and  the  penalty.  Israel  hoped 
for  safety ;  instead  of  this,  and  as  the  result  of  apostasy,  Israel  went  into  captivity. 
The  national  life  of  the  kingdom  and  people  of  Samaria  was  absolutely  destroyed,  never 
to  be  revived.  Thus  a  mighty  whirlwind,  the  messenger  of  Divine  indignation,  carried 
the  people  away  in  their  sins.  Thus  is  it  with  all  high-handed  and  stiff-necked  sinners. 
Their  rebellion  and  apostasy  has  even  to  human  eyes  the  appearance  of  a  sowing  to 
the  wind ;  but  in  the  order  of  the  Divine  government  it  is  appointed  that  such  shall 
reap  the  whirlwind.  We  read  the  lesson  in  the  awful  fate  which  has  overtaken  all 
nations  which  have  been  unfaithful  to  their  calling,  which  have  defied  the  righteous 
and' Divine  Governor.  And  in  how  many  instances  of  individual  life  have  we  seen  the 
operation  of  the  same  law  I  Moral  ruin  and  utter  overthrow  have  followed  upon 
estrangement  and  rebellion.  The  very  confidence  which  sinners  repose  in  the  idols 
they  choose  for  themselves  becomes  the  occasion  of  their  more  complete  and  irreme- 
diable confusion.  Judgment  is  delayed ;  but  the  stores  of  retributive  force  accumu- 
late, and  in  due  time  the  tornado  of  Divine  indignation  sweeps  down  upon  the  sinner's 
head  with  irresistible  force,  issuing  in  the  catastrophe  of  temporal  and  spiritual 
min.— T. 

Ver.  9, — Hired  lovers.  Israel  excited  the  displeasure  of  Jehovah  by  not  merely 
renouncing  confidence  in  him,  but  by  placing  confidence  in  foreign  nations  and  strange 
gods.  And  Israel  aggravated  the  ofl'ence  by  rejecting  the  aid  which  her  covenant  God 
would  readily  and  gratuitously  have  bestowed,  and  by  expending  her  treasure  in 
purchasing  from  neighbouring  nations  assistance  which  proved  to  be  vain  and  unprofit- 
able. Her  conduct  is  compared  to  that  of  an  adulteress,  so  wanton  as  to  purchase  with 
her  husband's  money  the  affection  and  embraces  of  a  stranger. 

I.  It  is  the  infatuation  of  bin  to  forsake  the  free  and  undeserved  favour 
OF  God.  The  folly  of  such  a  course  is  apparent  to  all  whose  minds  are  not  under  the 
influence  of  prejudice  and  passion.  When  the  fountain  of  living  waters  is  accessible, 
how  wretched  is  the  self-delusion  of  those  who  turn  away  from  it  1 

II.  This  infatuation  is  still  more  apparent  when  it  leads  sinners  to  trust 
TO  vain  befdoeb.  The  cisterns  which  are  sought  when  the  fountain  is  forsaken  are 
broken  cisterns,  which  can  hold  no  water.  Such  was  the  powerlessness,  the  insufficiency 
of  the  gods  and  the  kings  whom  Israel  sought.    And  in  that  they  represent  the  men, 


oa  Tin.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  261 

the  systems,  the  uxsieties,  the  pursuits,  which  sinners  are  ever  wont  to  exalt  to  the  seat 
of  God. 

III.  This  inpatwation  of  binneeb  leads  them  to  past  with  evertthinq  in 
OBDEB  TO  OBTAIN  NOTHINO.  Israel  spent  her  treasure,  drained  her  resources ;  and  for 
what  ?  Only  to  endure  the  bitterest  humiliation,  the  most  cruel  disappointment.  There 
was  none,  iu  the  day  of  her  sorrow,  that  could  help,  deliver,  or  comfort  her — none ! 
And  this  was  all  she  obtained  for  her  apostasy.  The  lovers,  the  friends,  whom  she 
"  hired  "  were  unfaithful  and  unhelpful.  So  is  it  with  all  who  put  their  confldonce  in 
men  and  in  princes.  Men  give  up  character  and  friends,  a  good  conscience,  a  bright 
hope ;  they  part  with  all,  and  what  do  they  receive  in  return  ?  The  pleasures  of  sin 
for  a  season ;  but  very  soon  weariness,  disappointment,  and  misery.  And  "  the  end  of 
these  things  is  death." — T. 

Ver.  14. — The  Maker  forgotten.  It  Ib  not  an  uncommon  case  that  one  who  has 
received  very  substantial  benefits  from  a  fellow-man  forgets  his  benefactor,  and, 
when  raised  to  a  higher  position  in  life,  ignores  those  who  by  their  exertions,  sacrifices, 
and  sympathy  have  contributed  to  his  elevation.  We  deem  such  ingratitude  repre- 
hensible and  almost  monstrous.  Yet  how  lightly  do  we  regard  those  who  are  guilty  of 
forgetfulness  of  their  Creator  and  Bedeemer  1  And  yet  this  has  been  a  common  fault 
from  the  days  of  Israel  of  old  down  to  the  present  time. 

I.  The  guilt  of  forgetting  God,  generally  considered.  This  appears  when  it 
is  borne  in  mind:  1.  That  God  is  our  Maker.  To  him  we  owe  our  existence;  and  to 
be  unmindful  of  our  Creator  is  the  grossest  sin.  2.  That  God  has  not  forgotten  ns.  He 
did  not  create  man  to  leave  him  to  himself,  to  live  or  to  die.  On  the  contrary,  his 
care  is  ever  over  us,  his  love  is  always  towards  us.  The  tokens  of  his  remembrances 
are  always  around  us,  in  the  bounties  of  his  providence  and  in  the  proffers  of  his  gospel. 
3.  That  God  has  done  much  to  keep  himself  in  our  memory.  This  is  condescension 
indeed  on  the  part  of  him  who  is  the  theme  of  heaven's  eternal  song ;  whom  they  praise 
day  and  night  in  his  temple.  Yet  on  every  side  we  see  tokens  of  God's  presence, 
we  hear  the  tones  of  his  voice.  He  is  not  far  from  every  one  of  us.  Unnumbered 
suggestions  of  his  presence,  unnumbered  reminders  of  his  Fatherly  love,  aggravate  the 
guilt  of  the  unreflecting  and  ungrateful. 

II.  The  special  guilt  of  forgetting  God  on  the  part  of  Israel  of  old  and  on 
the  part  of  Christians  now.  To  the  children  of  Abraham  God  was  a  covenant  God ; 
he  had  done  great  things  for  their  fathers  and  for  them.  To  forget  One  who  had  the 
hiijhest  claims  upon.their  memory,  their  fidelity,  their  devotion, — ihis  was  guilt  indeed. 
Yet  not  comparable  to  the  guilt  of  those  who  enjoy  the  advantages  secured  to  such  as 
live  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  privileges  of  the  Church. 
How,  if  we  forget  God,  can  we  hope,  can  we  ask,  that  he  should  remember  us  in  mercy 
and  for  good? — ^T. 

Vers.  1,  2. — The  conventional  Church.  "  Set  the  trumpet  to  thy  mouth.  He  shall 
come  as  an  eagle  against  the  house  of  the  Lord,  because  they  have  transgressed  my 
covenant,  and  trespassed  against  my  Law.  Israel  shall  cry  unto  me,  My  God,  we  know 
thee."  "  It  is  not  unusual,"  says  Elzas, "  for  the  prophets,  without  naming  the  invading 
foe,  to  announce  his  approach  (see  Isa.  xiii.).  The  words  are  singularly  abrupt,  and  indi- 
oat«  the  suddenness  of  the  threatened  invader.  '  Like  an  eagle.'  If  this  be  a  prophecy 
against  Judah,  as  some  have  supposed,  then  by  the  eagle  Nebuchadnezzar  is  meant,  who 
is  often  compared  to  the  king  of  birds  (see  Jer.  xlviii. ;  Ezek.  xvii. ;  Dan.  vii.  4).  But 
if  the  prophecy  be  against  Israel,  which  is  the  most  likely,  then  Shalmaneser  King  of 
Assyria  is  intended,  who  for  his  rapidity,  avarice,  rapacity,  and  strength  is  fitly  com- 
pared to  the  royal  bird.  '  The  house  of  the  Lord.'  This  cannot  mean  here  the  temple 
at  Jerusalem,  which  is  otherwise  so  designated,  since  the  threatenings  aie  most  probably 
denounced  against  the  kingdom  of  the  tea  tribes.  It  must  therefore  be  taken  to  denote 
the  people  of  Israel,  the  whole  nation  viewed  as  the  family  of  God."  By  the  "  house  of 
the  Lord,"  therefore,  we  are  to  understand  not  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  nor  the  land  of 
Judsea,  but  Israel  as  a  section  of  the  professed  people  of  God.  The  house  of  the  Lord 
was  a  conventional  Church.  Look  at  the  words  as  presenting  a  conventional  Church  in 
three  aspects. 


264  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  vin.  1— 14 

I.  Ab  endakqebed.  "  He  shall  come  as  an  eagle  agdnst  the  house  of  the  Lord.* 
How  comes  the  eagle  ?  Bavenously,  suddenly,  and  swiftly ;  it  pounces  down  on  its 
prey  with  the  rapidity  of  lightning,  and  fastens  its  talons  on  its  heart.  A  conventional 
Church  is  in  greater  danger  than  any  secular  community.  Why  ?  1.  ItaguOt  U  greater. 
It  has  the  oracles  of  God,  and  it  professes  faith  in  those  oracles,  and  yet  its  heart  is  out 
of  sympathy  with  God  and  his  laws.  "Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazia,"  eto.l  "He  that 
Imoweth  bis  master's  will  and  doeth  it  not,  shall  he  beaten  with  many  stripes."  The 
hell  of  conventional  Churches  will  be,  methinks,  deeper  and  darker  than  any  other  hell 
in  the  black  domain  of  retribution.  2.  Its  influence  i$  more  pemidoui.  Whose 
influence  on  society  is  the  most  baneful — the  man  who  denies  God,  the  man  who 
ignores  him,  or  the  man  that  misrepresents  him  ?  The  last,  I  trow.  The  conventional 
Church  gives  sodety  a  mal-representation  of  God  and  his  religion.  Of  all  the  men  in 
Christendom  there  is  no  man  who  is  a  greater  bane  to  his  race  than  he  who  wears  the 
garb  of  religion  but  is  destitute  of  its  spirit.  Surely  the  eagle  of  retribution  will  wing 
its  way  to  no  class  more  savagely  and  more  quickly  than  to  these  conventional  religionists. 

II.  As  WABNED.  "  Set  the  trumpet  to  thy  mouth."  This  is  Heaven's  command  to 
the  prophet.  Blow  a  blast  that  shall  thrill  every  heart  in  the  vast  congregation  of 
Israel.  Why  sound  the  warning  ?  1.  Because  the  danger  is  tremendous.  It  is  utter 
destruction.  2.  Because  the  danger  is  at  hand.  The  eagle  has  spread  its  pinions,  has 
mounted  the  air,  fastened  his  eye  on  the  victim,  and  is  about  swooping  down  in  fury. 
3.  Because  the  danger  may  he  avoided.  Were  there  no  escape,  why  blow  the  tmmpet  ? 
Why  raise  the  alarm  ?    Thank  God  there  is  escape  as  long  as  life  continuea, 

"  While  the  lamp  holds  ont  to  bun 
The  vilest  sinner  may  return." 

What  is  wanted  now  is  a  ministry  of  warning  to  conventional  Churches.  We  want  bold, 
intrepid,  fiery  prophets,  like  unto  Elijah,  to  sound  the  trumpet  of  alarm  to  all  who  are 
at  ease  in  Zion. 

III.  As  BEFENTANT.  "  Israel  shall  cry  unto  me.  My  God,  we  know  thee."  The 
alarm  has  been  t-aken  and  the  refuge  is  sought.  "  My  God,  we  know  thee."  "  This  is 
life  eternal  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent." 
Oh,  hasten  the  day  when  all  conventional  Churches  shall  be  brought  to  a  deep  and 
experimental  knowledge  of  God  and  his  Son  !  When  this  transpires,  the  dense  cloud 
that  has  concealed  the  sun  of  Christianity  shall  be  swept  away,  and  the  quickening 
beam  shall  fall  on  every  heart.  The  mountain  that  has  obstructed  the  chariot  of 
redemptive  truth  shall  be  levelled  to  a  plain,  and  the  wheels  shall  move  with  lightning 
speed.    "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  shall  have  free  course,  and  be  glorified." — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  3,  4.— The  abandonment  of  good,  and  the  eoneequent  pitrsuit  of  evO.  "Israel 
hath  cast  off  the  thing  that  is  good."    Two  things  are  contained  in  these  verses. 

L  The  abandonment  of  good.  "  Israel  hath  rejected  what  is  good  "  (Elzas).  The 
good  here  undoubtedly  refers  to  the  true  worship  of  the  true  God.  Observe :  1.  That 
true  worship  is  the  "  good  thing  "  for  man.  It  is  good  not  only  because  GK>d  requires 
it,  but  because  it  is  the  necessary  condition  of  spiritual  life,  growth,  harmony,  and 
blessedness.  True  worship  is  the  soul's  only  heaven.  2.  That  this  "good  thing"  man 
sometimes  abandons.  Israel  was  once  a  true  worshipper,  but  the  true  worship  it  had 
now  "  cast  off."  Fallen  angels  were  once  true  worshippers,  and  many  a  human  spirit 
once  inspired  with  true  devotion  has  fallen  into  worldliness  and  idolatry.  Moral  mind 
has  the  power  of  abandoning  the  highest  good.  3.  That  the  abandonment  of  this 
"  good  thing  "  imperils  the  smi.  "  The  enemy  shall  pursue  them."  Moral  good  is  the 
only  effective  safeguard  of  the  spirit ;  when  this  is  given  up  or  "  cast  off,"  all  the  gates 
of  the  soul  are  thrown  open  to  tormenting  fiends.  The  walls  of  the  vineyard  are  broken 
down,  and  it  lies  exposed  to  the  tread  and  ravages  of  every  moral  beasts 

IL  The  consequent  pitbsuit  of  evil.  "  They  have  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  me," 
etc.  The  setting  up  of  kings  here  refers  to  the  founding  of  the  kingdom  by  Jeroboam, 
and  to  the  entire  series  of  Israelitish  kings.  The  kings  of  Israel  were  not  according  to 
Divine  ordination  (1  Kings  xi.  27 — 40).  "  Their  silver  and  their  gold  have  they  made 
them  idols,  that  they  may  be  cut  off."  Prom  these  kings  of  their  own  making  came  the 
s  tting  up  of  the  idolatrous  caif-worship  which  was  started  by  Jeroboam.    Though 


OH.  VIII.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  266 

silver  was  not  used  in  the  construction  of  the  golden  calves,  it  was  employed  to  support 
the  idolatrous  worship.  Thus,  because  they  abandoned  the  "  good  tiling,"  thej  went 
wrong  in  their  politics  and  religion.  They  made  their  own  kings  and  their  own  gods. 
When  once  men  give  up  the  right  they  rush  into  the  wrong.  Let  a  man  go  wrong  in 
relation  tu  God,  and  he  will  go  wrong  in  all  his  relations,  secular  and  spiritual. 

CoKCLUSiON.  There  is  nothing  in  connection  with  the  human  race  of  such  tran- 
scendent importance  as  worship.  The  religious  element  is  the  strongest  of  all  elements ; 
and  men  must  have  a  god  of  some  sort  or  other,  and  their  god  wiU  fashion  their 
chanwter  and  determine  their  destiny. 

•And  yet  from  him  we  turn  away, 

And  fill  our  hearts  with  worthless  thingii 
And  fires  of  avarice  melt  the  clay. 

And  forth  the  idol  springs. 
Ambition's  flame  and  passion's  heat. 
By  wondrous  alchemy,  transmute 
Kaith's  dross,  to  raise  some  gilded  bmta 
To  flU  Jehovah's  seat." 

(J.  H.  Ollneh.) 

D.T. 

Yen.  6—7. — Idolatry.    "Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  east  thee  off."    These  verses 

present  to  us  idolatry  in  five  aspects. 

I.  As  ABHORRENT  TO  Jehovah.  "Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off;  mine 
anger  is  kindled  against  them."  By  a  synecdoche,  Samaria  is  here  used  for  all  the  ten 
tribes.  There  is  no  allusion  in  history  to  any  calf  set  up  in  the  city  of  Samaria,  bat  its 
existence  in  Bethel,  the  most  celebrated  place  of  worship  in  the  kingdom,  is  a  matter  of 
certainty.  "  The  introduction  of  the  worship  of  the  golden  calves  by  Jeroboam,  in 
imitation  of  that  of  Apis  at  Memphis,  and  of  Mnevis  at  Heliopolis,  which  he  must  have 
seen  during  his  residence  in  Egypt,  paved  the  way  for  the  imitation  and  adoption  of  the 
gross  idolatries  x)ractised  by  the  Phoenicians,  Syrians,  and  Chaldeans."  Kow,  against 
this  idolatry  Jehovah  declares  his  anger  "  to  be  kindled."  The  language  is,  of  course, 
anthropomorphic,  and  used  only  to  express  his  unconquerable  opposition  to  idolatry,  the 
foulest  of  all  evils — a  violation  of  his  command,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  god  beside 
me."  It  is  the  abominable  thing  which  he  hates.  The  fact  that  idolatry  is  abhorrent 
to  the  great  God  is  the  grand  reason  why  his  loyal  servants  should  consecrate  them- 
selves to  his  service. 

II.  As  ANTAQONisTic  TO  MOBAL  PUBiTT.  "How  long  shall  they  be  incapable  of 
purity  ?  "  (Elzas).  Where  there  is  not  supreme  love  to  the  supremely  Good,  there  is  no 
soil  in  which  one  solitary  virtue  can  germinate,  there  is  no  foundation  on  which  one 
stone  can  be  laid  for  the  temple  of  goodness.  Hence  the  history  of  idolatry  shows  that 
it  is  inseparably  associated  with  pollution  and  crime.  Idolatry  is  a  fountain  essentially 
corrupt,  and  all  its  streams  are  filthy  and  foul.  Paul's  description  in  the  first  chapter  of 
Romans  is  true  to  universal  fact.  If  the  world  is  ever  to  be  made  virtuous,  it  must 
have  the  one  true  and  living  God  presented  to  it  as  the  one  Object  of  lupreme  love  and 
worship. 

III.  As  AN  onTBAQE  ON  BEA80N.  "  For  from  Israel  was  it  also:  the  workman  made  it; 
therefore  it  is  not  God."  "  It  is  the  greatest  folly,"  says  an  old  author,  "  to  look  upon 
that  which  derives  its  excellency  from  ourselves  as  superior  to  us,  and  that  in  the 
highest  degree ;  to  forsake  God  that  made  us,  and  to  make  that  to  be  s  god  unto  us  that 
we  have  made  ourselves.  If  one  be  maintained  or  raised  by  another,  he  is  expected  to 
be  serviceable  to  him.  In  this  relation  we  stand  to  God,  but  idolatry  makes  men  go 
against  the  very  principles  of  reason.  They  fashion  the  idol  and  yet  account  it  their 
god ;  they  are  made  and  sustained  by  God,  and  yet  forget  him."  And  yet  this  folly 
men  are  constantly  committing  every  day,  not  only  in  heathen  lands,  but  in  Christendom. 
Men  are  everywhere  making  flieir  gods.  Power,  money,  pleasure, fam»,—th^o  be  thy 
gods,  0  England  I 

IV.  Ag  DOOMED  TO  DESTB0CTION.  "  But  the  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be  brokm  in 
pieces."  "All  idolatry  must  be  destroyed"  (Exod.  xxxiv.  13 ;  Deut.  viL  5 ;  Ezek.  xx.  T). 
L  God  ha$  destroyed  idols  by  the  gospel.    2.  God  m  destroying  idols  by  the  gospel 


2W  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  vtn.  1— li, 

"As  I  Hve.saith  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  my  glory."  "In  that  (lay 
a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold,  which  they  made  each  one 
for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and  to  the  hats :  to  go  into  the  clefts  of  the  rocks, 
and  into  the  tops  of  the  ragged  rocks,  for  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  for  the  glory  of  his 
majesty,  when  he  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth." 

V.  As  PRODUCTIVE  or  GREAT  EVIL.  "They  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they  shall 
reap  the  whirlwind,"  etc  "  As  the  husbandman  reaps  the  same  kind  of  grain  which  he 
has  sown,  but  in  far  greater  abundance,  so  he  who  sows  the  wind  shall  have  the  whirl- 
wind to  reap."  "  It  hath  no  stalk."  Nothing  that  can  yield  a  blossom.  "  The  bud 
shall  yield  no  meal."  '"If  they  should  have  a  stalk,  and  that  stalk  should  have  • 
blossom,  that  blossom  shall  yield  no  fruit ;  and  if  there  be  fruit,  the  sower  shall  not  enjoy 
it,  for  strangers  shall  eat  it.  The  Israelites  should  he  unsuccessful  in  all  their  under- 
takings,  and  whatever  partial  gains  they  might  acquire  would  be  eagerly  seized  by  the 
Assyrians"  (Elzas).  1.  All  men  are  sowing.  Every  human  act  is  a  seed.  2.  Some 
are  sowing  worthless  seed — "  wind."  The  worldling,  the  man  of  pleasure,  the  conven- 
tional religionist,  the  speculative  sceptic,  are  all  "sowing  the  wind."  3.  The  more 
worthless  the  seed  sown,  the  more  terrible  the  reaping.  "  Reap  the  whirlwind."  Great 
IB  the  power  of  the  whirlwind.  The  Scripture  describes  it  as  very  great.  In  1  Kings 
xiz.  11  it  "  rent  the  mountains,  and  brake  in  pieces  the  rocks."  Sahdicos  reports  that 
Cambyses'  soldiers  being  at  dinner  in  a  sandy  place,  there  arose  a  whirlwind  and  drove 
the  sand  upon  them,  so  that  it  covered  them  aU.  "What^ioevei  a  mau  suweth,  that 
shall'he  aLio  reap." 

"  near,  Father  I  hear  and  aid  I 
If  I  have  loved  too  well ;  if  I  have  shed, 
In  my  vain  fondness,  o'er  a  mortal  head 
Gifts  on  thy  shrine,  my  Qod,  more  fitly  laid} 
If  I  have  sought  to  live 
But  In  one  liglit,  and  made  a  mortal  eyd 
The  lonely  star  of  my  idolatry; — 
Thou  art  Love ;  oh,  pity  and  forgive  I " 

(Mrs.  Hemans.  I 

D.T. 

Vers.  11, 12. — Perversion  ofmorship.  "  Because  Ephralm  hath  mnAe  many  altars  to 
sin."  Israi;!  was  to  have  only  one  altar,  and  that  in  the  place  where  the  Lord  would 
reveal  his  Name  (Deut.  xii.  5).  But,  instead  of  that,  Ephraim  had  built  a  number  of 
altars  in  different  places  to  multiply  the  sin  of  idolatry,  and  thereby  heap  more  and 
more  guilt  upon  itself  (Delitzsch).  The  passage  liads  us  to  notice  the  perversion  of 
worship.  This  is  one  of  the  oldest,  the  most  prevalent,  and  most  baneful  sins  amongst 
mankind.  Jlen  have  perverted  worship,  not  only  by  making  false  gods,  but  by  making 
false  altars  for  the  true  God.  There  is  only  one  altar  in  true  worship,  and  that  altar  is 
Christ  (Heb.  xiii.  10).  The  text  leads  us  to  make  two  remarks  iu  relation  to  false 
worship. 

I,  It  is  a  great  sin.  1,  It  is  a  very  propagative  sin.  "  Ephraim  hath  made  many 
altars."  "  If  men  leave  the  rule,"  says  an  old  author,  "  they  know  not  where  to  stay ; 
hence  the  multiplying  of  things  thus  amongst  the  Papists — five  hundred  altars  in  some 
one  temple."  How  sublimely  antagonistic  the  Jews  were  to  the  introduction  of  any 
altar  but  one  (Josh.  xxii.  11)  1  But  now  they  had  "  many."  Once  admit  a  wrong  thing 
in  woiship,  and  that  one  thing  will  multiply  itself;  superstition  will  give  it  fertility. 
The  llomish  Church  is  a  sad  illustration  of  this,  and  the  Anglican  Church  in  some 
sections  is  multiplying  examples.  2.  It  is  a  self-punishing  sin.  "  Altars  shall  be  unto 
him  to  sin."  The  idea  probably  is,  "  As  you  have  gone  on  persisting  to  multiply  altari 
contrary  to  my  will,  I  will  let  you  alone  ;  you  shall  go  on.  Your  altars  shall  be  a  sin  to 
yon."  That  is,  thus  seeing  they  will  have  them,  they  shall  have  them ;  they  shall 
have  enough  of  them.  Let  them  go  on  in  their  ways ;  let  them  multiply  their  sin.  They 
make  a  great  deal  of  stir  for  it,  and  have  it  they  must ;  they  refuse  to  see  the  light ;  they 
are  prejudiced  against  the  way  of  God's  worship.  Let  them  have  their  desires ;  let 
them  have,  saith  God,  governors  to  establish  by  their  authority,  and  teachers  to  defend 
by  their  subtle  arguments,  what  they  wish  for.    They  multiply  altars  to  sin,  and  they 


CH.  vni.  1— M.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  267 

shall  be  to  sin,  even  to  barden  them ;  their  hearts  are  set  upon  them,  and  they  will 
have  them  and  love  them,  and  they  shall  be  hardened  in  their  heart's  desire  ill  what 
is  evil.  And  as  it  shall  he  to  them  for  sin,  so  it  shall  be  to  them  for  misery,  the  fruit 
of  sin  ;  for  so  sin  is  taken  very  frequently  in  Scripture  for  the  fruit  of  sin.  They  will 
have  them  to  sin,  and  they  shall  find  in  them  the  fruit  of  sin — misery.  The  text 
leads  us  to  remark  that — 

II.  It  is  a  sin  against  great  light.  "  I  have  written  to  him  the  great  things 
of  my  Law,  but  they  were  counted  as  a  strange  thing."  They  could  not  say  they 
sinned  in  ignorance.  God  gave  them  directions  most  concise  and  abundant  concerning 
the  nature  and  object  of  true  worship.  Some  translate  the  words, "  I  may  prescribe  my 
laws  to  them  by  myriads ;  they  will  treat  it  as  a  strange  thing."  1.  God  has  given  us 
laws  concerning  worship.  2.  Those  laws  are  oft  repeated.  By  myriads  or  by  thousands. 
We  have  "  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept."  3.  These  oft-repeated  laws  leave 
false  worshippers  without  exctise.—D.  T. 

Ver.  14. — Neither  the  religion  nor  security  of  a  nation  to  te  Judged  hy  appearances. 
"  For  Israel  hath  forgotten,"  etc.  The  "  temples  "  referred  to  here  are  the  idolatrous 
temples  which  Israel  had  built  after  the  models  of  those  built  by  the  Syro-phoenicians  ; 
and  the  "  fenced  cities  "  refers  to  those  fortified  places  which  they  had  erected  against 
foreign  invaders.  The  words  imply  that  neither  the  temples  nor  the  "  fenced  cities  " 
were  any  proof  either  of  their  religion  or  their  security. 

I.  The  multiplication  of  temples  is  no  infallible  pboof  of  the  growth  jf 
RELIGION  IN  A  COUNTRY.  Temples  were  now  multiplied  in  Israel.  And  the  reason 
assigned  is  forgetfulness  of  their  Maker.  When  strangers  visit  England  and  witness  the 
number  of  our  churches  of  all  sects,  and  measures  of  beauty  and  size,  their  first 
impression  would  be — What  a  religious  people  these  English  are !  But  when  we  think  of 
the  moral  causes  that  often  lead  to  the  erection  of  temples,  they  rather  prove  our  for- 
getfulness of  God.  1.  There  is  greed.  Churches  are  sometimes  built  as  an  investiuent. 
2.  There  is  spite.  One  or  two,  or  more,  have  received  a  grievance  at  the  neighbouring 
Church,  and,  inspired  by  spite,  they  set  to  the  erection  of  another.  3.  There  is  seotism. 
Episcopalians,  Wesleyans,  Congregationalists,  all  seek  to  rival  each  other  in  this 
respect ;  so  Aat  the  multiplication  of  temples,  we  fear,  must  not  be  taken  as  a  proof  of 
the  growth  of  religion. 

II.  The  INCREASE  OF  NATIONAIi  DEFENCES  IS  NO  PROOF  OF  THE  INCBEASE  OF  NATIONAL 

SECUEITY.  "  I  will  send  a  fire  upon  his  cities."  When  noble  foreigners  visit  our  shores, 
we,  with  our  national  vanity,  seek  to  impress  them  with  the  greatness  of  our  national 
defences.  We  exhibit  our  fleets,  our  standing  armies,  our  fortifications;  we  have  our 
naval  and  military  reviews.  What  fools  are  they  who  think  that  national  security  is  in 
these  things  1  The  safety  of  a  people  is  in  the  moral  excellence  of  their  character  and 
the  guardianship  of  Heaven.; — D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — Doomsday.  The  trumpet  sounds  the  approach  of  judgment.  It  is 
judgment  which  begins  at  the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).  The  "eagle"  is  the 
Assyrian;  in  later  times  the  Roman  (cf.  Deut.  xxviii.  49).  The  cause  of  the  judgment 
is  that  constantly  insisted  on :  "  They  have  transgressed  my  covenant,  and  trespassed 
against  my  Law  "  (ver.  1). 

L  Knowledge  of  God  through  judgment.  (Ver.  2.)  In  the  day  of  doom  Israel 
would  cry  to  God,  "  My  God,  we  know  thee,  we  Israel."  So  at  the  last  judgment :  1. 
Tlu>se  who  have  hitherto  denied  Ood  will  be  forced  to  acknowledge  him.  Their  startled  cry, 
when  it  is  too  late,  will  be,  "  My  God,  we  know  thee."  They  will  know  him  to  their 
cost.  They  will  no  longer  be  able  to  disguise  to  themselves  the  fact  of  his  existence 
or  the  reality  of  his  power.  No  more  pretence  of  ignorance,  no  more  cavilling,  no 
more  blasphemous  defiance.  2.  Those  who  have  hitherto  forgotten  Ood  will  he  forced  'o 
remember  him.  They  will  experience  a  rude  awakening  from  the  careless  security  in 
which  they  have  been  living.  They  will  find  God's  words  to  be  true,  his  warnings 
real,  the  "  wrath  to  come  "  a  dreadful  certainty.  It  will  be  impossible  longer  to  put 
off  reflection,  or  to  shut  out  thoughts  of  him  with  whom  they  have  to  do.  3,  Those 
who  have  hitherto  slighted  God's  friendship  will  he  eager  to  make  friends  with  him. 
They  will  address  him  as  their  God  ("  My  God  "),  will  recall  past  knowledge  of  him, 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  Tin.  1— U. 


will  urge  any  pleas  which  they  think  will  gain  them  mercy.  They  are  as  anxious  now 
to  make  themselves  out  God's  friends  as  formerly  they  were  to  have  nothing  to  do 
with  him.  In  times  of  a£Siction  or  peril,  as  well  as  on  the  approach  of  death  or  judg- 
ment, sinners  show  themselves  very  willing  to  call  on  God.  "  Many  will  say  unto  me 
in  that  day,  Lord,  Lord,"  etc.  (Matt.  vii.  22).  Such  pleas,  however,  will  not  avail  Tije 
repentance  is  too  late,  and  it  is  not  sincere.  Israel  would  gain  nothing  by  being  of 
the  seed  of  Jacob  (of.  Matt.  iii.  9). 

IL  Ah  invariable  sequence.  (Ver.  3.)  Israel,  having  cast  off  good,  would  be 
pursued  by  the  enemy.  The  sequence  is  short,  simple,  certain.  It  is  as  sure  as  any 
law  df  nature.  1.  Antecedent.  "Israel  hath  cast  off  good."  In  every  sense  Israel 
had  done  this.  The  nation  had  (1)  cast  out  the  knowledge  of  good  (ch.  iv.  6) ;  (2) 
cast  off  the  practice  of  good  (ch.  iv.  1,  7 ;  v.  4 ;  vi.  7 ;  vii.  1,  2) ;  (3)  despised  the  hope 
of  good,  the  blessing  and  salvation  promised  on  condition  of  obedience.  2.  Consequent. 
"  The  enemy  shall  [or, '  let  the  enemy ']  pursue  him."  The  enemy  pursues  those  who 
cast  off  good.  (1)  Conscience  pursues.  The  sinner  cannot  escape  from  its  rebukes, 
Ecourgings,  and  pursuing  memories.  (2)  The  laws  of  nature  pursue.  Nature  is  so 
constituted  that  its  laws  are  on  the  side  of  the  virtuous,  and  against  those  that  do  evil. 
Sin  is  followed  by  inevitable  natural  penalties.  (3)  Divine  justice  pursues.  There  is, 
even  in  this  life,  a  providential  retriliution  which  the  sinner  seldom  escapes  (cf.  Deut. 
xxviii.).  In  any  case  there  is  a  final  judgment,  when  every  one  shall  receive  for  the 
things  done  in  the  body,  according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  good  or  bad  (2 
Cor.  V.  10). 

III.  Eepeesentativb  tbansgbebsiok.  (Ver.  4.)  Israel's  kings  were  not  of  God. 
They  had  been  set  up  without  consulting  God,  and  had  ruled  in  disregard  of  God's 
will.  The  worship  of  the  calves  was  in  direct  opposition  to  Divine  commandment. 
It  had  its  ground  in  political  expediency.  This  lays  bare  to  us  the  essence  of  ungod- 
liness. Ungodliness :  1.  Waives  all  regard  to  Ood's  will  in  the  shaping  of  life.  It 
plans  existence  irrespectively  of  God.  Whatever  the  ungodly  man  "  sets  uji,"  it  is  done 
"  without  God,"  He  seeks  an  independent  being.  2.  Mahes  gods  for  itself  out  of 
Ood's  gifts.  "Of  their  silver  and  gold  have  they  made  them  idols."  The  world 
becomes  its  god.    3.  Z%e  end— "  cut  off."— J.  0. 

Yen.  6 — 7. — Broken  god$.  Samaria  would  now  discover  the  folly  of  trusting  in  her 
calf. 

I.  Sahabia's  OALT.  (Vers.  6, 6.)  1.  The  fatuity  of  making  it,  "  From  Israel  was 
it  also :  the  workman  made  it ;  therefore  it  is  not  God  "  (ver.  6).  Idolatry  is  a  huge 
absurdity.  That  cannot  be  a  god  which  we  make  with  our  own  hands  (cf.  Isa.  xl. 
18 — 20 ;  xliv.  9 — 20).  As  foolish  is  it  to  make  a  god  of  wealth,  position,  reputation, 
or  anything  created  by  man's  effort.  2.  The  folly  of  trusting  in  it.  "  Thy  calf,  0 
Samaria,  hath  cast  thee  off"  (ver.  6) ;  "  The  calf  of  Samaria  shall  be  broken  in  pieces  " 
(ver.  6).  (1)  It  could  not  help.  (2)  It  was  helpless  to  save  itself.  Anything  earthly 
that  man  relies  on  will  prove  a  vain  help  when  God  wills  its  overthrow,  or  the  over- 
throw of  him  who  depends  on  it.  3.  The  reward  of  serving  it.  "  Mine  anger  is 
kindled  against  them  "  (ver.  5).  God's  anger  was  kindled  (1)  at  the  idolatry ;  (2)  at 
the  sins  connected  with  the  idolatry ;  (3)  at  the  resistance  shown  to  the  means  used  for 
the  nation's  spiritual  recoveiy.  "How  long  will  it  be  ere  they  attain  to  innocency  ?" 
The  effects  of  this  kindling  of  God's  anger  are  described  in  ver.  7.  One  effect  would  be 
the  destruction  of  their  idol  (ver.  6). 

II.  Sik's  PENALTIES.  (Ver.  7.)  Retribution  is  set  forth  under  two  images.  1.  The 
mnd  and  whirlwind.  "  They  have  sown  the  wind,  and  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind." 
"  The  wind  is  an  image  of  vain  human  efforts,  from  which  ruin  is  developed',  as  natur- 
ally as  the  wind  becomes  a  tempest "  (Schmoller).  The  image  suggests :  (1)  "The  unsub- 
stantiality  of  sinful  objects  of  pursuit.  Substanceless  as  wind  (cC  ch.  xii.  1).  (2) 
That  the  sinner  is  not  his  own  master.  Wind  is  an  image  of  the  hurrying  force  of 
passion.  The  sinner's  passions  hurry  him  along.  (3)  That  sin  develops  the  elements 
of  its  own  retribution.  The  sowing  is  congruous  with  the  reaping.  As  the  sinner  is 
hurried  along  by  sin,  so  he  must  submit  to  be  swept  along  by  God's  judgments.  As  he 
lived  an  unsubstantial  life,  he  must  submit  to  have  the  unsubstantiality  of  hia  life 
revealed  bjr  the  tempst  that  lays  it  in  ruins.    2.  Pie  Ucnted  grain.    "  It  h«th  no 


OH.  viiL  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  269 

etallc,"  eto.  The  thonght  here  Is  that  of  designs  frustrated  at  every  stage.  It  appears 
first  as  if  there  would  be  no  stall:.  Then  such  stallc  as  there  is  yields  no  fruit.  Or  il, 
perchance,  there  should  be  any,  it  is  devoured  by  strangers.  Thus,  life  without  God 
proves  to  be  but  deceptive  show,  promise  without  perrorraance,  effort  without  result. 
It  has  to  reckon  with  Qod's  frown  at  every  stage.  He  may  nip  its  designs  in  tbeii- 
inception.  He  may  thwart  them  a  stage  further  on.  He  may  prevent  them  from 
attaining  final  success.  Or,  if  success  be  permitted,  it  is  only  that  he  may  make  their 
overthrow  more  striking  in  the  end  (Ps.  IxziiL  18 ;  cf.  oh.  ix.  11, 16). — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — ^10. — Israel  among  the  OentHee.  We  have  here  the  Nemesis  of  a  false  desire 
of  independence. 

I.  MiNOLIKa  WITH  THE  WORLD  LEADS  TO  ABSOEPTION  BY  THE  WORLD.      (Ver.  8.)      It 

was  the  complaint  against  Ephraim  that  he  had  mixed  himself  among  the  people 
(cb.  vii.  8).  He  was  not  content  to  remain  separate,  as  God  had  ordained.  He  must 
nave  his  freedom  (of.  Luke  xv.  11 — 13).  We  now  see  the  end  of  this :  "  Israel  is  swal- 
lowed np."  He  was :  1,  Absorbed  by  the  world.  The  Gentiles  got  wholly  the  pos- 
session of  him.  It  is  so  spiritually  with  those  who  try  to  serve  both  God  and  mammon. 
The  attempt  to  serve  two  masters  proves  vain.  The  world  gains  ground  in  the  heart ;  God 
loses  ground.  By-and-by  the  world  has  the  whole.  The  backslider  is  "swallowed 
up "  (cf.  1  Tim.  vi.  9,  10 ;  2  Tim,  iv.  10),  2,  An  object  of  contempt  to  the  world. 
"  Among  the  Gentiles  as  a  vessel  wherein  there  is  no  pleasure."  The  world  in  its  heart 
secretly  despises  those  whom  it  has  got  under  its  influence,  having  turned  them  away 
from  God.  It  holds  them  in  contempt.  Two  kinds  of  men  the  world  has  respect  for — 
its  own  kind,  and  the  thoroughly  godly.  It  has  no  respect  at  all  for  the  third  something, 
that  tries  to  be  both  and  yet  is  nedther — ^the  trimmer,  the  compromiser,  the  backslider. 
Nor,  once  it  has  them  in  its  power,  is  it  slow  to  show  its  contempt  for  them. 

II.  The  desire  to  be  independent  of  God  leads  to  dependence  on  the  world. 
(Ver.  9.)  Israel  went  up  to  Assyria— "a  wild  ass  alone  by  itself."  We  understand 
the  figure  to  allude  to  Israel's  untractahle  spirit  and  desire  of  indopendeuce.  The 
nation  must,  at  all  costs,  be  rid  of  God's  yoke,  and  go  out  "  alone  by  itself,"  The  use 
it  makes  of  its  independence,  however,  is  to  go  to  Assyria,  The  motive  is  not,  of 
course,  to  have  Assyria's  yoke  imposed  on  it  instead  of  God's;  but  this  is  the  result. 
Seeking  Independence  of  Qod,  it  sinks  into  dependence  on  Assyria,  Herein  is  imaged 
the  end  of  all  attempts  at  a  false  independence,  1.  True  freedom  for  man — true 
independence — lies  in  loyal  acceptance  of  the  ride  of  Ood.  This  gives  inward  eman- 
cipation and  superiority  to  the  seductions  of  the  world.  2,  Renouncing  this,  the  soul 
sink§  into  a  dependence  on  finite  things,  alien  to  its  nature.  It  falls  into  bondage.  It 
exchanges  God's  service  for  a  worse.  It  is  ruled  by  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life  (1  John  ii.  16),  The  prodigal,  leaving  his  father's  house 
for  freedom,  ended  by  joining  himself  to  a  citizen  in  the  "far  country,"  who  sent  him 
into  his  fields  to  feed  swine  (Luke  xv,  15, 16). 

III.  Traffickino  with  the  world  leads  to  oppression  bt  the  world.  (Ver.  10.) 
Israel  trafficked  with  the  world  for  its  favour — "  hired  among  the  nations ; "  the  result 
being  that  it  was  given  up  by  God  to  be  oppressed  by  the  world — "  the  burden  of  the 
king  of  princes."  The  stages  are  (1)  sinful  desire  towards  the  world — "hired  lovers" 
(ver.  9);  (2)  propitiation  of  the  world,  by  gifts,  alliances,  etc. ;  (3)  absorption  by  the 
world  end  subjection  to  the  world,  as  already  described ;  (4)  oppression  by  the  world. 
This  power  of 'Assyria  over  Israel  was :  1.  Divinely  given.  "Now  will  I  gather  them." 
It  was  God,  and  no  one  else,  who  gave  this  people  into  the  hands  of  the  foreigners,  2. 
Distressing.  Israel  would  suffer  much  in  exile.  Her  burden  would  be  heavy;  her 
numbers  would  be  diminished.  The  world  is  a  terrible  tyrant  over  those  whom  it  gels 
in  its  power,  3.  Equitable.  We  trace  here  the  same  proportionateness  between  sin 
and  punishment  as  falls  so  frequently  to  be  noticed.  They  voluntarily  "hired"  among 
the  nations;  now  tiiey  are  oppressed  by  Gentile  tribute.— -J.  0. 

Van.  11 — ^14. — Religum  hecome  tin.  Israel's  holiest  things  becamt  tla  to  them 
through  their  disregard  of  God's  commandments. 

L  The  altar  become  sin.  (Ver.  11.)  The  law  required  that  there  should  be  but 
uno  altar,  |ad  that  in  the  place  where  God  had  put  his  Name  (Deut.  xii.).    E^'hraim 


270  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  viii.  1—14. 

disregarding  this  command,  multiplied  altars,  and  so  committed  sin.  The  worship  at 
local  altars  was  at  most  but  tolerated  in  the  days  of  the  judges,  of  Samuel,  and  the 
early  kings,  in  consideration  of  the  unsettled  state  of  the  nation  (1  Kings  iii,  2).  It 
became  sin  once  a  house  had  been  built  for  God's  worship.  Had  it  been  necessary,  after 
the  division  of  the  nation,  to  appoint  a  district  centre  for  Israel,  God  would  have 
directed  the  people  in  the  choice  of  one.  Thoy,  however,  neither  desired  nor  sought 
for  guidance,  but  organized  their  worship  in  their  own  way,  blending  with  it  idolatrous 
rites,  and,  beside  Jehovah's  altars,  reared  altars  to  idols  (ch.  x,  1).  They  thus  sinned, 
both  in  the  number  of  their  altars  and  in  the  use  they  put  them  to.  Accordingly, 
God  declares  that  these  very  altars,  the  things  whereby  they  professed  to  worship  him, 
would  be  imputed  to  them  for  sin.  We  are  taught :  1.  That  God  claims  to  regulate 
his  own  worship.  2.  That  wanton  departures  from  the  rule  he  has  given  is  imputed  as 
transgression.  3.  That  will-worship  is  not  acceptable  to  God  (Col.  iL  23),  4.  That 
we  cannot  condone  for  disobedience  in  the  matter  of  worship  by  either  the  number  or 
magnificence  of  our  services. 

II.  Thb  Law  become  sin.  (Yer.  12.)  Qod  had  given  Israel  a  Law,  the  myriad 
precepts  of  which  would  have  guided  them  aright  in  every  situation  of  life ;  but  this 
Law  Israel  had  "counted  as  a  strange  thing."  The  Law,  which  was  "holy,  and  just, 
and  good,"  became  sin  to  the  people  through  their  neglect  of  it.  Consiiler :  1.  The 
dignity  of  the  Law.  It  is  God's  Law  (*'  my  Law  ") ;  one,  yet  many.  Single  in  its  prin- 
ciple— "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.  (cf.  Deut.  vi.  5)— yet  manifold  in  its 
applications ;  branching  out  into  an  infinite  multiplicity  of  precepts,  and  extending  to 
every  detail  of  life.  2.  Tht  accessibility  of  the  Law,  God  had,  to  secure  its  being  kept 
in  remembrance,  put  it  in  written  form.  The  turn  sometimes  given  to  these  words, 
"  /  would  have  written  to  him,"  etc.,  is  meaningless  in  the  connection.  The  prophet 
is  dealing  with  what  Ephraim  has  done,  not  with  what  he  might  have  done  under 
certain  conceivable  circumstances  in  which  he  was  never  placed.  The  passage  is  a 
testimony  to  the  existence  of  a  written  Law.  We  should  remember  our  own  privileges 
in  the  possession  of  a  written  revelation.  3.  The  neglect  of  the  Law.  Ephraim  per- 
mitted this  Law,  great,  wonderful,  and  holy  as  it  was,  fitted  to  instruct  and  guide  him 
in  the  way  of  life,  to  be  as  "a  strange  thing"  unto  him.  He  forbore  to  study  it. 
He  neglected  to  practise  it.  The  very  Law  thus  redounded  to  his  condemnation. 
How  many  act  in  a  similar  way  with  the  Bible!  They  possess  it,  but  leave  it 
unopened,  unstudied.  The  unread  Book  becomes  sin  to  them.  It  will  rise  against 
them  in  the  judgment. 

HI.  Sacrifices  becoue  bin.  (Yer.  13.)  As  seen  before,  sacrifices  will  not  be 
accepted  by  God  as  a  substitute  for  obedience  (ch.  vi,  6 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  22).  Without  the 
light  spirit  in  the  offerer,  they  become  as  mere  "flesh,"  in  which  God  takes  no  pleasure. 
The  sacred  thing  becomes  a  thing  common.  Instead  of  atoning  for  iniquity,  the  sacri- 
fices became  themselves  iniquity.  They  were  imputed  for  sin.  Neither  the  number 
nor  magnitude  of  them  could  avert  the  wrath  that  was  decreed.  "  They  shall  return 
to  Egypt,"  t.«.  to  a  new  Kgypt,  to  Assyria. 

IV.  Temples  become  sin.  (Yer.  14.)  As  sacrifices  cannot  be  taken  instead  of 
obedience,  so  temples  cannot  be  accepted  as  a  substitute  for  godliness.  Israel  "  built 
temples,"  but  had  "  forgotten  his  Maker."  The  very  temples  thus  became  as  sin.  The 
building  of  temples  and  the  lavishing  of  outward  adornment  upon  them  often  proceeds 
the  more  rapidly  that  God  himself  has  been  forgotten.  Worship  becomes  externalism. 
The  outward  is  made  the  most  of,  as  if  to  condone  for  the  want  of  the  "inward.  It  is 
not,  however,  outward  temples  that  God  primarily  desires,  but  the  temples  of  humble 
and  contrite  spirits  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).    The  former  without  the  latter  are  sin. 

V.  Fenced  cities  become  sin.  (Ver.  14.)  It  is  added  that  Judah  had  multiplied 
fenced  cities.  As  sacrifices  were  substituted  for  obedience,  and  temples  were  substituted 
for  godliness,  so  fenced  cities  got  to  be  put  instead  of  God  himself.  The  sin  lay  in 
looking  away  from  the  pledged  Divine  help  to  mere  earthly  defences.  Those  who  do 
this  are  left  at  last  to  prove  the  worthlessuess  of  their  defences.  God  would  send  a 
fire  upon  the  cities,  and  it  would  devour  the  palaces.  Human  strength  is  no  protection 
in  the  absence  of  God's  help;  it  is  equally  powerless  to  protect  against  Qod'i 
judgments. — J,  0. 


CB.  IX.  1—17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


271 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX, 


Ver«.  1 — ^9  contain  a  warning  against 
aeourity  arising  from  temporary  prosperity. 

Ver.  1. — Bejoioe  not,  0  Israel,  for  joy,  as 
otiier  people.  The  occasion  on  which  the 
prophet  penned  this  section  was  some  idola- 
trous merry-making  in  connection  with 
harrest,  and  not  any  change  of  political 
situation.  (1)  The  literal  rendering  of  the 
first  clause  is,  rejoice  not  un/o  exultation,  or 
exceedingly,  as  the  same  expression  is  trans- 
lated in  Job  iii.  22 ;  it  is  thus  climactic.  (2) 
The  old  versions  take  el-gil  as  imperative,  and 
read  h^i  thns:  firjSl  tbppdvov,  equivalent 
to  "  nor  make  merry ; "  and  the  Vulgate  has 
noli  exultare  ;  but  aZ  is  constructed  with  the 
future,  not  jrith  the  imperative.  Again, 
some  read  b'  instead  of  i",  and  so  render, 
"  among  the  peoples,"  the  words  being  ad- 
dressed, not  to  Israel  in  exile,  but  still  resi- 
dent in  their  own  land.  For  thou  hast  gone 
a-whcring  bom  thy  God,  thou  hast  loved  a 
reward  upon  every  oom-floor.  (1)  Accord- 
ing to  this,  which  is  the  common  rendering, 
the  clause  with  hi  assigns  a  reason  for  their 
foregoing  auch  joy.  But  (2)  Ewald  and 
others  translate  by  **  that  or  for  that  thou 
hast  committed  whoredom,"  understanding 
this  clause  to  express  the  object  of  their  joy. 
We  prefer  the  former,  for  their  faithlessness 
and  foul  idolatry  were  sufScient  reasons  to 
prevent  Israel  indulging  in  the  joy  of  har- 
vest. The  blessings  of  the  harvest  were 
regarded  by  them  as  rewards  for  the  wor- 
ship of  their  idol-gods,  in  other  words,  as 
gifts  from  Baalim  and  Asbtaroth  or  other 
idols,  and  thus  as  ethnan,  a  harlot's  hire; 
not  as  tokens  and  pledges  of  the  favour  of 
Jehovah. 

Ver.  2. — The  floor  and  the  vine-press  shall 
not  feed  them,  and  the  new  wine  shall  fail 
in  her.  Thus  Israel  was  not  to  enjoy  the 
blessings  of  the  harvest ;  the  com  and  oil 
and  new  wine,  or  com  and  wine,  would  not 
prove  as  abundant  as  they  expected,  or 
plenty  would  be  succeeded  by  scarcity;  or, 
rather,  the  people  would  be  prevented 
enjoying  the  abundant  produce  of  their  land 
in  consequence  of  being  carried  away  cap- 
tive to  Assyria,  as  seems  implied  in  the 
following  verse.  The  floor  and  press — 
whether  wine-press,  or  rather  oil-press,  m 
the  mention  of  new  wine  follows — are  put 
for  their  contents  by  a  common  figure  of 
speech.  The  expression,  "fail  in  her,"  is 
literally,  "  lie  to  her,"  and  has  many  paral- 
lels; as,  "The  labour  of  the  olive  shall 
fjail  [mar,  is,  •  lie'],"  and  Horace's  "  fundus 
mendax,"*  equivalent  to  "  a  farm  tliat  belies 
bis  hopes." 


Ver.  8.— They  Aall  net  dwell  in   the 

Lord's  land;  but  Ephraim  shall  retnm  to 
£gypt,  and  they  shall  eat  unclean  things  in 
Assyria.  The  Lord's  land  was  Canaan 
which  Jehovah  chose  to  dwell  there  b.v 
visible  symbol  of  the  Shechinah-glory,  and 
which  he  gave  to  Israel  as  his  people.  Is- 
rael expected  to  have  it  for  a  permanent 
place  of  abode,  but  that  hope  was  frustrated 
by  their  sin.  The  remaining  clauses  of  the 
verse  may  be  understood  either  (1)  that 
Ephraim  would  return  to  Egypt  to  obtain 
auxiliiiries,  but  to  no  purpose, — for  they 
would  be  carried  away  captive  and  be  com- 
pelled to  eat  unclean  things  in  the  land  of 
Assyria;  or  (2)  the  prophet  threatens  that 
some  of  them  would  go  as  exiles  into  Egypt, 
and  others  of  them  into  Assyria.  This 
latter  explanation  is  much  to  be  preferred  ; 
while  with  regard  to  Egypt  the  threatening 
thus  understood  would  re-echo  an  older  pro- 
phecy in  Dent,  xxviii.  68,  "  The  Lord  shall 
bring  thee  into  Egypt  again  with  ships,  by 
the  way  whereof  I  spake  unto  thee,  Thou 
shalt  see  it  no  more  again:  and  there  ye 
shall  be  sold  unto  your  enemies  for  bondmen 
and  bondwomen,  and  no  man  shall  buy 
you."  In  Assyria  also  they  would  be 
obliged  to  eat  things  ceremonially  unclean, 
as  it  would  be  impossible  to  conform  to  the 
requirements  of  the  Law,  according  to  which 
the  eating  of  certain  animals  was  prohibited. 
There  is  yet  (3)  another  interpretation, 
which  takes  Assyria  to  be  the  place  of  exile, 
whilts  Egypt  figuratively  represents  the 
condition  of  that  exile,  namely,  a  state  of 
hard  bondage  and  sore  oppression,  such  as 
Israel  endured  in  Egypt  in  the  dajs  of  yore. 
Vers.  4,  5. — ^They  shall  not  offer  wine 
offerings  to  the  Lord,  neither  shall  they  be 
pleasing  unto  him :  their  sacrifices  shaU  be 
unto  them  as  the  bread  of  mourners;  aU 
that  eat  thereof  shall  be  polluted.  Having 
predicted  their  inability  to  obseive  tiij 
ritual  distinctions  between  clean  and  un- 
clean, whi  h  the  Law  prescribed,  whether 
from  the  tyranny  of  their  oppressors  or  from 
scarcity,  or  from  the  absence  of  sanctifica- 
tion  by  the  presentation  of  the  firstfruits, 
the  prophet  proceeds  to  predict  their  ols- 
satioii  altogether.  Such  is  the  prophet's 
picture  of  their  miserable  position  in  As- 
syria. It  is  aptly  remarked  by  Grotius  that 
"they  failed  to  pour  out  libations  to  the 
Lord  when  they  could;  now  the  time  shall 
come  when  they  may  wish  to  make  such 
libations,  but  cannot."  According  to  the 
Massoretio  punctuation  and  the  common 
rendering,  (1)  which  is  that  of  the  Authoriztd 
Version,  the  people  themselves  are  the  sub- 
ject of  the  second  verb.    They  were  neitlicr 


272 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  IX.  1 — 17. 


able  to  oflEer  drink  offerings,  a  part  for  the 
whole  of  the  meat  offerings  and  unbloody 
oblations ;  nor,  if  they  did,  could  they  hope 
for  acceptance  for  them  away  from  the  sanc- 
tuary and  its   central  altar.     (2)   Hitzig 
supplies  niskeyhens,  their  drink  offerings, 
from  the  foregoing  clause,  as  subject  to  the 
verb  of  the  following  one,  and  the  veib  is  ex- 
plained by  some  in  the  sense  of  "  mire."    If 
(3)  we  neglect  the  tegholta,  and  make  zibli- 
eheliem  the  subject,  the  meaning  is  clearer, 
and  the  contrast  between  the  unbloody  and 
bloody  offerings  more  obvious  j  thus :  "  They 
■will  not    pour   out   libations  of  wine  to 
Jehovah,  nor  will  their  sacrifices  [equiva- 
lent   to  'bloody   oblations']  please   him," 
that  is  to  say,  not  such  as  were  actually 
offered,  but  such  as  they  might  feel  dis- 
posed to  offer.    The  same  noun  may  be  re- 
peated in  next  clause;  thus, their  sacrifices, 
or  rather  slaughtered  meats,  are  unto  him 
as  bread  of  mourners,  or,  what  is  better, 
their  food  (supplied  from  Jc  lechem)  shall 
le    unto    ftem    like    bread    of   mottrneri. 
Mournen'  bread  is  that  eaten  at  a  funeral 
feast,  or  meal  by  persons  mourning  for  the 
dead,  and  wliich  was  legally  unclean,  since 
a  corpse  defiled  the  house  in  which  it  was 
and  all  who  entered  it  for  seven  days,  as  we 
read  in  Numb.  xix.  14,  "  This  is  the  law, 
when  a  man  dietb  in  a  tent :  all  that  come 
into  the  tent,  and  all  that  is  in  the  tent, 
shall  be  unclean  seven  days."    Of  course, 
all  who  partook  of  the  food  would  be  pol- 
luted ;  80  with  that  of  Israel  in  exile,  being 
uusanctifled  by  ,the  offering  of  flrstfruits. 
For  their  bread  for  their  soul  shall  not  come 
into  the  house  of  the  Lord.    "  Their  bread 
for  their  Boul,"  that  is,  for  appeasing  their 
appetite,  whatsoever  their  sotu  lusted  after, 
or  bread  for  the  preservation  of  their  life, 
would  not  come  into  the  house  of  the  Lord 
to  be  sanctified  by  representative  offerings. 
What  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day,  and  in 
the  day  of  the  feast  of  the  Lordt    On  suob 
occasion!  they   would  feel  the  misery  of 
their  position  most  keenly.    Away  in  a  far 
foreign  land,  without  temple  and  without 
ritual,  they  would  bewail  the  loss  of  their 
annual  celebrations,  their  national  festivals 
and  religious   solemnities — those    holiday- 
times  of  general  joy  and  spiritual  gladness. 
The  distinction  between  moed  and  ehag  is 
variously  given.   (1)  By  Grotius  and  Roaen- 
mttller  nuSd  i»  referred  to  one  of  the  three 
annual    feasts — Passover,    Pentecost,    and 
Tabemaoles;  and  ehag  to  any  of  the  other 
feasts,  including  the  new  moon.    (2)  Others 
restrict  diag  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  or 
harvest  festival,  the  most  joyous  of  them 
all.     Keil  makes   the   words  synonymous, 
except  that  in  ehag   festival  joy  is  made 
prominent. 
V«r.  6. — Tor,  lo,  they  are  gone  because  of 


destruction:  Sgypt  shall  gather  them  np, 
Memphis  shall  bury  them.     Their  futurs 
exile  was  seen  in  prophetic  vision ;  and  in 
consequence  and  because  of  its  certainty  he 
speaks  of  it  as  having  already  taken  place. 
The  destruction  is  the  desolation  and  wast- 
ing of  their  native  land,  because  of  which, 
or  away  from  which  and  leaving  it  behind, 
they  are  gone.    The  land  of  their  banish  • 
ment  was  the  land  of  their  bondage.   There, 
far  from  the  land  of  their  birth,  they  were 
doomed  to  die  and  to  be  gathered  together 
for  a  common  burial.    Memphis  was  tlie 
ancient' capital  of  Lower  Egypt;  its  situa- 
tion wag  on  the  western  bank  of  the  Nile, 
and  south  of  Old  Cairo.    There  its  ruins  are 
still  seen,  with  extensive  burial-grounds, 
wliile  amid  those  ruins  is  the  village  oi 
Mitrahenni.    Eimchi  identifies  Moph  with 
Noph.    The  pleasant  places  for  their  silver, 
nettles  shall  possess  them :  thorns  shall  be 
in  their  tabernacles.    The  literal  rendeiin^ 
of  the  first  clause  is,  (1)    their   cherished 
delight  of  nlver.    By  this  some  understand 
(a)  silver  idols;   (6)  others,  valuables  in 
silver;    (e)  the  Jewish  commentators,  the 
houses  of  the  precious  treasures  of  their 
silver — so  Bashi;  "Their  precious  buildings 
where   their    silver    treasures   were" — so 
Eimchi;    (d)    Jerome    understands    their 
mansions  and  all  the  ornaments  of  their 
mansions  purchased  by  silver;   Keil   also 
has,  "  houses  ornamented  and  filled  vrith  the 
precious  metals."  This  explanation  is  pretty 
generally  accepted,  and  appears  to  us  to 
deserve    the    preference.     Their    former 
homes,  so  pleasant  and  so  richly  decorated, 
were  so  utterly  desolate  and  deserted  that 
thorns  and  thistles  overspread  them.    But 
(2)  the  sentence  is  differently  translated 
and  explained  by  BosenmuUer  aud  some 
others ;  thus :  "  Moph  (Memphis)  will  bury 
them  out  of  desire  for  their  silver."    This 
violent  divulsion  destroys  the  parallelism  of 
the  second  hemistich,  besides  ignoring  the 
athnach.    The  LXX.,  again  (3),  puzzled 
by  the  word  machmad,  mistook  it  for  a  pro- 
per name :   "  Therefore,    behold,   they   go 
forth  from  the  trouble  of  Egypt,  and  Mem- 
phis   shall   receive    them,    and    Machma* 
{tuixi'-as')  shall  bury  them."    Giving  a  de- 
cided preference  to  (1)  (d),  we  have  a  thrill- 
ing picture  of  distress.     First  comes  the 
destruction  of  their   native  city;    having 
looked  their  last  look  on  the  ruins  where 
once  stood  their  liome,  they  have  set  forth 
— a  miserable  band  of  pilgrims — to  the  land 
of  the  stranger,  and  that  stranger  their  con- 
queror and  oppressor;   they  have  reached 
the  place  of  exile,  there  to  find,  not  a  home, 
but  a  grave,  and  not  a  single  grave  for  each, 
according  to  the  Jews'  mode  of  sepulture  to 
the  present  day.  but  a  common  place  of 
burial    into  which  they   are  huddled   to- 


OB.  XX.  1—17.] 


TUB  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


273 


cefher,  Egypt  gathering  them  and  Hemphia 
burying  them ;  while  in  the  land  that  gave 
them  birth,  their  once  happy  homesteads, 
richly  decorated  and  expensively  adorned, 
are  left  utterly  desolate — a  heritage  for 
thorns  and  thistles. 

Vers.  7—9. — These  verses  describe  the 
season  and  source  of  punishment.  The 
days  of  visitation  are  come,  the  days  of 
recompense  are  oomo.  Commentators  have 
appropriately  compared  the  Vergilian  "  Venit 
summa  dies,.et  iireluctabile  tempus,"  equi- 
valent to  "  The  final  day  and  inevitable  hour 
is  come."  Israel  shall  know  (it) :  the  pro- 
phet is  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man  is  mad. 
Here  the  prophet  and  the  man  of  the  spirit 
(margin)  are  (1)  the  false  prophets  which 
pretended  to  inspiration,  and  flattered  the 
people  with  false  hopes  and  vain  promises 
of  safety  and  prosperity ;  and  thus  helped 
to  confirm  them  in  their  sinful  couraea. 
The  object  of  Israel's  knowledge,  though 
not  introduced  by  ki,  is  the  folly  of  such 
false  prophets,  and  the  madness  of  such 
pretenders  to  prophetic  inspiration.  That 
ith  ruaeh  may  be  used  of  a  false  prophet 
as  well  as  of  a  true  one  is  proved  from  ish 
heileJch  ruaeh,  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit, 
applied  by  Hicah  ii.  11  to  one  of  these 
pretenders :  "  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit 
and  falsehood  do  lie,  saying,  I  will  prophesy 
nnto  thee  of  wine  and  of  strong  drink ;  he 
shall  even  be  the  prophet  of  this  people." 
Israel  is  doomed  to  know  by  bitter  experience 
the  folly  and  madness  of  those  prophets 
who  deceived  and  duped  the  people  by 
lies  soon  detected,  and  their  own  folly  and 
madness  in  giving  ear  to  the  delusive  pros- 
pects they  held  forth.  This  explanation 
agrees  with  Kimchi's  comment :  "  Then 
shall  they  confess,  and  say  to  the  prophets 
of  lies,  who  had  led  them  astray,  and  had 
said  to  them,  Peace  (in  time  of  greatest 
peril) — then  shall  they  say  nnto  them,  A 
fool  the  prophet,  a  madman  the  man  of 
spirit."  The  predicate  precedes  the  subject 
for  emphasis,  and  the  article  prefixed  to 
the  subject  exhausts  the  class  of  those  false 
prophets.  (2)  Aben  Ezra,  Ewald,  and  many 
others  understand  the  prnphet  and  spiritual 
man  to  mean  true  prophets,  which  the 
people  called  fools  and  madmen,  and  treated 
as  such,  contemning  and  persecuting  them. 
Thus  Aben  Ezra :  *'  The  days  of  recompense 
are  come  to  you  from  God,  who  will  re- 
compense you  who  said  to  the  prophet  of 
God,  He  is  a  fool,  and  to  the  man  in  whom 
the  spirit  of  God  was,  He  is  mad."  The 
word  m'shuggah  is  properly  tlie  participle 
Pual  used  as  a  substantive,  and  kindred  in 
meaning  to  fidtirts  of  the  Greek,  from  ftal- 
yo/iai,  to  be  frenzied.  In  confirmation  of 
(IX  comp.  Jlizek.  xiii.  10  and  Jer.  xxviii.  15 ; 
and  in  favour  of  (2),  2  Kings  ix.  11.    (3) 

HOS!Ki. 


The  Septnagtat  has  icol  KafnuS^trerai,  equi- 
Talent  to  «  And  shall  be  afflicted,"  taking, 
according  to  Jerome,  yod  for  vav,  and  daleth 
for  resh;  while  Jerome  himself  translates 
icTjpte,  as  if  reading  ip^.  For  the  multitude 
of  thine  iniquity,  and  the  great  hatred. 
The  source  of  all  was  sin.  The  visitation 
threatened,  which  was  retributive — a  re- 
compense—was  for  the  greatness  of  their 
iniquity.  The  last  clause  is  thus  dependent 
on  and  closely  connected  with  the  first,  hy 
ruling  the  construction  first  as  a  preposition, 
then  as  a  conjunction :  "  And  because  the 
enmity  is  great"  Ewald  says,  "  If  the  first 
member  states  a  reason  (e.j.  by  using  the 
preposition  hy,  on  account  of,  because  of, 
and  the  following  infinitive),  the  meaning 
requires  thsi,  whenever  a  finite  verb  follows, 
the  conjunction  '  because'  shall  be  employed 
in  forming  the  continuation."  The  hatred 
was  (a)  that  of  Israel  against  their  fellow- 
men,  and  their  God  or  his  prophetic  mes- 
sengers ;  though  others  (6)  understand  it  of 
the  hatred  of  God  against  transgressors  who 
had  provoked  his  just  indignation.  The 
first  exposition  (o)  suits  the  context,  and  is 
supported  by  the  following  verse.  The 
watchman  of  Ephraim  was  with  my  God. 
This  rendering  is  manifestly  inaccurate,  as 
the  first  noun  is  in  the  absolute,  not  in  the 
construct  state ;  the  right  rendering,  there- 
fore, b  either,  "  A  watchman  is  Ephraim 
with  my  God;"  or,  "The  watchman,  O 
Ephraim,  is  with  my  God."  (1)  If  we 
adopt  Aben  Ezra's  explanation  of  the  pro- 
phet and  spiritual  man  as  true  prophets 
whom  the  people  jeeringly  and  scornfully 
called  fools,  fanatics,  and  madmen,  the 
meaning  of  this  clause  of  the  next  verse 
presents  little  difficulty.  The  prophet 
makes  common  cause  with  these  divided 
prophets :  his  God  was  their  God,  and,  how- 
ever men  treated  them,  they  were  under 
Divine  protection.  The  sense  of  the  im, 
with,  in  this  case  is  well  given  by  Pusey  as 
follows :  "  The  true  prophet  was  at  all  times 
with  God.  He  was  with  God,  as  holpen  by 
God,  watching  or  looking  out  and  on  into 
the  future  by  the  help  of  God.  He  was 
with  God,  as  walking  with  God  in  a  constant 
sense  of  his  presence,  and  in  continual 
communion  with  him.  He  was  with  God, 
as  associated  by  God  with  himself  in  teach- 
ing, warning,  correcting,  exhorting  his 
people,  as  the  apostle  says,  '  We  then  are 
workers  together  with  him.'"  In  the  next 
clause  the  false  prophet  is  described  by  way 
of  contrast  as  a  snare.  (2)  The  word  npis 
is  properly  a  participle,  and  Ephraim  is 
thus  exhibited  by  the  prophet  as  on  the 
outlook,  (a)  not  for  counsel  and  help  beside 
or  apart  from  God,  as  Gesenius  understands 
it ;  but  (6)  as  on  the  outlook  for  revelations 


274 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  IX.  1—17. 


and  prophecies  alongf  with  m;  Ood;  i.e. 
Ephraim,  not  Batisfied  with  the  genuine 
prophets,  had  prophets  of  his  own,  which 
spake  to  tlie  people  according  to  their  wish. 
This  exposition  is  in  the  main  supported 
by  Bashi  and  Kimchi :  the  former  says, 
"  They  appoint  for  themselves  prophets  of 
their  own ; "  and  Kimchi  more  fully  thos, 
"Ephraim  has  appointed  for  himself  a 
watubiuan  (or  seer)  at  the  side  of  his  God ; 
and  he  ia  the  false  prophet  who  speaks  his 
prophecy  in  the  name  of  his  God."  (But) 
the  prophet  is  a  snare  of  a  fowler  in  (over) 
all  his  ways,  and  hatred  in  the  house  of  his 
God.  Whether  we  adopt  (1)  or  (2)  as  the 
explanation  of  the  first  clause,  we  may  un- 
derstand the  prophet  of  this  clause  as  (1) 
the  false  prophet  wlio — by  way  of  contrast 
if  we  accept  (1),  or  by  way  of  continuation 
if  we  prefer  (2)— is  like  the  snare  of  a 
bird-catcher  over  all  the  people's  path,  to  en- 
tangle, entrap,  and  draw  thtm  into  deatiuo- 
tion.  (o)  He  is,  moreover,  inspired  with 
hostility — a  man  of  rancorous  spirit  against 
God  and  his  true  prophets.  "This  prophet 
of  lies,"  says  Ahen  Ezra,  "  is  a  snare  of  the 
bird-catcher."  Similarly  Kimchi  says  in 
his  exposition,  "This  prophet  is  for  Ephraim 
on  all  his  ways  as  the  snare  of  the  bird- 
'•atoher  that  catcheth  the  fowls;  so  they 
catch  Ephraim  in  the  words  of  their  pio- 
phets."  (2)  Some  understand  "prophet"  in 
the  middle  clause  of  the  verse  as  the  true 
prophet,  and  the  snare  as  the  hostility  and 
traps  which  the  people  prepared  for  the 
messengers  of  God;  so  Kashi:  "For  the 
true  prophets  they  lay  snares  to  catch 
them.  According  to  this  exposition  we 
must  render,  "  As  for  the  prophet,  the  snare 
of  the  bird-catcher  is  over  all  his  ways." 
(6)  In  the  last  clause,  "  house  of  his  God," 
may  mean  the  temple  of  the  true  God,  or  the 
idol-temple;  thus  Abeu  Ezra:  "Enmity  is 
in  the  house  of  his  god ; "  while  Kimchi 
thinks  either  sense  admissible :  "  We  may 
understand  'ft  n'3  of  the  house  of  the  calves, 
which  were  his  god,  and  the  false  prophet 
acted  there  as  proi)het,  and  caused  enmity 
between  himself  and  God ;  or  we  may 
explain  it  of  the  house  of  the  true  God, 
that  is,  the  house  of  the  sanctuary."  Thus 
the  hostility  may  refer  to  the  prophet  him- 
belf,  of  which  he  is  the  subject  as  (a),  or 
the  object  according  to  Kimchi  just  cited, 
or  the  detestable  idol-worship,  or  perhaps 
the  Divine  displeasure  against  the  false 
prophet  and  the  people  led  astray  by  him. 
They  luve  deeply  ooriupted  themselves,  as 
in  the  days  of  Glbeah.  The  historical  event 
here  alluded  to  was  the  abominable  and 
infamous  treatment  of  the  Levite's  con- 
cubine by  the  men  of  Gibeah.  This  was 
the  foulest  blot  on  Israel's  history  during 
all  the  rule  of  the  judges.    For  the  loath- 


some particulars,  Judg.  xix.  may  be  eon- 
suited.  The  oonstmclion  is  peculiar.  The 
two  verbs  'Sfn  are  co-ordinated  apposition- 
ally  ;  "  The  leading  verb,  which  in  meaning 
is  the  leading  one,  is  subordinated  more 
palpably  by  being  placed  alongside  of  the 
preceding  verb  without  a  joming  and" 
(Ewald).  The  former  verb  is  often  con- 
structed with  an  infinitive,  and  sonietimis 
with  a  noun.  Some  trace  the  reference,  as 
already  stated,  (1)  to  the  enormity  of  the 
men  of  Gibeah  in  relation  to  the  Levite's 
concubine ;  others  to  the  election  of  Saul, 
who  was  of  Gibeah,  to  be  king.  Bashi 
mentions  both :  "  Some  say  it  was  Gibeah  of 
Benjamin  in  the  matter  of  the  concubine;  but 
others  say  it  was  Gibeah  of  Saul,  when  they 
demanded  for  themselves  a  king  and  re- 
belled ag.iinst  the  words  of  the  prophet." 
Therefore  he  will  remember  their  iniquity, 
he  will  visit  their  sins.  The  sin  of  Gibeah 
was  fearfully  avenged;  its  punishment  re- 
sulted In  almost  the  total  extinction  of  a 
tribe  in  Isiael — that  of  Benjamin.  And  as 
Israel  had  paralleled  that  of  the  men  of 
Gibeah,  he  gives  them  to  understand  first 
implicitly  that  like  punishment  would  over- 
take them,  then  he  explicitly  denounces 
visitation  for  their  iniijuify  and  reirlbution 
for  their  sin.  The  clause  thus  closes,  as  it 
commenced,  with  the  sad  note  of  coming 
calamity. 

Yer.  10. — I  fonnd  Israel  like  grapes  in  the 
wilderness ;  I  saw  your  fathers  as  the  first- 
lipe  in  the  fig  tree  at  her  first  time.  Grapes 
and  first  figs  are  among  the  choicest  and 
most  refre  hing  fruits ;  but  to  find  such  de- 
licious fruits  in  a  dry,  barren  wilderness  is 
specitdly  grateful  and  delightful.  There  are 
three  possible  constructions  of  bammidlihor : 
(1)  with  "  found,"  (2)  with  "  grapes,"  and  (3) 
with  both.  According  to  the  first,  which,  on 
the  whole,  seems  preferable,  the  meaning  is, 
"  I  found  Israel  of  old  as  a  man  finds  grapes 
in  a  desert ; "  and  the  sense  is  God's  good 
will  towards  and  delight  in  Israel.  Grapes 
found  by  a  weary,  exhausted  traveller  in  a 
wilderness  are  a  real  boon,  refreshing  and 
strengthening  him  for  continuing  his  jour- 
ney and  reaching  his  destination.  Kashi 
gives  the  sense  clearly  and  concisely  thus : 
"  As  grapes  which  are  precious  and  delicious 
in  a  desert,  even  so  liave  I  loved  Israel." 
Aben  Ezra,  in  his  exposition,  refers  to  Deut. 
xxxli.  10,  "He  found  him  in  a  desert  land, 
and  in  the  waste  howling  wilderness;  he 
led  him  about,  he  instructed  him,  he  kept 
him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye ; "  and  then 
adds,  "  As  gi'apes  in  a  wilderness  where  no 
one  dwells ;  every  one  that  finds  them  re- 
joices in  them,  and  so  in  the  first-ripe  €gs." 
The  comment  of  Kimchi  is  fuller  and  more 
satisfactory:  "As  a  man,  when  he  finds 
grapes  in  the  wilderness  which  is  dry  and 


OH.  rt.  1 — 17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


275 


frnitleBB,  lejoices  oyer  them;  and  as  he 
rejoices  when  he  finds  a  firstfruit  in  the  flg 
tree  in  its  beginning ;  even  so  have  I  found 
Israel  in  the  wilderneBS,  and  fed  them  and 
nourished  them:  they  lacked  nothing, 
cqunlly  as  if  they  had  been  in  an  inhabited 
land ;  but  they  have  not  recognized  my 
goodness."  As  the  fig  harvest  is  rather  late 
in  Palestine — about  the  middle  of  August- 
early  figs  liave  special  worth,  and  are  re- 
garded as  a  delicacy.  Tlie  comparison  then 
ia,  according  to  Rashi,  with  the  "  early  fig 
on  the  fig  tree,  which  is  ripe;  like  the  fig 
on  tlie  flg  tree  in  its  beginning,  i.e.  in  the 
beginning  of  the  ripening  of  the  figs;"  tlien 
he  subjoins,  "  Even  so  did  your  fatliers 
appear  in  my  eyes,  that  I  loved  them."  But 
they  went  to  Baal-peor,  and  separated  them- 
■elves  onto  that  shame.  Israel  did  not  con- 
tinue long  in  a  condition  so  pleasing  to  God, 
but  fell  away  from  him,  forgot  his  benefits, 
and  turned  aside  to  the  abominable  idols  of 
the  surrounding  Gentiles.  As  Ahen  Ezra 
somewhat  pathetically  expresses  it,  "  Yet 
my  joy  was  only  small  and  of  short  duration, 
for  they  did  homage  to  Baal-peor,  and  sepa- 
rated themselves  from  nie."  Long,  there- 
fore, before  the  sin  of  Glbeah  they  trans- 
gressed in  Baal-peor;  in  the  early  period  of 
their  history  they  apostatized  and  proved 
unfaithful  to  Jehovah.  To  this  hideous 
god,  corresponding  to  Priapus  of  the  Greeks, 
the  maidens  of  Moab  sacrificed  their  vir- 
ginity. The  Israelites  were  designed  to  be 
Kazarites,  that  is,  separated  to  Jeiioyah  and 
consecrated  to  his  service,  but  they  sepa- 
rated themselves  unto  that  shame,  either  the 
idol  or  his  worship.  And  their  abominations 
were  according  as  they  loved.  If  men  are 
slavei  to  appetite,  they  make  a  god  of  their 
belly ;  if  to  lust,  Baal-peor  is  their  god ;  and 
men  become  like  what  they  worship,  and 
abominable  as  the  idols  they  serve,  as  the 
psalmist  says, "  They  that  make  them  are 
like  unto  thein ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth 
in  them."  They  "became  abominations 
like  their  lover  "  (phabh,  paramour ;  namely, 
Baal-peor),  that  is,  as  abominable  and  loath- 
some in  the  sight  of  God  as  the  idols  which 
they  adulterously  worsliipped. 

Vera.  11 — 14. — Having  referred  to  the 
most  flagrant  instances  of  Israel'*  transi^res- 
sions  in  the  past — Gibeah  in  the  time  of  the 
judges,  Baal-peor  at  a  still  earlier  period 
even  in  the  days  of  Moses,  and  having 
merely  indicated  the  parallel  between  their 
present  sin  and  previous  enormities,  the 
prophet  proceeds  to  denounce  the  punish- 
ments deserved  and  ready  to  descend  upon 
them.  As  for  Ephraim,  their  glory  shall 
fly  away  like  a  bird,  from  the  birth,  and  from 
the  womb,  and  from  the  conception.  The 
greatest  glory,  perhaps,  of  Ephraim  was  their 
fruitfulfless — "  double    fruitfulness"   beini} 


the  very  meaning  of  the  name — and  the  mul- 
tiplication of  their  numbers ;  now  tliat  glory 
of  populouaness  was  to  vanish  speedily  and 
entirely,  like  birds  winging  their  way  swiftly 
and  out  of  sight.  After  the  figure  comes  the 
fact,  and  it  is  expressed  in  anti-climactio 
form — no  child-bearing,  no  pregnancy,  no 
Conception.  The  course  of  barrenness  takes 
the  place  of  the  blessing  of  fruitfulness. 
Though  they  bring  up  their  children,  yet 
will  I  believe  them,  that  there  shall  not  be  a 
man  left.  Even  if  their  sons  sliould  grow 
up  to  manhood  and  attain  maturity,  yet 
they  would  be  cut  off  by  the  sword  and 
swept  away  by  death,  so  that  their  progeny 
would  perish.  This  accords  with  the 
threatened  punishment  of  unfaithfulness  re- 
corded in  Deut.  xxxii.  25, "  The  sword  with- 
out, and  terror  within,  shall  destroy  both  tlie 
young  man  and  the  virgin,  the  suckling  also 
with  the  man  of  grey  liuirs."  The  negative 
sense  of  min,  equivalent  to  "  bo  that  not,"  ia 
common  before  verbs,  also  before  nouns  the 
min  being  put  for  the  fuller  niMD.  Tea, 
woe  also  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them ! 
Til  is  accounts  for  the  coming  calamity ;  it  ia 
the  departure  of  Jeliovah  from  Israel,  and 
the  withdrawal  of  his  favour.  The  word 
Tiff  (1)  stands  for  "VD,  sin  and  samech  being 
interchanged;  or  (2)  it  may  be  for  "na,  tin 
put  for  shin  by  a  clerical  error.  The  meaning 
is  a  little  different :  "  when  I  look  away  from 
them."  Bashi  mentions  the  fact  that  this 
word  belongs  to  those  words  written  with 
sin  but  read  with  samech.  His  comment  on 
the  verse  is  correct :  "  For  what  benefit  have 
they  when  they  bring  up  their  children? 
Because,  if  they  do  bring  them  np,  then  I 
bereave  them  so  that  they  do  not  become 
men ; "  similarly  Eimchi :  "  If  there  he  some 
among  them  who  escape  these  mishaps  and 
reach  the  birth,  and  they  (the  parentg)  bring 
them  up,  yet  shall  they  die  in  youth,  and 
never  reach  the  season  when  they  shall  be 
called  men."  (3)  The  misreading  of  n»^  in- 
stead of  -yto2  by  the  LXX.  led  to  the  strange 
misrendering, "  Wherefore  also  there  ia  a  woe 
to  them  (though)  my  flesh  ia  of  them  (Siin 
Ka\  ojal  avTois  itrri'  tydp^  }iov  ef  avrSiv)"  of 
which  Cyril  connects  the  first  member  with 
the  preceding  words,  and,  detaching  the  re- 
mainder, interpreted, "  Let  my  flesh  be  far 
from  them ; "  t  e.  let  me  and  my  race  be  as  far 
away  from  them  as  possible ;  thus  he  prays 
for  exemption  from  the  punishment  threat- 
ened. £phraim,  as  I  saw  Tyrus,  is  planted 
in  a  pleasant  place :  hut  Ephraim  shaU  bring 
forth  his  children  to  the  murderer.  The  first 
member  of  this  verse  has  called  forth  great 
diversity  of  translation  and  interpretation. 
It  were  tedious,  and  not  conducive  to  the 
right  understanding  of  the  verse,  to  enume- 
rate the  various  expositions  given  of  it  A 
vojy  lew  of  the  most  important  may  be 


8T« 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  IX.  1—17. 


briefly  noticed.  (1)  The  LXS..,  reading  n«^, 
DiTja,  rendered,  "  Ephraim,  even  as  I  saw, 
gave  her  children  for  a  prey  {els  flrfpaj/)."  (2) 
Ewald,  conjecturing  nnix,  renders, "  Ephraim 
is,  as  I  judge,  according  to  the /oral,  a  plant- 
ing in  a  meadow."  Rejecting  both  these, 
we  come  (3)  to  that  of  Geaeuius :  "  Epliraim, 
like  Tyre  (as  if  it  were  Tyre),  is  planted  in  a 
deautiful  meadow;"  De  Wette'sis,"EphraiLa, 
when  (or  if)  I  look  as  far  as  Tyre,  is  planted 
on  a  pleasant  meadow ; "  Keil  has, "  Ephraim, 
as  I  selected  it  for  a  Tyre  planted  in  the 
valley ;  so  shall  Ephraim  lead  out  its  sons 
to  the  murderer."  All  these  renderings  are 
faulty  In  one  respect  or  other ;  some  of  them 
misi  the  sense  altogether,  and  others  of 
them  obscure  it.  (4)  The  rendering  that 
appears  to  us  simplest,  most  in  harmony 
with  the  Hebrew,  and  most  suitable  to  the 
context,  is  that  of  Wiinshe,  but  with  a  modi- 
fication— that  of  a  secure  dwelling-place 
instead  of  meadow :  "  Ephraim,  as  I  look 
towards  Tyre,  is  planted  on  a  meadow  [rather, 
'sure  restiug-place'],  and  Ephraim  must  lead 
out  its  sons  to  the  murderer."  The  meaning, 
then,  is  that  Ephraim  is  a  lovely  land,  in 
whatever  direction  one  looks  towards  it,  like 
the  famous  Tyre;  it  was  beautiful  and 
blooming,  populous  as  well  as  pleasant ;  or 
rather,  strong  in  its  natural  fortifications,  like 
the  famoVB  capital  of  Phoenicia;  yet  the 
wrath  of  Heaven  hun^  over  it — it  would 
become  waste  and  emptied  of  its  male  popu- 
lation, Ephraim  being  obliged  to  send  forth 
the  bravest  of  her  sons  to  repel  the  hostile 
invader,  and  to  perish  in  the  tumult  of  the 
battle.  By  combining  a  part  of  Eashi's  ex- 
position with  part  of  Kimchi's,  we  reach  the 
correct  sense.  Bashi  has,  "  Ephraim,  as  I 
look  towards  Tyre.wliich  in  its  prosperity  is 
crowned  above  all  cities,  so  I  look  upon 
Ephrajm  planted  on  a  meadow;"  so  far  the 
explanation  is  correct,  not  so  what  follows : 
"  And  Ephraim — liow  does  he  reward  me  ? 
He  is  busied  in  bringing  forth  his  sons  to 
the  murderer  in  order  to  sacrifice  them  to 
idols ; "  in  place  of  this  latter  part  we  substi- 
tute the  following  of  Kimchi :  "  The  enemies 
shall  come  upon  them,  and  they  shall  march 
out  from  their  cities  to  meet  them  in  battle, 
and  the  enemies  shall  slay  them."  The  in- 
finitive with  I',  N'sin^,  implies  the  necessity 
imposed  on  Ephraim  to  do  so.  Ephraim  is 
to  lead  out,  or  must  lead  out,  his  sons  to  the 
murderer.  Bosenmiiller,  in  his  commentary, 
has  the  following  remark  on  this  idiom  at 
the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  forty-ninth  psalm : 
"  Tempus  infinitivum  positum  esse  futuri 
live  aoriiti,  vice,  pro  eo  quod  plenum  esset 
h  Tnj;  =  paratua  eat,"  etc.  He  adds  that 
the  Syriac  prefixes  atid,  equivalent  to 
paratus  est  to  the  infinitive  with  Umiad,  and 
so  makes  a  paraphrase  of  the  future ;  while 


the  Hebrews  omit  atid.  Driver  ('Hebrew 
Tenses,'  p.  300)  says  of  this  usage  of  the 
so-called  "periphrastic  future,"  "Hero  the 
infinitive  with  h,  expressing  as  usual  a  direc- 
tion, tendency,  or  aim,  forms  the  sole  predi- 
cate :  the  subject,  as  a  rule,  stands  first,  so 
as  to  engage  the  mind,  the  purpose  which  if 
postulated  for  it  follows ;  and  thus  the  idea 
arises  of  an  inevitable  sequence  or  obliga- 
tion, though  not  one  of  a  formal  or  pro- 
nounced character,  which  is  expressed  in 
Hebrew  by  other  means  (i.e.  by  the  addition 
of  hy,  or  of  h,  as  '^^,  equivalent  to  'incumbent 
upon  me') ;  Hos.  ix.  13,  *  And  Ephraim  is 
for  bringing  forth  his  sous  to  the  slayer ;  *  or, 
as  this  la  the  entire  scope  and  object  in 
regard  to  whicli  Ephraim  is  here  considered 
— «»  to  or  mutt  bring  forth."  Give  them, 
0  Lord :  what  wilt  thou  give  t  give  them  a 
miscarrying  womb  and  dry  breasts.  The 
prophet  seems  at  a  loss  to  know  what  he 
should  ask  for  his  countrymen.  Though  it 
was  not  total  excision,  but  rather  diminution 
of  numbers,  that  was  threatened  in  accord- 
ance with  the  statement,  "  If  thou  wilt  not 
observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  Law  .  .  . 
ye  shall  be  left  few  in  number,  whereas  ye 
were  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude ; " 
yet  at  every  stage  their  offspring  was  to  be 
cut  off,  or,  if  spared  to  arrive  at  manhood,  it 
was  only  to  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  murderer. 
No  wonder,  then,  the  prophet  is  perplexed 
in  regard  to  the  petition  that  would  be  most 
expedient  for  them..  He  hardly  knew  what 
was  best  to  ask  on  their  behalt  (1)  The 
thought  at  length  fiashed  upon  him  that 
utter  childlessness  was  preferable  to  biingiug 
up  children  to  be  slain  with  the  sword  or 
trained  in  idolatry ;  hence  he  prayed  for  . 
what  he  regarded  as  the  less  calamity — "  a 
miscarrying  womb  and  dry  breasts."  Or 
(2)  the  prophet  is  agitated  between  com- 
passion for  his  countrymen  and  indigna- 
tion at  their  sin.  Justly  indignant  at  the 
heinousness  of  their  iniquity,  he  is  about  to 
appeal  to  Heaven  for  vengeance  on  the  trans- 
gressors, but  in  pity  for  the  erring  people 
he  checks  the  half-uttered  imprecation,  or 
softens  it  into  the  milder  request  for  their 
extinction  by  ohildlessuess. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — After  the  interruption  by 
the  excited  queotion  of  the  prophet  in  ver. 
14,  the  terrible  storm  of  denunciation  sweeps 
on  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  All  their 
wickedness  is  in  Gilgal :  for  there  I  hated 
them ;  or,  there  I  conceived  hatred  agaimt 
them,  the  verb  being  used  in  an  inchoative 
sense.  Gilgal  had  been  the  scene  of  many 
mercies ;  there  the  rite  of  circumcision,  the 
seal  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  after  its 
omission  during  the  sojourn  in  the  wilder- 
ness, was  renewed ;  there  the  Passover,  also 
intermitted  from  its  second  observance  at 


OH.  IX  1 — 17.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


r? 


Sinai,  was  kept ;  there  the  twelve  memorial 
stones  had  bten  set  up ;  there  the  Captain 
of  the  host  of  the  Lord  had  appeared  to 
Joshua,  reassuring  him  of  Divine  protection ; 
there  the  tabernacle  had  stood  before  its 
removal  to  Shiloh;  yet  that  very  place — a 
place  of  such  blessing  and  solemn  covenant- 
ing— had  become  the  scene  of  idolatry  and 
iniquity.  The  wickedness  of  Israel  had 
been  concentrated  there  as  in  a  focus ;  there 
Israel's  rejection  of  the  theocracy  in  its 
spiritual  form  had  taken  place;  there  that 
first  plague-spot  of  ruin  had  been  contracted ; 
there  the  calf-worship  had  beea  developed ; 
there  the  form  of  civil  government  had  been 
shaped  according  to  their  own  erring  fancy, 
and  their  mode  of  religious  wortjhip  had 
been  oorrapted.  Thus  Uilgal  had  become 
the  centre  of  all  their  sin ;  but  the  scene  of 
mercy  became  the  source  of  wrath,  for  there 
God's  fatherly  love  was  turned  by  Israel's 
wickedness  into  hatred.  For  the  wickedness 
of  their  doings  I  will  drive  them  out  of  my 
honse,  I  will  love  them  no  more.  They  were 
driven  out  like  Hagar  out  of  the  house  of 
the  patriarch,  that  Islimael  might  not  inherit 
with  Isaac;  like  an  unfaithful  wife  divorced 
and  driven  out  of  tlie  house  of  the  husband 
wliom  she  has  dishououred ;  or  like  an  ua- 
dutiful  and  disobedient  son  whom  his  father 
has  disinherited.  Further,  God  disowns 
the  lebeilloua  son,  and  aoknowledges  the 


pntemal  relationship  no  longer.  The  princes 
of  Israel  had  become  rebellious  and  stubborn ; 
by  an  impressive  Hebrew  paronomasia,  their 
sarim,  rulers,  had  become  sorerim,  revolters. 
Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up, 
they  shall  bear  no  fruit.  Ephraim  is  a 
pleasant  plant,  but  a  worm  has  tmilten  the 
root  and  it  has  withered;  Ephraim  is  a 
goodly  tree,  but  the  lightning  of  heaven  has 
scorched  and  dried  it  up ;  there  may  be 
leafage  for  a  time,  but  no  fruitage  ever. 
Yea,  though  they  bring  forth,  yet  wlU  I  slay 
the  heloved  fruit  of  their  womb.  The  desires 
— margin,  dear  delights,  or,  darlings — perish, 
and  so  the  figure  is  now  dropped,  and  the 
fact  is  seen  in  all  its  severe  and  stern  reality, 
while  the  dread  denunciation  of  vers.  11  and 
12  is  repeated  and  emphasized.  Hy  Ood 
will  cast  them  away,  because  they  did  not 
hearken  unto  him ;  and  they  shall  be  wan- 
derers among  the  nations.  The  prophet 
submits  his  will  to  the  Divine  will,  and  ac- 
quiesces in  the  disposals  of  his  providence, 
and  in  his  own  proper  person  predicts  Israel's 
coming  doom.  He  fills  up  the  outline  of 
the  dark  picture  by  stating  the  cause  of 
their  rejection.  He  specifies  at  the  same 
time  the  character  of  rejection,  namely,  dis- 
persion among  the  nations,  like  birds  driven 
from  their  nest,  for  M  the  term  nod'dim 
denotes. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 6.^ Sin  is  (he  eauie  of  sorrow  and  the  source  of  sadnesf.  The  merry- 
making of  wicked  people  is  ofteu  Ijoth  hollow  and  heartless;  it  is  always  without  true 
ground  or  real  cause ;  while  the  laughter  of  fools  is  like  the  crackling  of  thorns  under 
a  pot.  The  people  of  Israel  were  jubilant  at  the  time  referred  to.  The  reason  of  their 
jubilation  does  not  distinctly  appear.  It  may  have  arisen  from  some  losses  having  been 
retiieved,  or  some  advantages  gained,  or  some  successes  achieved,  or  some  useful  alliances 
secured,  or  the  ordinary  joy  of  harvest.  Whatever  it  was,  there  was  no  good  cause  for 
it  nor  continuance  of  it.  "  Joy  is  forbidden  fruit  to  wicked  people."  Among  the  losses 
which  sin  entails  are,  as  we  learn  from  the  verses  before  us,  the  following : — 

L  The  loss  of  joy.  1.  Religion  makes  men  joyful  as  well  as  cheerful.  "  Rejoice  in 
the  Lord  alway,"  is  the  exhortation  of  an  apostle,  and  an  exhortation  which  he  repeats. 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength.  How  different  with  the  wicked !  They  deprive 
themselves  of  all  real  j(^.  They  may  be  outwardly  prosperous  and  rejoice  in  that 
prosperity ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them,  and  a  worm  is  at  the  root  of  their 
joy.  2.  The  professing  people  of  God  sometimes  envy  the  seeming  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  ;  seeing  the  outward  success  of  sinners,  they  are  tempted  to  imitate  their  works 
and  ways.  They  forget  that  in  doing  so  their  sin  is  more  heinous  than  that  of  other 
people ;  it  is  aggravated  by  their  engagement  to  be  the  Lord's,  by  the  vows  of  Qod 
which  are  upon  tliem,  and  by  the  various  means  and  motives  which  they  enjoy  for 
pursuing  the  right  course.  Their  sin  is  thus  greater  than  that  of  other  people ;  they 
are  therefore  forbidden  to  rejoice  with  the  ordinary  joy  of  other  people.  It.  was  thus 
with  Israel,  when,  lorgetful  or  unmindful  of  their  covenant  relation,  they  went  a-whoring 
from  their  God,  and  committed  spiritual  adultery  by  following  idols.  3.  Some  men 
make  a  profession  of  religion  for  sake  of  worldly  gain;  they  calculate  the  benefits, 
paouniary,  professional,  political,  or  social,  which   they  expect  from  religion;   tkej 


278  THE  BOOK  OF  ROSEA.  [oh.  ix.  1— ll 

estimate  religion  by  the  outward  advantages  which  they  think  to  derive  from  it ;  or, 
wliat  is  much  the  same,  they  profess  that  religion  or  attach  themselves  to  that  denomi- 
nation from  which  they  hope  for  the  greatest  gain.  Thus  Israel  attributed  to  her 
spiiitual  harlotry  any  temporary  prosperity  she  enjoyed;  it  was  her  idols  she  thanked 
for  any  season  of  plenty  that  she  was  favoured  with;  she  loved  a  reward  on  every 
corn-flopr.  Thus  her  religion  was  mercenary,  her  idoliitry  shameful,  her  proaperoua 
state  of  short  continuance,  and  her  joy  ill  founded  as  evanescent. 

II.  'i'HB   LOSS  OF   THE   MEANS   OF  SUBSISTENCE   NOT  CNFBEQUBNTLT  FOLLOWS   FROM   A 

COURSE  OF  SIN.  A  careiT  of  sin  has  often  reduced  a  man  to  a  morsel  of  bread,  or  left 
him  without  bread  altogether.  When  men  are  bent  on  the  obtainment  of  worldly 
blessings,  and  make  them  their  chief  end,  they  are  often  denied  the  blessings  whicli 
they  covet :  frequently  they  are  disappointed  of  them ;  more  frequently  are  they  disa))- 
pointed  in  them  ;  even  when  they  secure  them  they  fail  to  find  the  satisfaction  which 
they  seek.  ■  "  The  floor  and  the  wine-press  shall  not  feed  them,"  says  the  prophet ; 
"  much  less  feast  them,"  quaintly  but  truly  observes  an  old  commentator,  adding,  "  It 
shall  either  be  blasted  by  the  hanrl  of  God  or  plundered  by  the  hand  of  man;  the  new 
wine  with  which  they  used  to  make  merry  shall  fail  in  her.  .  .  .  We  forfeit  tha  good 
things  of  the  world  if  we  love  them  as  the  best  things." 

III.  The  loss  of  house  and  home  has  often  besulted  feom  sinful  indulgence. 
A  time  of  famine  necessarily  becomes  a  time  of  extensive  emigration.  But,  apart  from 
seasons  of  scarcity,  when  men  are  forced,  in  order  to  procure  the  means  of  •  decent 
livelihood,  to  seek  a  home  and  a  country  in  some  distant  land,  it  is  no  rare  occurrence 
for  men  to  find  themselves  expatriated  through  their  own  vices.  When  they  beggar 
themselves  by  vicious  indulgence,  their  last  resort  is  a  foreign  land.  In  the  case  of 
Israel  the  hardship  was  peculiarly  distressful.  The  land  of  promise  was,  in  a  special 
sense,  "  the  Lord's  laud ; "  it  was  a  good  land,  a  gladsome  land.  How  glowing  as  well 
as  eloquent  the  eulogy  bestowed  upon  it  by  the  sacred  writer  when  Israel  was  about  to 
enter  it  1  "The  Lord  thy  God  bringeth  thee  into  a  good  land,  a  land  of  brooks  of 
water,  of  fountains  and  dejiths  that  spring  out  of  valbv  s  and  hills ;  a  land  of  wheat, 
and  barley,  and  vines,  and  fig  trees,  ami  pomegranates ;  a  land  of  oil  olive,  and  honey ; 
u  land  wherein  thou  shalt  eat  bread  v\ithout  scarceness,  thou  shalt  not  lack  anything 
in  it;  a  land  whose  stones  are  iron,  and  out  of  whose  hills  thou  mayest  dig  brass." 
Besides  these  blessings  of  a  temporal  kind,  possessed  by  that  land  into  which  the  Lord 
had  led  Israel,  it  was  the  Lord's  land  because  of  the  spiritual  privileges  enjoyed  there. 
It  was  distinguished  by  his  special  favour  and  gracious  presence ;  it  was  the  home  of 
his  priests  and  prophets  ;  it  was  the  seat  of  his  holy  oracle,  and  in  all  respects  a 
delightsome  land.  But  Israel  had  forfeited  their  title  to  it.  It  had  been  leased  to 
them  by  the  Lord,  but  by  their  idolatries  and  many  sins  they  had  broken  every  clause 
in  that  lease ;  and  now  they  must  turn  their  back  on  this  land  which  the  Lord  had 
given  them.  They  had  loved  idols,  and  now  to  the  land  of  idols  they  must  go.  Into 
bondage  in  Egypt  or  into  captivity  in  Assyria  they  are  driven ;  the  Lord's  land  "  shall 
not  only  cease  to  feed  them,  but  cease  to  lodge  them,  and  to  be  a  habitation  for  them ; 
it  shall  spue  them  out,  as  it  had  done  the  Canaanites  before  them."  Their  performance 
of  outward  ceremonies  had  not  sprung  from  a  principle  of  love  to  the  Divine  Law ;  now 
they  are  no  longer  in  a  position,  even  if  they  are  disposed,  to  obey  that  Law.  They 
had  abused  the  abundance  of  good  things  which  God  had  given  them ;  now  for  Tery 
want  they  must  eat  unclean  things  as  repugnant  to  their  feelings  as  opposed  to  their 
rituaL  They  had  shown  an  infatuated  fondness  for  idols  in  their  own  land,  the  Lord's 
land  ;  now  they  must  eat  the  unclean  things  oflfered  to  idols  in  a  foreign  land.  Qreal 
had  been  their  sinfulness,  great  in  degree  and  similar  in  kind  is  their  punishment. 

IV.  Loss  OF  bpikitual  privileges  is  another  and  a  worse  consequenob  op  thbib 
SINS.  One  of  the  greatest  privations  is  the  loss  of  the  puhlic  ordinances  of  religion. 
Though  the  enjoyuient  of  them  whea  possessed  m.\y  be  little  valued,  the  withdrawal 
of  them  is  severely  felt.  There  is  no-famine  more  distressing  than  that  of  hearing  the 
Word  of  the  Lord.  Unfaithfulness  to  the  light  men  have  has  often  caused  the  candle- 
stick to  be  removed  out  of  its  place.  So  with  Israel  at  the  period  to  which  the  prophet 
refers.  They  were  deprived  of  libation  as  well  as  oblation,  and  of  every  offering  what- 
uver.  Without  the  material,  they  were  also  without  the  means  of  offering  any  acceptable 
sacrifice     In  a  heathen  land  they  were  necessarily  without  sanctuary  and  altar  and 


OH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  279 

priest.  How  sad  their  condition  I  and  sadder  still  when  tbey  felt  it  to  be  the  legitimate 
consequence  of  their  sin,  national,  social,  and  individual  I 

V.   Loss  OF  RBLIOIOUS  SOLEMNITIES  IS  AN  AQQKAVATION  OF   THBIB   LOSS  OF  BELIQI0C3 

ORDiNANrES.  The  sulemn  day,  or  day  of  the  feast  of  the  Lord,  as  often  as  it  came  round, 
was  a  high  day  as  well  as  a  holy  day  ;  a  day  of  joy  and  gladness,  of  thanksgiving  and 
]iraise.  Besides  the  weekly  sabbath  solemnity  and  the  monthly  solemnity  of  the  new 
moons,  there  were  the  three  great  annual  festivals  of  the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and 
Tabernacles.  Of  the  benefit  and  blessing  of  these  solemnities,  with  all  their  instruction, 
edification,  comfort,  and  encouragement,  they  are  now  deprived.  No  wonder  the  propliet 
asks  in  a  tone  of  pity,  not  unmingled  with  pathos,  "  What  will  ye  do  then?"  To 
this  inquiry  a  practical  commentator  makes  the  following  not  inappropriate  reply : 
"  You  will  then  spend  those  days  in  sorrow  and  lamentation,  which,  if  it  had  not  been 
your  fault,  you  might  have  been  spending  in  joy  and  pi  aise.  You  will  then  be  made 
to  know  the  worth  of  mercies  by  the  want  of  them,  and  to  prize  spiritual  bread  by 
being  made  to  feel  a  famine  of  it."  To  this  he  adds  the  pithy  remark,  "  When  we 
enjoy  the  means  of  grace,  we  ought  to  consider  what  we  shall  do  if  ever  we  should  know 
the  want  of  them  ;  if  either  they  should  be  taken  from  us,  or  we  disabled  to  attend  upon 
them." 

VL  Loss  OF  ALL  THTNOS   ONCE   HELD  DEAB  CONCLUDES  THIS  SAD  8UMMABT  OF  TBS 

EVIL  EFFECTS  OF  SIN.  Never  was  there  a  darker  outlook,  never  was  there  a  gloomier 
prospect!  What  havoc  sin  works  1  What  distress  it  occasions  1  In  a  single  verse  are 
crowded  together  the  destruction  of  their  country  by  one  heathen  power,  that  of 
Assyria  ;  their  dispersion  in  the  country  of  another,  namdy,  Ei^ypt;  their  death  in  that 
foreign  ImucI,  and  their  deprivation  of  decent  sepulture ;  the  desolation  of  the  dwellings 
they  had  left  behind — a  desolation  so  great  that  nettles  had  sprung  up  in  tlieir 
treasuries  and  thorns  in  their  tabernacles ;  nor  was  respite,  or  relief,  or  restoration  to  be 
expected.  They  had  delnded  themselves  with  false  hopes  and  had  resorted  to  carnal 
devices,  distrustful  of  God,  as  men  often  do,  and  with  like  result.  Insteadof  returning 
to  tl  at  God  against  whom  they  had  rebelled,  and  who  miuht  have  oiiened  to  them  a 
door  of  hope,  they  departed  more  and  more  from  him,  placing  their  dependence  on  the 
sinful,  unavailing  shifts  of  their  own  devising. 

Veri.  7 — 9. — There  i»  no  joy,  any  more  than  peace,  to  the  tinner.  However  men 
put  away  from  them  the  evil  day,  they  can  neither  stave  it  off  altogether  nor  delay  its 

coming. 

I.  The  CERTAINTY  OF  THE  DlVINE  JUD0MEKT8  OVERTAKING  SINNERS.     In  the  previoUS 

verse  the  prophetic  past  is  used,  to  intimate  that,  though  the  event  i  -redicted  had  not  yet 
taken  place,  yet  was  it  as  sure  of  accomplishment  as  il  it  had  already  occurred.  Here 
the  words  "  are  come  "  are  repeated  to  apprise  sinucis  of  its  certainty ;  thus  we  read 
in  the  same  tense,  and  with  like  repetition,  "  Llabylou  is  fallen,  is  f.illen."  So  also  iu 
Ezek.  vii.  6,  "  An  end  is  come,  the  end  is  come ;  .  .  .  behold,  it  is  come ; "  while  in 
the  verse  preceding,  and  in  the  one  succeeding,  the  same  expression  is  repeated  to 
impress  men  with  the  fact  of  the  threatened  judgments  being  both  sure  and  near,  and 
thus  prevent  self-deception. 

II.  The  CHARACTER  OF  THE  DiviNE  JUDGMENTS.  1.  They  are  days  of  Divine 
visitation.  Men's  sins  shall  be  searched  out  and  brought  to  light ;  they  shall  he 
scrutinized  by  the  omniscient  and  heart-searching  God.  2.  They  are  days  of  recom- 
pense,  when  not  only  shall  an  exact  account  be  taken,  but  a  just  recompense  of  reward 
dealt  out  to  each  according  as  his  work  shall  be.  The  recompense  shall  correspond  to 
the  visitation;  the  stricter  the  former,  the  juster  and  more  exact  the  latter.  3.  They 
are  daya  near  at  hand,  so  near  as  well  as  certain  that  they  are  spoken  of  as  already 
come. 

III.  The  CONDUCT  or  the  prophet.  If,  as  some  suppose,  the  prophet  here  mentioned 
is  (1)  the  false  prophet,  he  deluded  the  people  with  false  hopes,  and  God  gave  the 
people  over  to  strong  delnsion  that  they  might  believe  a  lie.  They  awake  not  out  of 
their  day-dream  until  roused  by  the  visitation  and  recompense  of  the  Almighty.  God, 
by  afflictive  dispensations,  has  to  stir  men  up  when  milder  means  have  failed.  But  (2) 
the  prophet  mentioned  may  be  a  true  prophet,  and  it  may  only  be  in  the  estimation  of 
the  people  that  he  is  fool  and  madman.      n  this  case,  those  that  thus  treated  him  with 


280  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  a.  1—17. 

contempt  and  ridicule  shall  be  awakened  by  the  visitations  of  the  Almighty  to  a  sense 
of  their  sin  and  shame.  Then  (3)  shall  they  know,  as  stated  in  the  first  clause,  not  only 
the  nearness  and  certainty  of  the  Divine  visitation  and  recompense,  but  shall  also  know 
that  a  prophet  had  been  among  them,  that  he  had  discernment  of  the  times,  and  had 
faithfully  conveyed  to  them  the  message  of  God.  They  (4)  shall  know  too,  to  theli 
cost  and  by  bitter  experience,  many  things  about  God,  about  his  ambassadors,  and  about 
their  own  heartless  misconduct.  They  shall  know,  says  an  old  divine,  these  things: 
"  1.  What  a  great  God  they  had  to  deal  with.  2.  How  vile  a  thing  sin  is.  8.  The 
vanity  of  all  their  shiftings.  4.  The  dreadfulness  of  Divine  wrath.  5.  The  faithfulness 
of  God's  prophets.  6.  The  wisdom  of  those  who  dared  not  do  as  they  did.  7.  The  folly 
and  vanity  of  all  the  false  prophets  that  did  before  seduce  them." 

IV.  The  cause  op  all  their  ekroes  was  the  multitude  of  theib  bins.  Faults 
in  their  life,  as  is  not  unusual  with  wicked  men,  bred  errors  in  the  brain.  Their 
iniquity  had  been  great  and  aggravated,  and,  in  addition  to  their  multiplied  iniquity, 
they  were  just  objects  of  liatred  and  subjects  of  the  same — at  once  "  hateful  and  hating." 
Besides  their  vile  heart  and  wicked  life,  they  hated  God,  his  ambassadors,  his  ways,  and 
all  godliness.  Could  they  fail  to  be  children  of  wrath  while  their  carnal  mind  was  thus 
enmity  to  God  ?  It  was  reasonable  that  God  should  abandon  such  persons  to  prophets 
of  lies,  to  deceive  and  undo  their  souls ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  in  keeping  with 
the  malignity  of  their  hearts  and  the  malice  of  their  nature  to  calumniate  the  prophets 
of  the  Lord  and  vilify  them  as  fools  and  madmen ;  while  the  fact  of  accounting  them 
so,  aggiavated  their  sins,  hastened  the  fast-coming  visitation,  and  intensified  the 
recompense  of  reward. 

Vers.  10,  11. — Qod^t  goodness  met  with  ingratitude  bg  a  iinful  people.  Instead 
of  repenting  of  their  sins,  they  persevered  in  their  rebellion  against  God.  As  if  God 
overlooked  or  connived  at  their  enormities,  they  added  their  deep  corruption  in  the 
matter  of  Gibeah,  in  the  days  of  the  judges,  to  the  iniquity  of  Baal-peor  at  a  still  earlier 
period ;  while  the  sins  of  Gibeah  and  Baal-peor  were  equalled  by  those  of  the  prophet's 
own  day. 

L  The  delight  which  God  took  or  theib  fathebb.  Their  sainted  sites  had  been 
the  favourites  of  Heaven;  the  fathers  and  founders  of  their  race  had  sought  God's. 
"  face  and  favour  free,"  and,  walking  in  his  ways,  enjoyed  his  benediction.  L  God's 
pleasure  in  the  piety  of  his  people  is  truly  astonishing,  though  that  piety  is  entirely 
traceable  to  his  own  gracious  dealings  with  them.  When  a  weary  wanderer  in  a  wilder- 
ness comes  upon  grapes  rich  and  ripe,  or  figs  the  first  and  finest  of  the  season,  how  he 
is  refreshed  by  fruits  so  rare  and  luscious  1  Such  is  the  strong  and  suggestive  figure 
by  which  God  expresses  his  delight  in  his  servants  of  old;  nor  does  he  take  less  delight 
in  them  in  the  present  than  in  the  ancient  days.  Men  like  Abraham  the  faithful,  or  Isaac 
the  meditative,  or  Jacob  the  prayerful,  or  Joseph  the  pure,  or  Moses  the  meek,  enjoy  the 
sunshine  of  God's  favour  still.  2.  Where  much  is  given  much  is  required.  If  God 
thus  delights  in  his  people,  surely  his  people  should  delight  in  God.  If  God  views 
with  such  complacency  the  fruit  of  his  own  Spirit's  operations  in  the  hearts  of  his 
people,  and  the  effects  of  his  own  grace  seen  reflected  in  their  lives,  surely  it  is  our 
bounden  duty  as  well  as  high  privilege  to  reciprocate  in  some  measure  the  Divine  good- 
ness, delighting  in  the  Divine  ordinances,  living  in  the  Divine  service,  and  promotin^r 
the  Divine  glory.  3.  God  is  particularly  delighted  with  the  firstfruits,  and  not  only  so, 
but  with  the  first  of  the  firstfruits.  Here  is  special  encouragement  to  the  young  to 
devote  themselves  early  to  God,  and  early  to  delight  themselves  in  him.  They  are 
invited  to  give  their  young  hearts  to  God  when  the  dew  of  their  youth  is  heavy  upon 
them — when  their  perception  is  keen,  their  conscience  tender,  their  |  affections*  warm, 
and  their  memory  retentive. 

n.  Theib  deoenebaot.  Their  fathers  had  been  to  God  as  grapes  in  a  desert  land, 
and  as  the  first  ripe  in  the  fig  tree  at  her  first  time ;  but  the  degenerate  descendants 
of  such  godly  ancestry  had  become  like  fruit  bitter  and  sour.  They  resembled  fruitless 
fig  trees,  or  the  wild  vine  with  its  small  harsh  berries ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  all 
Jehovah's  care  and  culture,  they  had  long  ceased  to  walk  in  the  ways  or  follow  the 
steps  of  their  godly  forefathers.  The  holiness  of  those  forefathers,  lefreshing  as  grapes 
of  best  quality  and  figs  of  the  first  growth  to  the  heart  of  God,  was  no  longer  to  be  found  • 


C3,tx.l—l1.}  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  281 


their  fruit  was  Bonr,  their  ways  corrupt.  The  God  of  their  fathers  had  'ceased  to  be 
their  God.  "  Oh  1  it  is  a  comfortable  thing,"  says  an  old  divine,  "  when  a  child  is  able 
to  gay,  as  Exod.  xv.  2,  'My  God,'  and  '  My  father's  God.'  God  was  my  father's  God, 
and  delighted  in  my  father ;  and,  blessed  be  his  Name,  he  is  my  God,  and  I  hope  he  has 
some  delight  in  me." 

III.  Theis  DEPfiAviTT.  They  for  their  part  (the  use  of  the  pronoun  adds  emphasis) 
went  to  Baal-peor.  1.  Here  they  are  either  contrasted  with  their  godly  forefathers,  or  the 
contrast  is  rather  between  God's  care  and  goodness  on  the  one  hand,  and  their  ingrati- 
tude and  baseness  on  the  other.  The  complaint  of  God  resembles  that  of  a  fond  and 
indulgent  husband  who  has  lavished  his  love  on  a  worthless  wife,  and  who,  to  his 
unspeakable  mortification,  discovers  that  he  has  been  cherishing  an  adulteress.  Instead 
of  reciprocating  his  affection,  she  plays  the  wanton ;  instead  of  a  suitable  return  for  his 
many  acts  of  kindness,  tenderness,  and  care,  she  dishonours  him  by  turning  aside  to 
some  base  adulterer.  So  with  Israel  when  they  turned  from  the  living  God  to  dumb 
idols ;  so  with  any  people  who,  instead  of  setting  their  affections  on  God,  transfer  them 
to  any  earthly,  sensual,  or  sinful  object.  2.  We  see  in  the  conduct  of  Israel  a  notable 
example  of  the  perverted  use  of  the  Divine  mercies.  God  had  segregated  Israel  from 
the  nations  around  them,  and  separated  them  to  himself  to  be  a  peculiar  people.  The 
Nazarite  who  by  his  vow  was  separated  and  specially  consecrated  to  Jehovah,  was 
symbolical  of  the  whole  nation  in  its  separation  and  consecration  to  God.  But,  regard- 
less of  God's  mercy  and  reckless  of  their  own  privileges,  they  separated  themselves  to 
the  service  of  a  shameful  idoL  When  they  went  to  Baal-peor,  whether  the  idol  itself 
or  rather  the  place  of  the  idol  (the  same  as  Beth-peor),  they  engaged  with  full  consecra- 
tion, rather  desecration,  of  all  their  powers  in  the  infamous  worship  of  Baal,  here  called 
Bosheth,  their  shame.  3.  Their  abominations  were  according  as  they  loved  ;  that  is, 
(1)  they  became  as  abominable  as  that  which  they  loved;  or  (2)  their  abominable 
idols  were  multiplied  according  to  their  heart's  desire;  or  (3)  their  abominations 
were  according  as  they  loved.  They  were  guided  in  the  choice  of  them,  not,  of 
course,  by  the  Word  of  God  nor  by  the  Law  of  God,  but  by  their  own  inclination.  In 
matters  connected  with  religion  and  religious  worship  men  should  beware  of  being 
influenced  by  their  personal  likings,  or  private  inclinations,  or  lesthetic  tastes,  but  make 
sure  of  a  warrant  from  the  Word  of  God.  Another  evil  is  to  be  avoided  in  this  matter, 
that  of  allowing  our  judgment  to  be  overmasteied  by  our  affections,  and  thus  of  being 
unduly  influenced  in  our  religious  views  by  those  whom  we  love,  whether  husband,  or 
wife,  or  kindred,  or  friends,  or  family.  If  the  other  sense  be  preferred,  according  to 
which  people  become  as  abonunable  as  the  objects  which  they  love,  it  is  an  illustration 
of  the  well-known  principle  that  men  come  to  resemble  those  whom  they  love.  A 
child  imitates  and  so  gets  assimilated  to  the  parent  whom  be.  loves ;  looking  up  to 
and  admiring  that  parent,  he  comes  in  time  to  resemble  him  in  habits  of  thought  and 
modes  of  acting.  4.  Here,  in  passing,  we  observe  one  of  the  many  references  and  allu- 
sions of  the  prophet  to  the  earlier  books  of  Scripture.  Through  the  evil  counsel  ot 
Balaam  a  stumbling-block  was  placed  in  the  way  of  the  people  of  Israel,  when  they 
were  enticed  to  impurity  and  so  to  idolatry  by  the  daughters  of  Moab,  and  when,  in 
consequence  of  their  sin  in  the  matter  of  Baal-peor,  so  many  thousands  perished  in  the 
plague. 

IV.  Theib  bbstbuotion.  Ephraim's  glory  consisted  of  many  elements — prosperity, 
pomp,  and  power,  but  most  especially  their  population  and  numerous  progeny  as 
contributing  to  that  population.  In  this  particularly  did  Bphraim  glory ;  but  the  day 
of  their  glory  comes  to  a  speedy  and  disastrous  end.  1.  The  departure  of  their  glory 
is  compared  to  the  flight  of  a  bird,  and  thus  that  departure  is  represented  as  sudden, 
like  the  flight  of  a  bird  when  it  is  startled  from  its  nest  in  the  greenwood,  or  when 
some  one  throws  open  the  door  of  the  cage  in  the  dwelling  where  it  has  been  imprisoned ; 
as  swift,  like  the  flight  of  the  eagle  toward  heaven ;  as  irretrievable,  like  the  bird  of  power- 
ful pinion,  which  distances  pursuit  and  escapes  beyond  the  possibility  of  being  ever 
caught  or  found  again.  2.  Disaster  awaits  them  at  every  stage — conception,  gestation, 
and  parturition.  The  curiae  of  God  pursues  them  from  first  to  last,  hindering  the 
conception,  or  causing  abortion,  or  preventing  the  birth. 

Application.  Learn  hence :  1.  The  folly  of  glorying  in  any  earthly  prosperity  or 
worldly  advantage.     "Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which  is  not?  for  riches 


t82  THB  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  ix.  1—17. 

certainly  make  themselves  wings ;  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  toward  heaven."  2.  The 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  lasts  not  long.  Ephraira,  comprehending  the  ten  tribes,  had 
enjoyed  great  prosperity,  and  had  surpassed  Judah  in  numbers.  This  was  particularly 
the  case  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  to  which  this  Scripture  may  probably  refer. 
They  had  enjoyed  prosperity  so  long,  they  thought  it  would  last  alway ;  yet  it  passed 
away  as  in  a  moment.  3.  Let  us  seek  the  glory  that  is  real  and  abiding.  "  Let  not  the 
wise  man  glwy  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might,  let  not 
the  rich  man  glory  in  bis  riches :  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  he  under- 
standeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving-kindness,  judg- 
ment, and  righteousness  in  the  earth :  for  in  these  things  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord." 
4.  What  reason  we  have  to  bless  God  for  his  preserving  care.  "  He  preserved  us  in  the 
very  conception,  preserved  us  in  our  mother's  womb,  and  then  in  tlie  birth ;  and  then 
in  the  cradle,  in  our  childhood,  in  our  youth,  in  our  middle  age,  and  in  our  old  age;  for 
we  lie  at  his  mercy  at  every  point  of  time." 

"  Thy  providence  my  life  sustained, 
And  all  my  wants  redressed. 
When  in  the  silent  womb  I  lay, 
Aud  hung  upon  the  breast. 

Vers.  12—17. — "  Tlie  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  If  they  escape  one  calamity, 
they  are  sure  to  be  overtaken  and  overwhelmed  by  another. 

I.  Calamity  of  a  twofold  kind  threatened.  There  is:  1.  Bereavement,  and 
that  of  a  most  painful  nature.  To  be  childless  altogether,  or  to  lose  children  in  infancy, 
is  sorrowful  enough ;  but  to  be  bereft  of  children  when  they  have  grown  up  to  man- 
hood or  womanhood  is  an  unspeakably  greater  sorrow.  After  labour,  and  trouble,  and 
care,  and  thought  have  been  expended  in  their  upbringing ;  after  all  difficulties  have 
been  surmounted  ;  and  when  sons  have  become  like  plants  grown  up  in  their  youth,  apd 
daughters  like  comer-stones  polished  after  the  similitude  of  a  palace ;  when  the  conduct 
of  both  is  characterized  by  dutifulness,  love,  and  obedience ;  and  when  parents  naturally 
expect  much  help  and  comfort  from  them,  and  have  their  affections  twined  round  them 
— ^at  such  a  time,  to  be  deprived  of  them  either  by  a  sudden  stroke,  or  by  slow  disease, 
is  a  condition  more  than  ordinarily  sorrowful.  It  is  only  the  grace  of  God  in  large 
measure  that  can  sustain  and  support  parents  so  afQicted;  while  the  exercise  of  grace 
on  their  part  has  no  doubt  compensatory  blessings.  The  bereavement  of  Israel  was 
to  be  complete — without  a  man  left.  If  left,  they  might  be  left  without  the  intellect 
of  a  man,  or  the  physical  strength  of  a  man ;  they  might  be  imbeciles  or  invalids,  and 
thus  in  a  worse  condition  than  if  not  left  at  all.  2.  But  a  still  worse  woe  impends, 
namely,  that  of  Divine  desertion.  This  is  God's  withdrawal  from  a  people  or  a  person. 
When  he  thus  withdraws,  he  withdraws  his  goodness  and  mercy,  common  graces,  gifts, 
and  comforts.  When  this  withdrawal  takes  place  we  are  utterly  helpless ;  as  the  king 
of  Israel  said  to  the  poor  woman  who  cried  for  help,  "  If  the  Lord  do  not  help  thee, 
whence  shall  I  help  thee?"  or  as  the  apparition  of  Samuel  to  Saul,  "  Wherefore  then 
dost  thou  ask  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord  is  departed  from  thee?"  We  may  pass  through 
fiery  trials,  or  be  plunged  in  the  deep  waters  of  affliction ;  but  if  we  enjoy  the  Divine 
presence  we  need  not  be  afraid.  As  long  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,  and  the  God 
of  Jacob  is  our  Refuge,  we  need  not  fear  the  raging  of  the  great  sea-billows,  or  the 
upheaval  of  the  mountains,  or  even  the  shook  of  the  earthquake.  The  sorest  of  all 
troubles  is  to  bo  forsaken  by  God.  Oh,  how  sad  the  lot  of  a  man  who,  forsaken  by 
God,  is  left  in  the  power  of  his  enemies  1  "  I  am  sore  distressed,"  said  the  unhappy 
monarch ;  "  for  the  Philistines  make  war  against  me,  and  God  is  departed  from  me," 

II.  A  COMPARISON  instituted.  Ephraim  is  compared  to  Tyre  in  prosperity,  in 
position,  in  population,  and  in  military  prowess ;  and  yet  God  was  preparing  to  take 
his  departure  from  them.  1.  His  presence  maintains  health,  strength,  and  various 
other  comforts ;  or  if,  in  his  wise  providence,  he  sees  fit  to  withdraw  any  of  these,  he 
sanctifies  that  withdrawal.  But  when  God  himself  withdraws,  then  his  mercies  prepare 
for  flight  too;  nor  is  any  blessing  left  behind.  Kot  only  so;  even  when  men  are  at  the 
height  of  prosperity,  as  they  think,  God  may  be  on  the  point  of  departing  from  them, 
as  from  Israel  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  II.,  if  we  are  right  in  referring  this  comparison 
of  the  prophet  to  that  period.    2.  How  we  should  prize  God's  presence  and  pray  for  its 


OH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  281 

continnance,  saying, "  Leave  ns  not,"  and  avoid  whatever  would  force  or  lukiten  hli 

departure  I  But  how  may  we  be  sure  that  he  has  not  already  forsaken  us?  The 
answer  may  be  learned  from  the  words  of  the  psalmist :  "  I  will  keep  thy  statutes :  oh, 
forsake  me  not  utterly."  As  long  as  we  are  resolved  to  keep  his  statutes,  we  may  have 
little  fellowship  with,  but  cannot  be  forsaken  by,  God.  3.  How  dreadful  the  doom 
of  those  from  whom  God  has  actually  and  already  departed  1  It  is  like  the  withdrawal 
of  the  sun  from  the  firmament.  "  Take  a  delightful  summer's  day,  and  how  beautiful 
it  is  1  Now  compare  that  with  a  winter's  dark,  dismal  night.  What  makes  the  difference 
between  these  two?  The  presence  of  the  sun  in  the  one,  and  its  absence  from  the 
other.  This  is  but  the  presence  or  the  departing  of  one  of  God's  creatures.  Oh  1  if 
that  makes  such  a  diflference  in  the  world,  what  must  the  presence  or  departing  of  the 
infinite  God  do  to  the  soul  ? "  In  the  case  of  Bphraim,  their  children  are  brought  forth 
to  the  murderers — not  only  murdered,  but  that  murder  perpetrated  before  the  eyes  of 
their  parents.  This  seems  the  severest  stroke  of  all.  Even  a  heathen  poet  hns  most 
pathetically  portrayed  the  extreme  sadness  of  this  condition  in  the  death  of  Polites,  a 
son  of  Priam,  who  addresses  his  murderer  Pyrrhus  in  the  well-known  words :  "  May 
the  gods,  if  there  be  any  kind  power  in  heaven  to  watch  such  deeds,  yield  you  your 
due  reward,  who  have  defiled  the  father's  eyes  by  the  sight  of  his  son's  muriler." 

HI.  CoMMlsBBATiON  EXPRESSED.  The  prophet  prays  for  his  people,  but  seems 
straitened  in  his  petitions,  or  rather  he  is  at  a  loss  to  know  what  was  most  expedient 
for  them  and  conducive  to  the  Divine  glory.  He  does  not  pray  for  peace,  nor.  for 
deliverance,  nor  for  prosperity.  He  dared  not  venture.  He  knew  too  well  the  sins  of 
his  countrymen,  their  abuse  of  the  Divine  mercies,  their  contempt  of  warning, 
their  hardness  of  heart,  their  searedness  of  conscience,  and  their  gross  misuse  of  all 
means  used  for  their  recovery.  No  wonder  he  pauses  and  hesitates.  He  cannot  pray 
for  a  numerous  progeny  to  be  vouchsafed  to  his  people,  or  for  children  at  all.  Better 
they  should  never  come  into  the  world  at  all  than  to  be  made  the  prey  of  the  spoiler ; 
lietter  not  to  be  born  than  to  become  victims  of  the  murderer;  better  peiish  before 
birth  or  from  the  birth  than  live  a  life  of  sin  and  misery,  and  die  a  death  of  violence 
and  hopelessness!  At  length,  in  view  of  the  sinfulness  of  the  people,  the  misery  of 
times  not  far  distant,  and  the  fast-approaching  calamities,  he  prays  either  that  children 
ii.ight  not  be  born  at  all,  or  that  they  might  not  be  sustained  lo  as  long  to  survive 
tlieir  birth. 

IV.  Ckiminalitt  exposed.  We  are  here  reminded  of  the  plan  of  Israel's  criminal 
conduct,  of  the  punishment  of  it,  and  of  the  princes  who  were  ringleaders  in  it.  1.  The 
place  of  their  chief  and  greatest  crimes  was  Gilgal.  What  a  contrast  1  The  place  that 
testified  to  God's  greatest  mercies  also  witnessed  Israel's  greatest  wickedness.  In 
Gilgal  the  memorial  stones  were  set  up  after  the  passage  of  the  Jordan  ;  in  Gilgal  the 
first  Passover  was  celebrated  after  the  BxoduS;  in  Gilgal  the  rite  of  circumcision  was 
renewed  and  the  reproach  of  Egypt  rolled  away ;  in  Gilgal  Israel  first  ate  the  fruits  of 
the  promised  land.  Yet  all  their  wickedness,  their  chief  wickedness,  was  wrought 
there.  There  they  threw  off  the  government  of  God  by  judges,  and  would  have  Saul  to 
be  their  king;  there,  in  their  superstition,  they  \\orshipped  God  instead  of  at  Jerusalem, 
and  thus  trampled  underfoot  the  Divine  appointment.  The  more  God  signaUzes  a 
person  or  place  by  his  mercies,  the  more  severe  his  judgments  on  the  wickedness  of 
such.  Every  time  God's  eye  rested  on  Gilgal,  a  feeling  of  hatred  was  roused  against 
the  works  and  workers  of  iniquity  there.  2.  The  puiushment  of  their  wickedness  was 
expulsion.  "  Some  sins,"as  has  been  said,  "  provoke  God  to  anger,  and  some  to  grief,  but 
some  to  hatred.  '  There  I  hated  them.'  It  is  dreadful  when  our  sins  provoke  hatred. 
This  is  the  great  difference  between  the  sins  of  the  saints  and  others.  "The  sins  of  the 
.saints  may  anger  God,  may  grieve  God,  but  the  sius  of  others  provoke  God  to  hatred." 
That  hatred  manifests  itself  in  their  expulsion.  They  are  driven  out  of  God's  house, 
and  so  nationally  unchurched — as  a  disobedient  and  unruly  child  is  driven  out  of  his 
fitlier's  house,  or  as  a  rebellious  and  unruly  servant  is  turned  out  of  the  house  of  his 
master ;  while  son  and  servant  receive  no  more  tokens  of  favour  or  good  wilL  8.  Their 
princet,  one  and  all,  set  the  bad  example  of  rebellion  and  revolt.  As  "  like  priest,  like 
people,"  so  like  prince,  like  people.  Persons  in  high  places  have  it  in  their  power  to  do 
much  good  or  work  much  evil  by  their  influence  and  example ;  for  such  they  are 
responsible,  and  shall  oae  day  be  called  to  account.     Of  every  talent  given  us,  whether 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oil  iz.  1-^7. 

health,  or  wealth,  or  influence,  or  opportunities  of  doing  or  getting  good,  we  must  kll 
one'day  give  an  exact  account. 

Y.  CoNscHPi'ioH  couFLETBD.  A  tree  may  lose  its  leaves,  but  a  following  spring  will 
restore  them ;  it  may  lose  some  of  its  branches  in  the  process  of  pruning,  but  this 
will  not  prevent  it  growing  again.  Yea,  "  there  is  hope  of  a  tree,  if  it  be  cut  down, 
that  it  will  sprout  again,  and  that  the  tender  branch  thereof  will  not  cease.  Though 
the  root  thereof  wax  old  in  the  earth,  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the  ground ;  yet 
through  the  scent  of  water  it  will  bud,  and  bring  forth  boughs  like  a  plant."  So  long 
as  the  root  retains  life,  there  is  hope  of  the  tree ;  but  once  the  root  is  dried  up  and 
dead,  ruin  is  inevitable.  Thus  Ephraim  was  smitten ;  thus  many  are  smitten  in  just 
judgment  from  the  Almighty.  When  the  root  is  thus  dried  up,  there  can  be  no  hope 
of  firuit.  If  men  will  bear  fruit  to  the  world,  or  sin,  or  self,  and  not  unto  God,  it  is 
only  just  they  should  be  left  fruitless.  If  men  will  not  bring  up  their  children  for 
God,  training  them  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  is  it  strange  they  should 
be  left  childless? 

VL  Castaways  among  the  kations.  This  is  the  condition  in  which  Israel  remains 
till  the  present  day.  They  cast  away  the  truth  of  God,  and  now  they  are  cast  away. 
They  rejected  the  Son ;  for  he  came  to  his  own  realms,  and  his  subjects  received  him 
not ;  now  they  are  outcast.  Note  the  cause :  "  Because  they  did  not  hearken  unto 
him."  This  was  regarded  by  Luther  as  a  notable  statement,  and  worthy  to  he  written 
on  all  our  walls.  How  often  we  find  men  hearkening  to  the  counsels  of  the  wicked,  or 
to  the  suggestions  of  worldly  policy,  or  to  the  temptations  of  the  evil  one,  or  to  their  own 
lusts  and  passions,  but  not  tp  God !  Let  men  beware  of  refusing  to  give  audience  to 
God.  Let  them  beware  of  acting  as  if  they  did  not  hear  with  the  ear,  nor  understand 
with  the  heart.  Every  Jew  one  meets  is  a  warning  of  the  danger  of  not  hearkening 
to  God.  While  every  Jew  is  a  living  monument  to  the  truth  of  Scripture,  be  is  at  the 
same  time  a  proof  of  the  calamity  incurred  by  not  heavkening  to  God.  3.  It  is  here 
predicted  that  they  should  be  wanderers  among  the  nations.  The  fulfilment  of  the 
prediction  may  be  expressed  in  the  sadly  truthful  words  of  the  Hebrew  melodj— 

"Tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast^ 
How  shall  ye  flee  away  and  lie  at  rest  I 
The  wild  dove  hath  her  nest,  the  fox  his  cave, 
Uankind  their  country ;  Israel  but  the  grave  i* 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — ^9. — The  Assyrian  captivity.  Israel  had  courted  the  favour  of  Assyria ;  t)nt 
the  result  would  be  her  absorption  and  destruction  as  a  nation.  In  this  and  the  suc- 
ceeding chapter,  notwithstanding  acknowledged  difSculties  of  interpretation,  the  distresses 
of  the  Exile  are  depicted  with  telling  effect. 

I.  The  prophet's  intbrdict  against  Isbaei..  (Ver.  1.)  Hosea,  as  it  were,  appears 
suddenly  among  the  people  when  they  are  preparing  to  hold  some  joyous  festival,  and 
sternly  forbids  it  in  Jehovah's  Name.  He  is  constrained  by  the  burden  of  the  Lord  to 
act  the  unwelcome  part  of  "  the  skeleton  of  the  feast."  He  tells  Israel  that,  in  view  of 
the  dread  realities  of  her  position  as  a  nation,  this  was  no  time  for  gladness.  To  ignore 
the  facts  would  not  obliterate  them.  To  rejoice  exnltingly  just  now,  merely  because 
she  had  obtained  a  plentiful  harvest,  or  secured  some  temporary  relief  from  her  political 
troubles,  was  to  act  with  the  folly  of  the  ostrich,  which  thrusts  her  head  into  the  sand, 
and  thinks  that  all  is  well  because  she  does  not  see  her  pursuers.  If  it  is  "  better"  for 
all  men  "  to  go  to  the  house  of  mourning  than  to  go  to  the  house  of  feasting,"  it  would 
be  especially  advantageous  at  present  for  the  Israelitish  people  to  do  so.  For  the 
condition  of  the  nation  was  extremely  insecure.  The  prosperity  in  which  they  were 
rejoicing  was  hollow,  and  it  would  be  evanescent. 

II.  The  ground  of  the  interdict.  This  is  unfolded  in  the  body  of  the  passage. 
It  is  twofold.  1.  Israel's  extreme  sinfulness.  (Vers.  1,  7,  9.)  •'  Other  people,"  «.«. 
heathen  nations,  might  more  readily  be  excused  for  holding  iestivals  of  rapturous  joy ; 
for,  not  having  the  knowledge  of  God,  they  could  not  perceive  how  far  they  had  trans- 
gressed his  Law.  But  Israel  had  sinned  against  abundant  light,  and  in  spite  of  continual 


OH.  1x1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  H08BA.  186 

warning.  How  ead  tbat  the  chosen  nation  Bhould  look  upon  her  harvests  as  the  gift  of 
heathen  gods — as  Baal's  reward  for  her  devoted  service  of  him  1  Not  only  so,  but  Israel's 
wickedness  was  great  all  round.  The  people  heartily  hated  both  the  Lord  and  his 
servants  the  true  prophets.  The  whole  country  was  now  as  notorious  for  its  monstrous 
corruption,  as  Gibeah  of  Benjamin  bad  been,  since  the  time  when  the  tragic  atrocity  of 
the  Levite  and  his  concubine  had  been  perpetrated  there  (Judg.  xix.  16,  et  $eq.).  The 
error  of  the  men  of  Benjamin  in  shielding  the  villains  who  wrought  that  foul  deed  had 
involved  the  town  of  Gibeah  in  destruction,  and  the  tribe  itself  almost  in  extirpation. 
And  so  also  was  it  to  be  now  with  the  ten  tribes.  2.  Israel's  impending  misery.  The 
commonwealth  was  on  the  verge  of  destruction,  and  soon  the  people's  place  in  the  land 
would  know  them  no  more.  Surely  it  were  madness  to  rejoice  now,  when  they  are  on 
the  very  eve  of  buing  carried  away  into  captivity.  The  prophet  proclaims  most  plainly 
the  fiat  of  expulsion  (ver.  3).  The  nation  that  is  now  "  Lo-ammi,"  "  Not  my  people," 
cannot  he  allowed  any  longer  to  remain  in  "  the  Lord's  land,"  "  Ephraim  shall  return 
to"  the  new  "  Egypt "  of  Assyria,  and  shall  there  undergo  a  second  Egypt-like  oppres- 
sion. The  Exile  shall  involve  the  withdrawal  of  all  the  blessings  and  privileges  in  which 
the  people  gloried ;  as,  e.g. :  (1)  Loss  of  haroests.  (Ver.  2.)  Palestine  was  a  land  of 
inexhaustible  plenty,  and  there  Israel  "  did  eat  bread  without  scarceness ; "  but,  in  her 
efiacement  from  the  land,  she  shall  of  course  lose  her  harvests.  She  shall  have  no  happy 
harvest-homes  in  Assyria.  (2)  Loss  of  national  distinctions.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  To  "  eat 
unclean  things  in  Assyria"  would  prove  a  severe  trial  and  a  sore,  punishment.  For 
the  Jews,  although  they  imitated  the  heathen  in  some  things — as,  e.g.,  in  desiring  a  king 
like  the  nations,  and  in  falling  into  Gentile  idolatries — ^plumed  themselves  all  the  while 
upon  the  fact  that  the  Gentiles  and  they  did  not  stand  religiously  upon  the  same  level; 
and  they  clung  to  the  Mosaic  distinctions  of  meats  because  it  was  a  badge  of  their 
peculiar  privileges  as  the  chosen  nation  (pide  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  voL  iii. 
p.  1590).  (3)  Loss  of  spiritual  privities.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  In  their  exile  the  Hebrews 
would  miss  the  opportunities  of  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  which  they  had  neglected  while 
they  "  dwelt  in  the  Lord's  land."  Jerusalem  was  the  one  place  of  sacrifice ;  and  for  the 
captives  there  would  be  no  gracious  presence  of  God  in  heathendom.  No  temple  there, 
no  ritual,  no  great  annual  feasts,  no  exuberant  festal  joy  1  The  feast  of  tabernacles,  as 
the  grand  harvest-home  festival,  used  to  he  kept  by  the  tribes  with  lively  demon- 
strations of  national  gladness ;  but,  ^las  I  the  "  Greater  Hallel"  would  never  be  sung 
amid  the  miseries  of  Assyria.  (4)  Loss  of  inheritance  in  Canaan.  (Ver.  6.)  That  land 
had  been  given  to  the  Hebrews,  and  was  continued  in  their  possession,  upon  conditioa 
of  obedience  to  the  Divine  Law.  The  occupancy  of  "  the  Lord's  land  "  was  a  symbol 
of  the  enjoyment  of  the  Lord's  favour.  Now,  however,  seeing  that  the  people  have 
forfeited  the  blessing  of  Jehovah,  they  must  be  expelled  for  ever  from  that  goodly 
heritage.  The  ten  tribes  shall  not  return  fo  Palestine.  The  people  shall  find  their 
graves  in  the  Egypt-like  exile  of  Assyria.  Thistles  and  nettles  shall  spring  up  in  luxu- 
riance among  the  ruins  of  their  once  beautiful  houses.  The  traveller  finds  these  nettles 
still,  growing  rankly  to  a  height  of  six  feet — a  sign  of  the  csrse  that  yet  rests  upon  the 
land.  (5)  Lost  of  ike  hopes  held  out  ly  the  false  prophets.  (Vers.  7, 8.)  At  present  there 
were  false  teachers  among  the  people  who  kept  saying, "  Peace,  peace,"  merely  to  flatter 
them,  and  to  make  matters  pleasant  for  the  time.  But  every  prediction  of  prosperity 
would  he  falsified.  The  people  would  soon  discover  that  these  so-called  prophets  had 
been  either  "  fools  "  or  "  snares,"  that  is,  either  simpletons  or  sharpers.  The  expecta- 
tions of  well-being  which  these  persons  encouraged  them  to  cherish  would  be  miserably 
disappointed.  It  would  presently  be  found  that  Hosea  had  been  the  real  patriot,  and 
the  truest  friend  of  his  nation,  although  he  did  not  prophesy  good  concerning  it,  but  the 
worst  of  evils.  The  northern  kingdom  is  to  be  wasted  with  misery ;  no  wonder,  then, 
that  the  prophet  calls  out,  "  Eejoice  not,  0  Israel." 

III.  Sous  LSSSONS  or  THB  B^TEBDioT  FOB  OURSELVES.  1.  The  Ungodly  man  has  no 
rational  ground  for  gladness  or  rejoicing  (ver.  1).  2.  Our  harvest-joy  should  be  a  joy 
"  before  God  "  (vers.  1,  2).  3.  In  emigrating  to  a  strange  land  there  is  often  danger  to 
one's  spiritual  nature,  arising  from  the  loss  of  religious  privileges  (vers.  3,  4).  4.  It  is 
supreme  folly  to  banish  all  thought  of  "  the  solemn  days  "  of  life  by  giving  one's  self  up 
to  habits  of  frivolity  and  worldly  pleasure  (ver.  5).  5.  We  must  "  beware  of  false 
prophets,"  and  "  try  the  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God  "  (vers.  7, 8).    6.  "  The  Lord's 


286  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  n.  1—17. 

Uukd  "  U  only  for  the  Lord's  people :  for  such  alone  the  Lord  Jeans  prepares  a  place  in 
the  heaTenly  Canaan  (vers.  1 — 9).— 0.  J. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  true  and  the  faHw  prophet.  Accepting  the  Authorized  Version  here 
88  substantially  correct,  we  interpret  these  verses  as  referring  to  both  classes.  Ver.  7 
makes  mention,  in  a  ptnenthesis,  of  the  false  prophet.  The  first  clause  of  ver,  8  refers 
to  the  true  prophet ;  and  the  remainder  of  the  verse  contrasts  the  character  of  the  false 
prophet  with  his.    The  theme  thus  suggested  is  an  instructive  and  profitable  one. 

I.  The  true  and  the  false  prophet  abe  often  contemporabies.  One  of  S;vtaD's 
favourite  methods  for  the  support  of  bis  kingdom  seems  in  all  ages  to  have  bien  to 
caricature  the  works  of  the  Almighty,  and  to  induce  men  to  accept  the  counterfeit  and 
reject  the  real,  Whenever,  accoidingly,  the  Lord  raised  up  a  true  prophet,  Satan  at 
the  same  time  sent  forth  false  prophets.  Thus  Moses,  at  the  beginning  of  his  career, 
had  to  contend  with  "  the  magicians  of  Egypt ; "  and,  towards  the  close  of  it,  against  the 
influence  of  Balaam,  who,  although  constrained  to  ntter  true  predictions,  was  all  the 
while  the  Anti-Moses.  In  like  manner,  Elijah  confronted  at  Carmel  four  hundred  and 
fifty  prophets  of  liaal ;   and  Micaiah  at  Samaria  other  four  humlred  (1  Kings  xxii. 

-6 — 28).  Elisha  also  lived  contemporaneously  with  false  prophets  (2  Kings  iii.  11 — 13  ; 
A.  19).  Hosea,  as  he  himself  testifies  both  here  and  elsewhere  (ch.  iv.  5),  was  impeded 
and  thwarted  in  his  life-work  by  many  impostors.  And  at  last,  when  God  incarnated 
himself  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  supreme  Prophet  of  the  Cliurch,  the  devil  took  care  to 
send  into  tlie  woi  Id  "  false  Christs  and  false  prophets."  After  nearly  nineteen  centuries 
of  the  gospel,  Mohammedanism  yet  lives  as  the  religion  of  "  the  false  prophet,"  and  in 
our  day  there  are  still  pretenders  to  the  dignity  of  "  the  Mahdi,"  or  Moslem  Messiah. 
In  "the  last  time"  there  have  already  been  " many  antichrists ; ''  and,  before  the. 
Christian  dispensation  of  truth  shall  close,  the  Antichrist  par  excellence  must  yet  be 
revealed  (1  John  ii.  18). 

II.  The  work  of  the  true  prophet.  (Ver.  8.)  It  is  that  of  a  spiritual  "  watch- 
man," stationed  on  the  watoh-tower  of  faith  and  prayer.  He  stands  there,  concen- 
trating his  gaze  upon  the  unseen,  that  he  may  obtain  Divine  revelations  of  mercy  oi 
judgment,  and  ru|]ort  such  to  the  people  (Ezek.  iii.  17;  xxxiii.  7;  Hub.  ii.  1).  God 
sent  many  such  watchmen  to  the  chosen  nation.  He  sent  some  even  to  the  ten  tribes— 
the  two  writing  prophets  Hosea  and  Amos ;  such  great  prophets  of  action  as  Elij  ih  and 
Elisha;  besides  also  Ahijah,  Micaiah,  Jonah,  etc.  These  "watchmen  of  Ephraim" 
were  "  with  God,"  in  the  sense  of  being:  1.  Sent  by  God.  His  Spirit  called  ihem  to 
their  ofiice,  put  his  words  into  their  mouth,  and  even  caused  them  sometimes  to  feel  as 
if  their  own  consciousness  were  absorbed  into  that  of  God.  2.  Helped  hy  God.  He 
infused  into  their  hearts  the  courage  and  strength  which  they  needed  boldly  to  speak 
his  Word  to  a  "gainsaying  people,"  wTio  hated  them  for  their  faithlulness.  3. 
Mesponsible  to  Ood.  For  the  prophets  would  have  to  give  account  to  him  of  the  manner 
in  which  they  had  announced  the  revelations  vouchsafed  to  them  for  the  nation's  guid- 
ance. Moses  had  been  "with  God,"  for  "the  Lord  knew  him  face  to  face"  (Deut. 
xxxiv.  10).  Elijah  had  been  "with  God,"  for  he  spoke  of  him  as  Jehovah,  "before 
whom  I  stand"  (1  Kings  xvii.  1).  Elisha  was  called  "  a  holy  man  of  God  "  (2  Kings 
iv.  9).  Hosea's  name  means  salvation ;  and  the  name  reflected  the  substance  of  his 
ultimate  message,  that  of  the  redeeming  love  of  Jehovah.  And  similarly  still,  under 
the  gospel  dispensation,  the  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  stand  among  men  as  a  witness 
for  "  the  things  which  are  not  seen,"  a  watchnjan  whose  eye  searches  the  invisible,  and 
who  points  with  his  finger  towards  eternity  and  God.  Every  preacher  should  deliver 
his  message  as  David  Hume,  theinfidel,  remarked  that  John  Brown  of  HaddiUi^ton  did : 
"  That  old  man  preaches  as  if  Christ  were  at  his  elbow." 

III.  The  chakaotbr  op  the  false  prophet.  The  northern  kingdom  abounded  in 
such  persons  in  the  time  of  Hosea.  They  professed  to  be  prophets,  i.e.  for-speakers ; 
but  they  did  not  really  speak  for  God.  They  called  themselves  "  spiritual  men  "—men 
of  the  spiiit ;  but  the  spirit  which  possessed  them  was  an  evil  and  a  lying  spirit. 
Their  pretended  prophecies  were  soothing  and  flattering,  all  the  while  that  the  land 
reeked  wilh  idolatry  and  unmentionable  vices.  The  false  prophets  "prophesied  out 
of  their  own  hearts,"  and  "saw  nothin";"  of  the  vision  of  the  Lord  (Eiek.  xiii.  2,  3). 
At  the  very  hour  when  the  sword  was  about  to  come  upon  the  land,  and  the  throne 


OH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  287 

was  tottering  to  its  fall,  they  derided  the  earnest  warnings  of  the  true  prophets,  and 
hoodwinked  the  people  into  the  persuasion  that  all  would  yet  he  well.  Thus  the  £alse 
prophet,  so  far  from  being  in  any  good  sense  a  "  watchman,"  was  to  the  people  "  a 
snare  of  a  fowler  in  all  their  ways ;  and,  with  many  a  spcious  and  plausible  pretext, 
he  allured  the  poor  silly  people  to  their  min.  When,  at  length,  that  ruin  rushed  upon 
them,  it  was  demonstrated  that  the  prophet  who  bad  misled  them  with  the  expectation 
of  prosperity  was  a  "fool"  and  "mad."  Amid  the  horrors  of  their  captivity  in 
Assyria  they  would  have  leisure  to  reflect  upon  the  folly  of  the  impostors  whom  they 
bad  allowed  to  delude  them.  In  these  latter  times,  also,  there  are  false  prophets 
enough  who  are  as  "  a  snare  of  a  fowler,"  and  whom  ever  and  again  events  prove  to  be 
"fools"  and  "mad."  What  mischief,  e.g.,  was  wrought  in  Europe  by  the  infidel 
writings  ot  Voltaire  and  Rousseau  1  What  a  snare,  to  a  certain  class  of  minds,  has 
Comte  been  1  How  many  unwary  souls  have  been  beguiled  by  Strauss  and  Benan  1 
How  sadly  is  the  welfare  of  the  Lord's  flock  put  in  jeopardy  by  the  revival  of 
sacerdotalism  in  Churches  professedly  Protestant  I  Who  can  estimate  the  harm  that 
is  done  to  the  cause  of  God  by  the  baleful  influence  of  ungodly  and'unfaithful  ministers  ? 
Such,  wherever  found,  are  "a  snare"  to  the  people.  Their  example  tends  to  drive 
souls  away  from  God,  and  to  drag  them  down  to  perdition. 

IV.  How  THE  TBUK  PBOFHET   IS  TO  BK   DISTINQniSHED  FBOM  THE  FALSE.      1.  The 

false  prophet,  when  the  times  are  evil,  "  ipeaks  smooth  things."  He  justifies  the 
people's  misdeeds,  and  fails  to  rebuke  prevailing  sins.  He  is  a  blind  watchman ;  a 
dumb  dog, that  cannot  bark — loving  to  slumber ;  and  a  greedy  dog,  which  can  never  have 
enough.  So  he  flatters  the  people,  promises  them  peace,  and  tries  to  make  matters 
pleanant  all  round.  The  true  prophet,  on  the  other  hand,  without  thinking  of  his 
safety  or  of  his  means  of  subsistence,  always  "prophesies  right  things;"  and  in  an 
evil  time  "  cries  aloud,  spares  not,  lifts  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  shows  the 
people  their  transgressions."  2.  The  false  prophet  comes  "  before  Christ "  (John  x.  8) ; 
t.e.  he  aims  at  intercepting  men's  view  of  him  as  the  one  Mediator,  and  does  bis  work 
in  opposition  to  the  will  and  cause  of  Christ.  The  true  prophet,  on  the  other  hand, 
never  forgets  that  it  is  Christ  who  has  sent  him,  and  that  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus 
is  the  spirit  of  prophecy."  3.  The  false  prophet  attracti  ungodly  men  to  bis  teaching, 
and  attaches  them  as  his  followers  ;  "  but  the  sheep  will  not  bear  him."  His 
impostures  are  detected  by  those  who  enjoy  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(1  John  iv.  1 — 6).  The  true  prophet,  on  the  other  hand,  gathers  around  him  those 
who  are  spiritually  minded,  and  suffers  persecution  from  the  ungodly  (e.g.  Amos  vii. 
10, 11).  i.  The  false  prophet  shall  he  finally  branded  as  an  impostor  when  "  the  days 
of  recompense"  shall  have  come  (ver.  7).  Thus  the  field  of  Bamoth-gilead  decided 
whether  Micaiah  or  the  four  hundred  prophets  of  Ahab  had  prophesied  truly.  And  on 
the  day  of  judgment  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  say  to  many  who  have  professed  to  prophesy 
in  bis  Name,  "  I  never  knew  you ;  depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity " 
(Matt,  vii,  22, 23).  The  true  prophet,  on  the  other  hand,  "  shall  rest,  and  stand  in  bis 
lot  at  the  end  of  the  days  "  (Dan.  xii.  13). 

"  Eie  long  fhy  feet  shall  stand 
Within  the  city  of  the  Blessed  One; 
Thy  perils  past,  thy  heritage  secore, 
Vby  tears  all  wiped  away,  thy  joy  for  ever  bum,* 

O.J. 

Ters.  10 — 17.— Bereavement,  barrenneu,  and  banishment.  Here  the  prophet  (ver.  10) 
finds  a  backuround  for  his  picture  of  the  final  distress  and  captivity  of  Bphraim,  by 
contrasting  therewith  the  fair  promise  of  prosperity  and  usefulness  which  the  He!  row 
nation  had  shown  during  its  infancy.  The  body  of  the  strophe — uttered  by  Hosea 
with  intense  emotion — is  full  of  lamentations  and  mourning  and  woe  (vers.  11 — 16). 
And  the  closing  words  (ver.  17)  summarize  in  one  brief  and  pregnant  sentence  the 
burden  of  the  entire  paragraph. 

L  A  BRIGHT  BEOMNINO.  (Vefs.  10,  13.)  Jchovah  "found  Israel;"  the  people 
depended  upon  him  for  their  preservation  as  a  community.  The  emancipated  slaves 
of  Egypt  would  have  been  poor  and  helpless  indeed  but  for  his  supporting  care.  But 
he  set  his  love  upon  them,  and  planted  and  trained  the  Hebrew  commonwealth  a*  the 


288  THE  BOOK  OF  HuSEA.  [oh.  n.  1—17, 

Oriental  hnRbandman  does  his  yinei  and  fig  trees.  At  Mount  Sinai  Jehovah  made 
a  gracions  covenant  with  Israel,  set  up  his  taheniacle  with  a  view  to  dwell  among  the 
people,  and  arranged  the  tribes  in  order  as  his  sacramental  host.  When  they  gtruck 
their  tents  at  Sinai,  and  journeyed  towards  Paran  (Numb.  z.  11,  12),  the  Lord  looked 
upon  them  with  complacency  out  of  the  cloudy  pillar ;  and  he  marched  on  before  the 
host,  to  lead  Ephraim  into  a  land  heautiful  for  situation  as  that  of  the  famous  Tyre, 
and  where  they  might  become  as  rich  and  prosperous  as  the  Tyrians.  The  people  had 
solemnly  chosen  Jehovah  for  their  God,  and  "  no  strange  god  "  was  among  them.  So 
the  Lord  delighted  in  them,  as  the  weary  traveller  in  the  desert  rejoices  in  the  clusters 
of  the  vine,  or  in  the  firstfruits  of  the  fig  tree. 

IL  An  eablt  fall.  (Ver.  10.)  Although  God  "  had  planted  Israel  a  noble  viae, 
wholly  a  right  seed,"  very  soon,  alas!  they  "were  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant 
of  a  strange  vine  unto  him."  They  had  left  Egypt,  hut  Egypt  had  not  left  them. 
During  the  forty  years  which  they  spent  in  the  wilderness,  tliey  frequently  rebelled 
against  the  Lord,  But  the  prophet  mentions  here  only  one  of  their  provocations,  the 
idolatry  of  Baal-peor  or  Chemosh  (Numb,  xxv.),  an  idol  whose  rites  of  worship  involved 
the  practice  of  the  grossest  sensuality.  The  Hebrews,  in  fact,  had  in  those  early  days 
indulged  in  precisely  the  same  abominations  with  which  Hosea  was  now  so  familiar 
in  this  last  time  of  the  northern  kingdom.  The  unchaste  worship  of  Baal  and 
Astarte,  even  before  the  tribes  entered  Canaan,  had  brought  a  sad  blight  upon  the  fair 
early  promise  which  for  a  little  while  the  chosen  people  had  given.  "  They  separated 
themselves  " — ^like  an  evil  class  of  Nazarites — to  the  service  of  the  filthiest  of  the  gods 
of  heathendom.  "  And  their  ahominations  were  according  as  they  loved ; "  i.e.  they 
becamo  more  and  more  assimilated  in  their  own  character  to  the  objects  of  their 
worship. 

III.  An  iNPAHona  cabeeb.  (Vers.  15,  17.)  That  early  idolatry  of  Baal-peor 
repeated  itself  again  and  again,  especially  within  the  northern  kingdom,  after  its  revolt 
from  the  dynasty  of  David.  There  was :  1.  The  desecration  of  sacred  places.  "  All 
their  wickedness  was  in  Gilgal ; "  it  seemed  concentrated  as  in  a  focus  in  that 
very  locality  which  had  been  the  first  to  be  called  "holy"  within  the  Holy  Land 
(Josh.  V.  15),  and  which  had  been  the  scene  of  special  mercies  when  the  tribes  began 
to  take  possession.  It  was  a  sore  aggravation  of  Israel's  sin  that  the  people  should 
jTervert  Beth-el  into  Beth-aven,  and  destroy  the  hallowed  associations  of  such  a  place 
as  Gilgal.  2,  The  ungodliness  of  the  kings.  "All  their  princes  are  revolters,"  i.e. 
apostates,  men  who  with  unanimous  infatuation  had  departed  from  God  and  righteous- 
ness. All,  without  exception,  were  wicked  men ;  therefore  in  the  annals  of  the  Books 
of  Kings  the  same  melancholy  refrain  constantly  recurs :  "  He  did  that  which  was 
evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord :  he  departed  not  from  the  sins  of  Jeroboam  the  son 
of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  3.  The  wickedness  of  the  people.  "  They  did  not 
hearken  unto  God  "  (ver.  17).  Israel  "  went  after  her  lovers  "  the  Baalim,  prostituted 
herself  to  them,  and  forgot  Jehovah  her  rightful  Husband.  He  had  long  pleaded  with 
her  to  return  to  him,  but  in  vain.  He  had  told  her  of  his  shame  and  anger  because 
of  her  unworthiness,  he  had  reproached  her  for  perverting  his  gifts  to  the  basest  uses, 
he  had  threatened  her  with  severe  chastisements  and  even  with  final  rejection ;  but 
she  was  "joined  to  idols,"  and  "did  not  hearken  unto  him." 

IV.  A  TEBKIBLB  PUNISHMENT,  With  the  denunciation  of  this  penalty  the  whole 
passage  is  saturated.  "  Ephraim  is  smitten "  (ver.  16).  There  is  to  be :  1.  Bereave- 
ment. (Vers.  12, 13, 16.)  The  once  mighty  and  powerful  nation  is  to  have  its  ranks 
sadly  thinned  by  sudden  and  violent  deaths,  "Ephraim  shall  bring  forth  his  children 
to  the  murderer."  The  ten  tribes  are  to  have  their  numbers  so  greatly  lessened  as 
to  be  brought  to  the  verge  of  extermination.  "  There  shall  not  be  a  man  left,"  This 
would  prove  a  heavy  humiliation  to  a  people  who  expected  that  the  blessing  which 
Moses  pronounced  upon  them  would  always  be  continued  :  "  They  are  the  ten 
thousands  of  Ephraim,  and  they  are  the  thousands  of  Manasseh  "  (Dent,  xxxiiu  17). 
2.  Barrenness.  (Vers.  11, 14, 16,)  The  name  Ephraim  means"  double  fruitfulnesa,"  and 
the  northern  kingdom  gloried  in  its  numerous  progeny ;  but,  now  that  the  curse  of 
God  is  upon  the  nation,  "  their  glory  shall  fly  away  like  a  bird,"  and  they  shall  have 
few  births,  as  well  as  many  deaths.  The  very  "  root "  of  the  once  powerful  and 
fruitful  Ephraim  has  been  smitten  with  an  incurable  hurt;  and  the  fruit  of  Israel's 


CH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  289 

womb  shall  perish  at  the  hirth.  For  the  nation  has  been  guilty  of  both  spiritual  and 
literal  harlotry ;  and  of  such  sins  barrenness  is  the  appropriate  penalty.  3.  Banish- 
ment, (Vers.  12,  15,  17.)  This  is  the  acme  of  Ephraim's  doom.  "  Woe  also  to  them 
when  I  depart  from  them  1 "  They  are  banished':  (1)  l'>om  the/aroitr  of  God :  "  I  will 
loTe  them  no  more ; "  "  There  I  hated  them."  (2)  From  the  "  house "  of  God,  ».e. 
from  his  family — from  the  blessings  of  his  covenant.  (3)  From  "  the  Lord's  land  " 
(ver.  3) ;  for  they  are  to  become  lost  and  hopeless  "  wanderers  among  the  nations." 
This  doom  has  been  very  fully  suffered  by  Israel  in  the  past,  and  the  nation  is  lying 
under  it  still.  The  condition  of  the  Jews  during  the  past  eiuhteen  centuries  has  been 
a  striking  verification  of  Old  Testament  prophecy,  M  well  as  a  convincing  argument 
for  the  truth  of  Christianity. 

Lessons.  1.  The  attractiveness  of  early  piety,  and  the  advantages  which  flow  from 
it  (ver.  10).  2.  The  duty  of  gratitude  for  being  "planted  in  a  pleasant  place," 
tomporMlly  and  spiritually  (ver.  13).  3.  The  danger  of  backsliding,  which  besets  every 
Christian,  and  our  need  of  humility,  watchfulness,  and  prayer  (ver.  10).  4.  The 
leavening  influence  of  sin  upon  the  whole  heart  and  life  of  the  sinner  (ver.  10). 
5.  The  awfulnoss  of  the  condition  of  every  God-forsaken  soul  (vers.  15, 17).— C.  J, 

Ver.  3. — "  The  Lord's  land."  Canaan  was  a  land  very  dear  to  the  Hebrew  heart. 
Few  things  could  cause  the  children  of  Israel  deeper  grief  than  the  prospect  of  exile  and 
banishment.  When  absent  from  their  native  and  sacred  soil,  their  thoughts  were  with 
the  fair  hills  and  fertile  valleys  of  Palestine,  its  fenced  cities,  and  above  all  its  metro- 
polis, the  centre  of  religious  worship  and  sacrifice.  Accordingly  the  heart  of  Christen- 
dom has- ever  regarded  "the  holy  land"  as  the  symbol  of  spiritual  privilege  and 
enjoyment  and  fellowship.     Christians  dwell  in  "  the  Lord's  land." 

I.  It  is  the  land  of  promise,  as  assured  to  them  by  a  gracious  and  "  covenant- 
keeping"  God,  even  as  Canaan  was  promised  to  the  descendants  of  the  patriarchs. 

II.  It  is  a  land  of  spibitual  plenty.  Canaan  was  represented  as  a  "  land  flowing 
with  milk  and  honey,"  and  in  this  is  a  figure  of  the  sufficient  provision  which  God  has 
made  in  the  gospel  for  the  spiritual  needs  of  his  obedient,  loyal  people. 

III.  It  is  a  land  of  Divine  favour.  Palestine  was  denominated  a  good  land, 
upon  which  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  rested  "  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  until  the  end 
of  tlie  year."  Upon  the  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Canaan  God  ever  lifts  the  light  of  his 
countenance. 

IV.  It  is  a  land  of  best.  Even  as  Israel  rested  in  the  promised  inheritance  aifter 
the  wanderings  of  the  wilderness,  so  Christians  find  that  where  Gud  dwells,  and  where 
he  appoints  their  habitation,  there  is  rest  spiritual  and  eternal. — T. 

Ver.  5. — "  What  will  ye  dof"  The  prophet  takes  such  measures  as  seem  likely  to 
be  effective,  in  order  to  rouse  Israel  to  a  sense  of  the  guilt  and  fol  ly  of  forsaking  Jehovah. 
He  pictures  them  as  exiles  in  an  Eastern  land,  far  liom  their  beloved  country,  far  from 
the  sacred  metropolis,  and  the  temple  with  its  priesthood  and  its  sacrifices.  He  sup- 
poses the  days  of  holy  festivity  to  have  come  round,  with  which  the  chosen  people 
associated  national  memories  of  Divine  deliverance,  or  happy  acknowledgments  of 
Divine  bounty.  On  the  recurrence  of  such  seasons  of  holy  mirth  and  obedient  observ- 
iince  and  welcome  fellowshiji,  the  captives  might  well  be  supposed  bitterly  to  rue  their 
rebellion  and  apostasy,  which  had  involved  them  in  calamities  so  dire  and  privations  so 
disastrous.  When  so  situated,  Hosea  asks  them, "  What  will  ye  do  ?"  It  is  a  question 
which  may  well  be  put  to  those  who  are  tempted  to  forsake  God  and  to  yieLt  to  the 
seductions  of  the  enemy.     The  time  of  trial  will  come,  and  then  what  will  ye  do? 

I.  What  wir,L  tb  do  when  earthly  plans  and  pleasures  fail?  In  the  hot 
pursuit  of  worldly  ends  in  life,  in  the  absorbing  enjoyment  of  the  delights  thii  world 
can  yield,  men  forget  their  Maker  and  his  claims,  their  Saviour  and  his  love.  But 
when  the  time  comes — as  come  it  soon  may — when  favourite  projects  dissolve  as  dreams, 
and  when  no  more  pleasure  is  to  be  found  where  it  has  long  been  sought  and  often 
experienced,  what  will  ye  do? 

II.  What  will  yb  do  when  abandoned  by  earthly  friends?  The  countenanc* 
of  companions  in  health  and  high  spirits  is  cheering,  their  hilarity  is  contagious,  their 
presence  is  fitted  to  banish  gloomy  apprehensions.    But  such  friendships  are  often  super- 

H08IA.  V 


290  THE  BOOK   OF  HOSEA.  [on.  ix.  1—17. 

flcUl ;  times  of  adversity  put  them  to  a  test  too  severe.  Those  who  are  willing  to  partake 
of  hospitality  and  to  heighten  conviviality  are  seldom  the  friends  "  born  for  adversity ; " 
they  olten  vanish  when  sympathy  is  most  needed,  when  solitude  is  most  dreaded. 

IlL  What  will  tb  do  when  eeligioot  obsebvanoes  abb  foumd  to  bk  empty 
roBUB  ?  It  is  sometimes  supposed  that  any  time  will  do  for  religion,  that  religious  aid 
and  consolation  are  always  at  the  service,  at  the  beck  and  call,  of  every  one  of  us.  But 
it  is  not  so.  If  we  neglect  and  abuse  our  privileges,  they  will  forsake  us.  The  mau 
who  has  long  disused  his  Bible,  and  given  up  prayer,  and  forsaken  public  worship,  may, 
in  the  time  oi  anxiety  and  trouble,  have  recourse  to  what  has  been  long  negltcted. 
But  he  may  find  that  these  ordinances  and  privileges  are  to  him  nothing  but  a  form. 
They  have  not  changed,  but  he  has  grown  unspiritual,  hardened,  and  morally  incapable 
ot  using  privileges  within  his  reach.     What  then  will  he  do  ? 

IV.  What  will  tb  do  ik  thb  pbospbot  of  death  and  judgment?  In  youth 
and  in  good  spirits,  men  sometimes  hear  of  these  dread  realities — for  such  they  are  to 
the  impenitent  and  unpardoned — without  at  all  realizing  them,  or  believing  that  they 
have  anything  to  do  with  themselves.  But  in  sickness  and  in  old  age,  eternity  often 
draws  near  to  the  imagination  and  to  the  heart.  Memory  brings  up  evil  deeds  and 
words  and  thoughts.  The  foreboding  soid  feels,  and  feels  justly,  that  the  account  must 
soon  be  given,  that  the  judgment-seat  must  soon  be  faced.  And  yet  there  is  no  pre- 
paration, no  defence,  no  plea.  What  a  position  I  and  what  a  prospect  I  Faithfulness 
and  kindness  induce  the  preacher  of  the  Word  to  remind  the  careless  hearer  of  the 
coming  days,  and  the  revelation  they  will  bring ;  to  urge  upon  him  now,  whilst  it  is 
of  some  use  to  consider  the  solemn  question — What  will  ye  then  do  ?— T. 

Ver.  7. — The  sin  of  despising  God's  prophets.  Every  preacher  of  righteousness  has 
to  endure  now  and  again  the  misunderstanding  or  the  misrepresentation  of  some  of 
those  whom  he  addresses  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  to  be  desired  that  all  men 
should  speak  well  of  him.  The  servant  is  not  above  his  Master,  and  no  calumny  was 
too  base,  no  blasphemy  too  enormous,  for  the  enemies  of  Jesus  to  assail  him  with. 

L  The  fbeaoheb  of  biohtbousness  often  meets  with  slioht  and  with  con- 
tempt FBOM  MEN.  1.  The  charges  brought;  "  The  prophet  is  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man 
is  mad."  Hosea  and  other  prophets,  from  Noah  down  to  the  last  of  the  order,  had  to 
contend  with  such  foolish  and  wicked  calumnies.  As  a  shield  for  their  own  folly, 
sinners  profess  to  find  folly  in  those  who  rebuke  them.  2.  The  motives  which  prompt 
to  such  charges.  Sometimes  it  is  done  by  the  mistake  oi  the  unspiritual,  who,  to  their 
shame,  know  no  better,  because  of  their  insensibility  to  Divine  realities,  because  of  the 
low  level  upon  which  they  live.  Sometimes  by  the  malice  and  calumnious  wilfulness  of 
opponents  of  truth  and  goodness,  who  hate  nothing  so  much  as  to  be  rebuked  for  their 
evu  deeds.  8.  The  conduct  which  calls  forth  such  charges.  Usually  the  real  ground 
of  hostility  to  prophets  aud  to  faithful  preachers  has  been  the  interference  which  has 
aimed  rebukes  at  prevalent  sins.  Thus  the  real  fools  and  madmen  are  not  the  ministers 
of  God's  word,  but  those  who  despise  it  and  blaspheme. 

II.  The  pbeachbb  of  eightboubness  will  nevbetheless  bb  vindioated  by  God. 
Whilst  unbelieving  and  impenitent  sinners  make  a  mock  at  sin,  and  jeer  at  those  who 
condemn  sin,  God,  the  righteous  Judge,  observes  the  treatment  with  which  his  servants 
meet.  1,  God  approves  and  advances  his  faithful  messengers.  None  can  serve  him 
faithfully  and  be  neglected  or  passed  over.  The  good  and  faithful  servant,  who  has 
been  deemed  a  madman  by  those  themselves  infatuated  and  mentally  intoxicated,  shall 
be  commended  and  exalted  in  due  time.  2.  God  will  himself  punish  the  mockers  m 
the  days  of  visitation  and  recompense.  "  He,  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his 
neck,  8b«ll  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy." — T. 

Ver.  8,— 7^  watchman.  Among  the  many  similitudes  employed  to  set  forth  the 
character  and  office  of  the  prophet,  the  spiritual  teaoher  and  counseller  of  men,  none  is 
more  striking  than  this,  it  is  a  figure  employed  also  by  Ezekiel  and  Habakkuk,  and 
may  be  presumed  accordingly  to  have  commemled  itself  to  the  judgment  of  the  people 
generally,  or  at  least  of  those  who  reverenced  the  Lord's  messenuers.  Every  preacher 
and  teacher  may  be  regarded  as  a  watchman  stationed  on  the  walls,  bound  to  give  the 
people  warning  of  approaching  danger,  and  so  to  secure  their  safety. 


can.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  t91 

L  Bt  whom  AFi-oiNTBD.  The  watchman  is  placed  at  his  post  by  tathority.  "  I 
hare  set  thee  •  watchman,"  is  the  utterance  of  the  Lord  himself.  The  minister  of 
Ciiiist  prefaces  his  coimsels  and  admonitions,  as  did  the  olden  prophets  theirs,  with 
the  assertion  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 

n.  OrsB  WHOM  STATIONED.  The  Hebrew  prophet  testified  to  the  Hebrew  people. 
There  is  no  limit  to  the  commission  of  the  Christian  preacher,  who  is  bound  to  witness 
to  Jew  and  Gentile,  to  young  and  old,  etc. 

III.  With  what  function  chaboed.  St  Paul  describes  this  when  he  writes  of 
spiritual  pastors  and  overseers,  "  They  watch  for  your  souls,  as  those  who  shall  give 
account."  Warning  of  the  temptations  which  assail,  counsels  regarding  the  way  of 
escape  and  the  promises  of  deliverance, — these  form  a  large  part  of  the  duties  of  the 
spiritual  watchman's  sacred  office. 

IV.  With  what  responsibility  attached.  The  watchman  who  fulfils  his  trust 
is  permitted  to  cast  the  responsibility  upon  those  to  whom  he  ministers.  It  is  for  them 
to  take  warning.  If  they  do  so,  they  will  escape ;  if  not,  their  blood  will  be  npon  their 
own  head, 

V.  Of  what  treatment  deserving.  For  his  worlc's  sake,  for  his  message's  sake, 
for  his  Master's  sake,  he  merits  a  respectful  hearing  and  a  grateful  regard.  No  super- 
stitious reverence  attaches  to  his  person,  but  his  office  is  a  sacred  ofSce,  and  the  herald  is 
honoured  when  he  faithfully  carries  his  message  to  sinful  men. 

VI.  The  personal  probation  involved.  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  by  him  who  i* 
stationed  upon  the  walls  as  a  watchman  entrusted  with  souls,  that  he  also,  as  well  as 
those  to  whom  he  ministers,  is  npon  his  trial.  By  faithfulness  he  may  deliver  his  soul, 
whilst  he  secures  the  safety  of  the  people  and  the  approval  of  the  Lord.  By  unfaithful- 
ness he  may  not  only  be  the  means  of  ruining  others ;  he  may  incur  the  displeasure  of 
God,  and  may  bring  down  upon  himself  the  sentence  due  to  disobedience  or  remissness. 

Application.  1.  The  watchman  is  admonished  to  watch.  2.  Those  who  hear  hii 
Winning  are  entreated  to  give  heed  to  what  they  hear,  and  thus  escape  the  dacgeri  of 
this  probationary  life,  and  avail  themselves  of  the  opportunities  of  salvation. — T. 

Ver.  17. — "  Wanderers  among  the  tuitions^  Whether  or  not  there  was  present  to 
the  mind  of  the  prophet  the  actual  fate  which  has  overtaken  his  countrymen,  it  seems 
plain  that  the  Spirit  within  him  uttered  in  these  words  a  doom  of  which  long  centuries 
have  beheld  the  awful  fulfilment.     We  see  here — 

,  I.  National  continuitt.  The  Hebrews  were,  and  are,  treated  as  one  people.  God 
visited,  and  still  visits,  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children.  The  Israelites  who 
apostatized  were  one  generation ;  the  Israelites  who  suffered  the  ills  and  privations  of 
captivity  were  another  generation.  Generation  after  generation  of  Israel's  sons  have 
been  "  scattered,"  "  wanderers  among  the  nations  " — a  fate  incurred  by  the  obstinate 
unbelief  of  their  forefathers,  who  rejected  and  crucified  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  no 
doubt  a  very  mysterious  arrangement  of  Providence;  but  we  must  acknowledge  it 
as  an  indisputable  fact. 

n.  Divine  kiqhteoubnbss.  God  is  a  Buler,  a  moral  Governor,  who  never  abdicates 
his  regal  and  judicial  functions.  The  prophets  were  inspired  to  insist  upon  this  great 
fact  with  emphasis  and  with  repetition.  A  covenant  God,  a  God  delighting  in  meicy, 
yet  threatens  his  chosen  people  thus:  "I  will  cast  them  away,  because  they  did  not 
hearken  unto  me :  and  they  shall  be  wanderers  among  the  nations."  People,  hearing 
from  preachers  of  the  gospel  much  about  the  pity  and  the  love  of  God,  sometimes 
scarcely  believe  in  the  equity  and  the  moral  sway  and  reign  of  him  who  is  supremely 
just.  Nevertheless,  he  will  vindicate  his  government,  he  will  assert  his  authority,  and 
under  his  rule  the  wicked  "  shall  not  go  unpunished." 

III.  Divine  truthfulness  and  foresight.  The  language  of  the  text  has  been  so 
exactly  verified  that  it  might  have  been  written  after  the  event.  Inspiration  only  could 
have  written  it  lefore.  Human  sagacity  might  have  predicted  tlie  captivity ;  only 
Divine  foreknowledge  could  have  predicted  the  dispersion.  Thus  in  the  process  o( 
time  God's  Word  becomes  its  own  warrant. 

IV.  Purpose  and  preparation  for  national  restoration  and  return.  Why 
are  the  Jews  kept  separate  from  the  peoples  in  whose  lands  they  dwell  ?  Surely  •'  he 
who  Bcattereth  will  gather  them  "  t    It  is  the  expectation  of  some  that  the  Jews  ehall 


m  THE.  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  ix.  1—17, 

be  restored  to  the  land  of  promise ;  it  is  the  belief  of  all  that  the  ingathering  of  the 
Jews  into  the  Christian  fold  shall  one  day  be  brought  about,  and  that  their  union  with 
Oantiles,  in  Bubjection  to  the  one  Dirlne  Lord  and  Saviour,  shall  be  as  "  life  from  the 
dMd.»— T. 

Ver.  6. — 77ie  solemn  dayi  o/ lift.  "  What  irill  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day  ?  "  "What 
will  ye  do  in  the  day  of  assembly? — when  ye  shall  be  despoiled  of  everythins  by  the 
Assyrians;  for  the  Israelites  who  remained  in  the  land  after  its  subjection  to  tlie 
Assyrians  did  worship  the  true  Ood,  and  offer  unto  him  the  sacrifices  appointed  by 
the  Law,  though  in  an  imperfect  manner;  and  it  was  a  great  mortification  to  them  to 
he  deprived  of  their  religious  festivals  in  the  land  of  strangers  "  (Elzas).  The  "  solemn 
day "  here  evidently  refers  to  one  of  the  great  Jewish  feasts,  either  the  Feast  of  the 
Passover,  the  Pentecost,  or  of  the  Tabernacles ;  and  the  literal  meaning  seems  to  be^ 
What  will  you  children  of  Abraham  do  when  you  are  deprived  by  tyrannic  strangers 
of  the  privilege  of  attending  those  solemn  assemblies  ?  Though  the  word  "  assembly  " 
would  be  a  better  rendering  than  "  solemn,"  yet  inasmuch  as  these  festive  assemblies 
were  very  solemn,  and  the  deprivation  of  them  of  all  things  the  most  solemn,  we  shall 
accept  the  word  for  purposes  of  practical  application.  There  are  solemn  days  awaiting 
all  of  us,  and  the  appeal  in  the  text  is  evermore  befitting  and  urgent. 

I.  The  DAT  OF  PERSONAL  AFFLICTION  Is  a  "  Solemn  day."  The  day  comes  either  by 
disease,  accident,  or  infirmities  of  age,  when,  withdrawn  from  scenes  of  business,  pleasure, 
or  profession,  we  shall  be  confined  to  some  lonely  room,  and  languish  on  the  couch  of 
suffering  and  exhaustion.  Such  a  day  must  come  to  all,  and  such  a  day  will  be 
"  solemn  " — a  day  with  but  little  light  in  the  firmament  of  earthly  life,  a  day  of  darkness, 
and  perhaps  of  tempests.  "  What  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day  ?  "  What  can  you  do  ? 
You  will  not  be  able  to  extricate  yourself  from  the  sad  condition.  No  man  can  raise 
himself  out  of  that  physical  suffering  and  weakness  that  are  destined  to  come  on  his 
frame.  What  will  ye  do  so  as  to  be  sustained  in  soul  ?  Sceptical  reasonings  will  be 
of  no  service,  the  recollection*  of  past  life  will  be  of  no  service.  "  What  will  ye  do  in 
that  solemn  day  ?  " 

II.  The  DAT  OP  SOCIAL  BEREAVBUENT  is  a  "  solemn  day."  Much  of  the  charm  ol 
life  is  in  our  social  loves,  the  love  of  partners,  parents,  children,  friends.  The  time 
must  come  when  ruthless  death  will  tear  them  from  the  heart.  This  will  be  a  solemn 
day.  What  a  dark  day  with  the  soul  is  that  when  we  return  from  the  grave  where  we 
have  left  for  ever  some  dear  object  of  the  heart,  and  when  we  enter  the  home  where  the 
loved  one  was  the  centre  and  charm  of  the  circle  I  Truly,  a  sunless,  saddening  day  is 
this.  And  yet  such  a  day  must  come  to  all.  "  What  will  ye  do  in  thi$  solemn  day  ?  " 
What  will  you  do  for  consolation  ?  What  word  of  comfort  has  science  to  offer,  has  the 
world  to  present  ?    What  will  you  do  ? 

III.  The  DAT  OF  DEATH  is  a  "  solemn  day."  This  awaits  every  man.  "  What  man 
ii  he  that  liveth  and  shall  not  see  death?"  "There  is  no  man  that  hath  pt^wer  over 
the  spirit  to  retain  the  spirit ;  neither  hath  he  power  in  the  day  of  death :  and  there  is  no 
discharge  in  that  war."  What  a  "solemn  day"  is  thisl  All  earthly  connections  dis- 
solving, the  world  receding,  eternity  parting  its  awful  folds.  What  will  ye  do  in  this 
day,  when  heart  and  flesh  shall  fail  ?  What  will  sustain  your  spirit  then  ?  Will  you 
count  your  wealth  ?  Will  you  gather  about  your  dying  bed  your  worldly  companions  ? 
Will  you  seek  to  bury  the  remembrance  of  your  past  life?  Something  must  be  done 
— this  you  will  feel ;  but  what  ? 

rV.  The  DAT  OF  judgment  is  a  "  solemn  day."  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ."  What  a  day  will  that  be  I  A  "great  and  notable"  day. 
"  Howl  ye,  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  What  will  ye  do  ?  Will  ye  call  "  to 
the  mountains  and  ro£ks  to  fall  on  you,  and  hide  you  from  the  eyes  of  him  that  sitteth 
on  the  throne,  and  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb"  ? 

ComcLUSiON.  "  What  will  ye  do  in  the  solemn  day  ? "  "  Do  1 "  Why,  do  what  you 
should  do  every  day  of  your  life — exercise  a  practical  and  unbounded  faith  in  the  love 
of  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  1  am  persuaded  that  ncitlier  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalilies,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor 
height,  nor  depth,  nor  .iny  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 


oa.  IX.  1—11]  THE  BOOK  OF  EOSkk.  2^ 

"THi  not  the  Stoio's  leisong,  got  hj  rota, 
The  pomp  of  words  and  pedant  dissertation^ 
That  can  sustain  thee  in  that  hour  of  terror: 
Books  have  taught  cowards  to  talk  nobly  of  it, 
But  when  the  trial  comes  they  stand  aghast. 
Haat  thou  considered  what  may  happen  after  it  T 
How  thy  account  may  stand,  and  w&at  the  answer?" 

(Nicholas  Bowa.) 

D.T. 

Ver.  7. — Charge  againti  religioiu  ministen.  "  The  prophet  is  a  fool,  and  the  spiritual 
man  is  mad."  What  the  prophet  means  here  seems  to  be  this — that  when  the  pre- 
dicted retribution  had  come  Israel  would  learn  that  the  prosperity  which  some  of  tha 
prophets  had  j)redicted  (Ezek.  xiii.  10)  proved  them  infatuated  fouls.  Although  some 
render  the  expression,  "  the  spiritual  man  is  mad,"  a  mad  man  the  man  of  spirit,  the 
man  of  the  spivit  is  frantic,  the  idea  seems  to  be  the  same  as  that  conveyed  in  our 
xersion,  Tiz.  that  the  man  pretending  to  have  spiritual  inspiration  and  prophesying  wai 
mad.  We  may  take  the  words  as  a  charge  against  religious  ministers,  and  make  two 
observations. 

L  It  IB  A  OHABOit  THAT  u  80METIUEB  TOO  TBUB.  There  have  been  religions 
ministers  in  all  ages,  and  there  are  still  in  connection  even  with  Christianity,  who  are 
foolish  and  "  mad."  1.  There  are  men  of  weak  minds.  There  are  men  in  the  ministry 
utterly  incapable,  not  only  of  taking  a  harmonious  view  of  truth,  but  even  of  forming 
a  clear  and  complete  conception  of  any  great  principle.  We  say  not  a  word  in  dis- 
paragement of  men  of  small  cerebral  power  and  feeble  understanding.  Heaven  made 
them  what  they  are ;  but  they  were  never  intended  for  the  ministry.  In  the  ministry 
they  do  enormous  mischief.  Their  silly  sentimentalities,  their  crude  notions,  their 
inane  conceptions,  bring  the  pulpit  into  contempt.  They  are  "  fools."  2.  There  are 
men  of  irrational  theologiet.  There  are  men  who,  though  not  always  naturally  weak- 
minded,  nevertheless  propound  theological  dogmas  which  are  utterly  incongruous  with 
human  reason,  and  therefore  nnbiblical  and  un-Divine.  The  doctrines  that  multitudes 
of  men  are  predestined  to  eternal  misery,  that  Christ's  death  procured  the  love  of  Ood, 
that  all  that  men  require  to  make  them  good  and  happy  for  ever  is  to  believe  in  some- 
thing that  took  place  eighteen  hundred  years  ago, — such  dogmas  as  these  are  often  pro- 
pounded in  pulpits,  and  they  are  utterly  foolish ;  they  strike  against  the  common  sense 
of  humanity,  and  have  no  foundation  in  the  teaching  of  him  who  is  the  "  Wisdom  of 
God."  The  prophet  that  talks  such  things  is  a  "  fool,"  and  the  spiritual  man  is  "  mad." 
3.  There  are  men  of  $U^  rittudB.  The  crossings,  the  kneelings,  the  bowings,  the 
robings,  the  upholstering,  the  grimacings,  which  constitute  much  of  the  ministry  of  a 
large  number  of  what  are  called  Protestant  ministers,  justify  the  people  in  calling  them 
fools  and  madmen.  The  outside  world  is  constantly  pointing  to  the  pulpit,  and  saying, 
"  The  prophet  is  a  fool,  and  the  spiritual  man  is  mad."  Alas  I  that  there  should  be  any 
cause  for  it ! 

II.  It  IS  A  OHABOK  THAT  IS  OFTBH  A  scoFFiNO  OALOUNT,  The  unregenerate  world 
have  from  the  beginning  identified  preaching  with  folly  and  fanaticism.  The  general 
impression  to-day  in  England  is  that  preachers  are  intellectually  a  feeble  folk,  effeminate, 
lackadaisical,  unfit  for  the  business  of  the  world.  Now,  an  ideal  preacher  of  Christianity, 
instead  of  being  a  "  fool "  or  "  mad,"  is  the  wisest  and  most  philosophic  man  of  his  age, 
and  that  for  thiee  reasons.  1.  He  aims  at  the  highest  end.  What  is  that  ?  To  make 
himself  and  his  fellow-men  what  they  ought  to  be  in  relation  to  themselves,  in  relation 
to  society,  in  relation  to  the  universe,  and  in  relation  to  God.  Men  are  wrong  in  all 
these  respects,  and  their  wrongness  is  the  cause  of  all  the  crimes  and  miseries  of  the 
world.  2.  He  works  in  the  right  direction.  Where  does  he  begin  this  work  of  moral 
reformation  ?  At  the  heart.  "  Out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life."  All  human 
institutions,  conduct,  actions,  flow  from  the  likings  and  dislikings  of  the  human  heart. 
He  deals  therefore  as  a  philosopher  with  the  fontal  sympathies  and  antipathies  of  the 
souL  To  clear  the  stream  he  goes  to  the  fountain,  to  strengthen  the  tree  he  goes  to 
the  roots,  to  improve  the  productions  of  the  world  he  works  upon  the  soil.  3.  He 
employs  the  best  means.  Whai  are  the  h«st  means  to  touch  the  heart  effectively,  to 
gi  ve  its  sympathies  a  new  and  right  direojion  ?    Legislation,  art,  poetry,  rhetorio  ?    So ; 


294  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  ix,  1—17. 

LOYB.  What  love  ?  Human,  angelic  ?  No ;  too  weak.  Divine  love.  Divine  love, 
not  merely  in  nature,  nor  in  propositions,  but  in  example,  the  example  of  God  himself. 
This  is  moral  omnipotence,  this  is  the  Gross,  this  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation. 
Let  no  man  say  that  the  ideal  minister  is  a  fool ;  the  man  who  says  it  ia  a  fooL 

"  I  law  one  man,  armed  simply  with  God'i  Word, 
Enter  the  eouls  of  many  fellow-men,  ' 
And  pierce  them  sharply  as  a  two-edged  sword. 
While  cont'cience  echoed  back  his  words  again. 
Till,  even  as  showers  of  fertilizing  rain 
Sink  through  the  bosom  of  the  valley  clod, 
So  their  hearts  opened  to  the  wholesome  pain. 
And  hundreds  knelt  upon  the  flowery  sod — 
One  good  man's  earnest  prayer  the  link  'twixt  them  and  God.* 

(Caroline  Xorton.) 
D,  T. 

Vers.  1 — 6. — Hie  LortPi  land/or  the  Lor^s  peopU.  This  chapter  may  fall  in  the 
interval  between  the  Assyrian  invasions  of  b.o.  743—738,  and  the  invasions  ending  in 
the  overthrow  of  Pekah,  B.o.  734—730  (cf.  2  Kings  xv.  29,  30;  2  Chron.  xxviii. 
16 — 21,  and  Assyrian  monuments). .  The  interval  seems  to  have  been  one  of  revived 
prosperity  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  6 — 15). 

I.  Abused  goodness.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  1.  A  glimpse  of  prosperity.  Israel  had  been 
rejoiced  with  a  bounteous  harvest.  Land  and  people  bad  previously  suffered  sore  from 
the  Assyrian.  For  a  moment  judgment  pauses.  It  would  be  interesting  if  we  could 
connect  this  gleam  of  prosperity  with  the  momentary  gleam  of  better  feeling  in  the 
nation,  as  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxviii.  God  tries  all  methods  with  the  sinner.  He 
varies  judgment  with  mercy.  He  pauses,  as  it  were,  to  give  space  for  repentance. 
He  tries,  having  humbled  by  application,  again  to  melt  by  goodness  (Rom.  ii.  4).  2. 
Ooodness  dbtued.  Israel  knew  not  the  meaning  of  this  grace.  The  momentary  soften- 
ing led  to  no  good  results.  The  people,  reassured  by  the  heaped-up  corn-floor  and  the 
fnU  wine-press,  fell  into  the  old  error  of  attributing  their  prosperity  to  the  idols  (ch.  ii. 
5),  and  renewed  their  assiduity  in  their  service.  Our  joy  in  the  use  of  God's  good 
gifts  becomes  sinful  when,  (1)  excluding  God,  wo  boastfully  attribute  them  to  our 
own  labour,  or  to  "  nature  '  (Deut.  viii.  17) ;  (2)  our  joy  in  them  is  purely  natural, 
without  recognition  of,  or  gratitude  towards,  the  great  Giver;  (3)  we  abuse  them 
by  gluttony  or  drunkenness.  In  any  case,  with  doom  hanging  over  his  head,  the 
sinner's  joy  is  a  species  of  madness.  3.  The  disapppinted  expectation.  "  The  floor  and 
the  wine-press  shall  not  feed  them,''  etc.  One  swallow  does  not  make  a  summer,  and 
the  sinner  errs  if  he  supposes  that  one  returning  glimpse  of  prosperity  means  the 
reversal  or  collapse  of  God's  threatenings.  God  punishes  the  abuse  of  his  gifts :  (1)  By 
their  removal.  "When  they  thought  themselves  most  secure,  when  the  corn  was 
stored  on  the  floor,  and  the  grapes  were  in  the  presses,  then  God  would  deprive  them 
of  them  "  (Pusey).  (2)  By  denying  his  blessing  with  them.  "  I  will  curse  your 
blessings  "(MaL  iL  2).  (3)  By  their  failure  to  satisfy.  The  good  which  the  sinner 
seeks  in  a  godless  enjoyment  of  natural  things,  he  is  doomed  not  to  find.  They  "lie" 
unto  him.    They  constantly  cheat  his  hopes. 

II.  Deobebd  expulsion.  (Ver.  3.)  The  glimpse  of  prosperity  did  not  mean  much. 
The  sinner,  notwithstanding  passing  appearances  to  the  contrary,  abides  under  wrath 
(John  ill.  36).  The  decree  of  judgment  stands  unrepealed.  "  They  shall  not  dwell 
in  the  Lord's  land,"  etc.  1.  The  Lorffs  land  only  for  the  holy.  Canaan  was  chosen 
by  God  as  the  seat  of  his  majesty,  the  place  of  his  abode.  His  presence  sanctified  it. 
Israel  possessed  it  as  his  people.  They  held  it  on  condition  of  obedience.  Their  first 
work  in  it  was  to  purge  it  of  the  impurities  which  had  formerly  desecrated  it  (Deut.  vii. 
1 — 6).  Kow  that  Israel  themselves  had  become  unholy,  they  must,  in  turn,  be 
expelled  from  the  land.  God  could  not  allow  them  to  remain  in  it.  The  "  holy  land  " 
is  for  a  holy  people.  So  it  ia  said  of  heaven  that  into  it  "  shall  in  no  wise  enter  any- 
thing that  detileth"  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  2.  2^  Lord  resuming  hi*  ««m  from  the  wicked. 
The  laud  was  the  Lord's,  and,  when  Israel  proved  incorrigible,  the  Lord  took  his  own 
^x»n  them.    Tliey  had  not  owned  him  in  the  possession  of  what  he  gave,  and  h»  now 


OH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  295 

resntned  hli  pA.  The  sinner,  who  depends  on  God  for  "  life,  and  breath,  and  all 
things,"  would  fain  keep  the  gifts,  while  declining  all  recognition  of  the  Giver.  Thia 
God  refuses  to  permit.  The  day  is  coming  when  he  will  strip  the  sinner  of  all  he  has. 
The  Lord  has  ^ven,  and  the  Lord  will  take  away.  3.  Egypt-bondage.  "  Ephraim 
shall  return  to  Egypt,"  The  people  were  to  sink  back  into  the  state  of  oppression, 
misery,  and  mixture  with  the  heathen  in  which  they  were  when  God  took  pity  on 
them  in  Egypt.  The  Exodus  gave  them  a  national  existence,  a  calling,  and  a 
land.  They  were  now  to  become  a  "no  people"  to  God,  and  be  sent  b^k,  as  it 
were,  to  Egypt  again.  Bejection  by  God  means  the  loss  of  distinctive  being,  of 
life-aim,  of  sphere,  of  liberty,  and  subjection  to  the  hard  tyranny  of  inn,  Satan,  and 
the  world. 

m.  Unclbannesb  in  Asstbia.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  "  They  shall  eat  unclean  things  in 
Assyria,"  etc.  Israel's  condition  in  exile  would  be  marked  by :  1.  Privation  of 
privilege.  They  would  be  cut  off  from  the  sanctuary  ("  house  of  the  Lord "),  and 
prevented  from  observing  their  feasts,  and  bringing  their  usual  offerings  (cf.  ch.  iii.  4). 
Their  worship,  as  it  stood,  was  not  acceptable  to  God.  They,  however,  attached 
importance  to  their  sanctuaries,  altars,  wine  offerings,  sacrifices,  etc.  And  it  would  be 
part  of  their  punishment  that  they  would  be  deprived  of  them,  2.  Legal  imdeanness. 
The  prophet  speaks  here  also  from  the  standpoint  of  the  people.  Their  outward  life, 
even  in  Canaan,  had  no  right  sanctification  in  it.  Now,  however,  their  food,  sacrifices, 
etc.,  would  become  even  formally  unclean.  Uncleanness  would  arise  (1)  firom  inability 
in  a  heathen  country  properly  to  observe  the  laws  of  food ;  (2)  from  the  fact  that  the 
heathen  country  was  itself  polluted,  and  commnnicated  its  uncleanness  to  food  and 
offerings  (cf.  Amos  vii.  17) ;  (3)  from  the  food  not  being  properly  sanctiBed  by  the 
presentation  of  the  firstfruits  (ver.  4).  Israel,  in  short,  would  lose  even  their  outward 
distinctness  as  a  sacred  people,  and  would  sink  to  the  level  of  the  profaneness  of  the 
nations  around.  [It  seems  better,  in  ver.  4,  to  read,  "their  sacrifices  shall  not  be 
pleasing  to  him ;  (their  bread  shall  be)  as  bread  of  mourners  unto  them."]  Separation 
from  God  renders  existence  as  a  whole  unclean.  The  principle  is,  first,  the  conse- 
cration ot  the  person,  then  the  consecration  of  the  life.  If  we  are  not  consecrated  to 
God,  nothing  we  think,  say,  or  do  can  be  spiritually  acceptable.  Prayers,  good  works, 
eating  and  drinking,  all  remain  unclean.  We  eat  unclean  things  in  Assyria — in  the 
spiritual  Egypt.  The  taint  of  death  pollutes  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  3,  An  end  of  joy. 
(Ver.  5;  cf.  ch.  ii.  11.) 

IV.  Desolate  habitations.  (Ver.  6.)  1.  Exile  as  hurial.  "Egypt* shall  gather 
them  up,  Memphis  [a  noted  place  of  burial]  shall  bury  them."  The  allusion  is  still 
to  Assyria  figured  as  a  second  Egypt.  The  tribes  wonld  be  lost  in  it  as  in  a  grave. 
Hence  recovery  is  described  as  resurrection  (ch.  vi.  2).  Sin  is  death.  Those  aban- 
doned to  sin  are  as  the  dead  in  graves.  2.  Deserted  dwellings.  "Their  pleasant 
places  for  their  silver  [or, '  valuables  of  silver'],  nettles  shall  possess  them  :  thorns  shall 
be  in  their  habitation."  The  present  state  of  the  Holy  Land  is  the  best  commentary 
on  this  prediction.  Sin  leaves  behind  it  rank  desolation.  Look  at  man's  own  soul! 
What  desolation  there  1    Nettles,  thorns,  a  temple  in  ruins. — J.  0. 

Vers.  7, 8. — Prophet  and  prophet.  We  are  disposed  to  prefer  the  view  which  takes 
ver.  7  to  refer  to  the  true  prophet,  Hosea  himself ;  and  ver.  8  to  the  prophets  Ephraim 
had  set  up  tor  himself  alongside  of  the  true. — "  Ephraim  is  a  watcher  with  [along  with, 
but  independently  of]  my  God  " — ^prophets  who  were  as  "  the  snare  of  a  fowler  "  to 
the  people. 

L  The  tktjk  prophet.  (Ver.  7.)  1.  What  he  saw.  "  The  days  of  visitation  are 
come,  the  days  of  recompense  are  come."  The  true  prophet  saw,  and  did  not  hesitate 
to  declare  in  the  ears  of  all,  the  full  extent  of  the  ruin  which  was  soon  to  overvrhelm 
the  nation.  He  did  not,  like  the  false  prophets,  say,  "  Peace,  peace,"  when  there  was  no 
peace  (Jer.  viii.  11).  He  told  the  awful  truth.  The  event  verified  his  words.  God's 
messengers  are  faithful.  2.  What  he/elt.  "  The  prophet  is  a  fool,  the  spiritual  man 
is  mad."  (Of,  Robertson  Smith's  •  Prophets  of  Israel,'  p.  157.)  The  words  may 
express  at  once :  (1)  The  judgment  passed  on  the  prophet  by  his  contemporaries.  They 
thought  him  "  beside  himself  "  (cf.  Acts  xxvi.  24 ;  2  Cor.  v,  13).  They  set  down  bis 
excited  utterances  as  ravings.    (2)  The  sympathetic  anguish  which  actually  made  the 


2W  toE  BOOK  OF  fiOSBA.  [oh- "C- i— i'^- 

prophet  feel  as  one  beside  himself.  "  Hosca  was  a  stranger  among  his  own  people, 
oppressed  by  continual  contact  with  their  sin,  lacerated  at  heart  by  the  bitterness  of 
their  enmity,  till  his  reason  seemed  ready  to  give  way  under  the  trial,"  3.  Eia  moral 
mission.  "For  the  multitude  of  thine  iniquities,  and  the  great  hatred."  His  eye 
pierced  to  the  moral  cause  of  the  judgments  that  were  impending.  He  read  their 
origin  in  the  people's  sin,  and  in  their  hatred  of  what  was  good.  A  true  prophet  is 
known  by  the  intensity  of  his  grasp  upon  moral  truth. 

II.  Thb  false  prophet.  (Ver.  8.)  The  prophets  in  whom  Ephraim  trusted  were : 
1.  Self-constituted.  "  The  watchman  of  Ephraim  was  with  my  God,"  or,  "  Ephraim  is 
a  watchman,"  etc.  Ephraim  was  not  content  with  the  prophets  God  gave  him.  He 
must  have  prophets  after  his  own  heart.  He  must  be  a  "  watchman"  on  his  own 
account.  The  false  prophet  thus  ran  without  being  sent  (Jer.  xxiii.  21).  He  was  not, 
like  the  true  prophet,  a  "man  of  the  spirit."  If  any  spirit  was  in  him,  it  was  a  lying 
spirit.  2.  Ensnarers  of  the  people.  "  The  prophet  is  the  snare  of  a  fowler  in  all  his 
ways."  They  snared  the  people  to  their  ruin  (1)  by  their  teaching,  promising  peace 
a^d  prosperity  when  there  was  none ;  (2)  by  their  example,  encouraging  the  people  in 
their  idolatries  and  follies  ;  (3)  by  making  light  of  the  moral  element  in  conduct.  They 
"  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  not  return  from  bis  wicked 
way,  by  promising  him  life  "  (Ezek.  xiii.  22).  They  flattered  the  people's  wishes ;  felt 
none  of  that  agonizing  sympathy  with  them  which  made  Hosea  seem  as  one  mad ; 
kept  away  from  all  denunciation  of  their  sins.  They  were  hirelings,  whose  own  the 
sheep  were  not,  and  who  cared  not  for  the  sheep  (John  x.  12, 13).  They  were  a  snare 
"  in  all  their  ways  " — out  and  out  in  everything  they  did.  3.  Themselves  as  bad  as 
the  rest.  "  Hatred  in  the  house  of  his  God."  Professing  to  speak  in  God's  Name,  the 
prophet  was  full  of  malignant  hatred  of  God,  and  of  those  who  spoke  in  God's  Name 
(cf.  Amos  vii.  10— 13).— J.  0. 

Yers.  9, 10. — Gibeah  and  Baal-peor.  From  this  point  the  mind  of  the  prophet 
reverts  largely  to  the  past.  He  sees  mirrored  in  it  both  God's  love  and  the  people's 
sins.  Allusion  is  made  here  to  God's  early  love  for  Israel,  and  to  the  sins  of  Gibeah 
nd  Baal-peor. 

L  The  evii,  op  sin  is  seen  bt  comparison  with  former  sins,  the  heinousness 
OP  WHICH  ALL  ADMIT.  Two  such  Outstanding  sins  of  the  past  were  those  of  Gibeah, 
and,  at  a  still  earlier  period,  of  Baal-peor.  The  former  (cf.  Judg.  xix.,  xx.)  was  a 
sin  revealing  depths  of  corruption  in  Israel  such  as  had  not  previously  been  heard  of 
(Judg.  xix.  30).  It  shocked  the  national  conscience.  It  led  to  fierce  vengeance  being 
taken  on  the  transgressors,  and  on  the  Benjamites  who  sided  with  them.  The  latter 
was  a  sin  of  wider  scope,  and  scarcely  less  heinous  in  its  character  (Numb.  xxv.  1 — 18). 
It  combined  idolatry  with  whoredom  in  a  peculiarly  daring  and  offensive  manner.  It 
led  to  the  destruction  of  twentj'-fouv  thousand  in  the  camp  of  Israel  by  a  plague,  and  to 
the  after  extermination  of  the  Midianites.  These  were  the  "  deep  corruptions"  which 
were  now  reproducing  themselves  in  Israel.  The  people  might  refuse  to  give  the  right 
name  to  the  iniquity  as  practised  by  themselves,  but  they  could  scarcely  fail  to  repro- 
bate it  when  presented  in  these  earlier  instances.  It  was  a  peculiarity  of  these  sins  that 
they  had  been  judged  by  Israel  itself.  It  was  the  tribes  that  pronounced  sentence  on 
the  evil-doers  at  Gibeah ;  and  Phinehas  had  executed  judgment  on  Zimri,  as  afterwards 
the  men  of  war  did  on  the  Midianites.  This,  accordingly,  was  a  case  to  which  Paul's 
principle  applied,  that  ability  to  judge  of  an  offence  in  another  renders  one  inexcusable 
if  he  does  the  same  thing  (Kom.  ii.  1).  We  are  often,  however,  willing  to  condemn  in 
others  sins  which  we  inconsistently  tolerate  in  ourselves. 

IL  The  evil  of  sin  only  becomes  fully  apparent  against  thb  baokgbound  of 
Divine  love.  This  is  brought  out  in  ver.  10  in  the  case  of  Baal-peor.  The  enormity 
of  that  sin  was  only  fully  seen  when  set  against  the  manifestations  of  Divine  love 
which  had  preceded.  "  I  found  Israel  like  grapes  in  the  wilderness ;  I  saw  your  fathers 
as  the  first  ripe  La  the  fig  tree  at  her  first  time."  There  is  indicated  here :  1.  Oo(rs 
choice  of  Israel,  He  "  found  "  them  "  in  the  wilderness ; "  he  "  saw  "  them  there,  and 
chose  them.  2.  God's  delight  in  Israel.  The  nation  was  pleasant  to  him  as  grapes  in 
the  desert,  or  as  the  first-ripe  fig.  His  choice  and  his  affection  were  both  manifested 
in  many  wonderful  ways.    It  was  this  love  shown  to  Israel  which  made  such  acts  aa 


OH.  IX.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  297 


the  making  of  the  goMen  calf,  and,  again,  the  thameful  apostasy  of  Baal-peoT,  to 
inexcusably  wicked.  To  see  sin  in  its  full  enormity  we  must  count  up  the  mercies  of 
God  against  which  we  are  offending — ^must  reflect,  above  all,  on  God'a  loTe  to  us  a« 
displayed  in  Christ. 

III.  The  frjncifle  of  continuitt  nr  em.  Israel'i  gpostasy.  Rosea  seeks  to  show, 
was  no  new  thing.  It  began  at  a  very  early  period  (cf.  oh.  x.  9).  The  strain  of  it 
had  continued  in  the  blood  of  the  people  ever  since.  It  was  pruved  to  be  a  constitu- 
tional disorder  which  no  mild  treatment  would  eradicate.  We  gain  insight  into  the 
virulence  of  depravity  by  studying  its  hereditary  manifestation. — J,  O. 

Vers.  11 — ^17. — Ephraim's  woe.  "  Woe  also  to  them  when  I  depart  from  them  " 
(rer.  12).  It  is  this  thopght  of  woe  as  the  result  of  God  departing  from  Ephraim — 
"hating  them,"  "loving. them  no  more"(ver.  15) — which  is  the  key-note  of  the 
liassago.  The  prophet  compares  the  ideal  which  God  set  up  for  Ephraim — fruitfulness, 
Tyre-UUe  pleasantness  of  situation,  settled  habitation  in  Canaan — with  the  miserable 
end  now  awaiting  the  people.  His  mind  dwells  with  a  sort  of  fixity  of  horror  on  the 
bringing  forth  of  the  children  to  slaughter  with  the  sword  (vers.  12, 13,  16).  Woe 
would  descend  on  Ephraim  to  the  reversal  of  the  Divine  ideal. 

I.  In  respect  of  fbuitfulness.  (Vers.  11,  12.)  Fruitfulness  and  strength  of 
numbers  was  an  especial  part  of  the  promise  to  Ephraim  (Gen.  xlix.  22,  26 ;  Deut. 
xxxiii.  17),  even  as  a  numerous  posterity  was  the  promise  to  Israel  generally.  This 
"  glory  "  would  now  be  taken  from  the  people  that  boasted  of  it.  Licentiousness  had 
already,  in  part,  undermined  the  nation's  strength  (oh.  iv.  10).  The  sword  would 
now  finish  what  their  own  misconduct  had  begun.  As  in  a  previous  figure  (ch.  viii.  7), 
and  in  ver.  16,  the  curse  is  represented  as  working  to  the  frustration  of  the  people's 
wishes  at  every  stage  in  the  advance  of  their  hopes.  First,  there  is  no  conception ; 
then,  in  the  cases  where  there  is  conception,  there  is  "  a  miscarrying  womb  *  (ver.  14) ; 
then,  at  the  stage  of  birth,  there  is  failure  to  bring  forth ;  even  if  the  child  is  bom,  it 
is  doomed  to  be  killed  by  the  sword.  Nothing  goes  right;  everything  goes  wrong ; 
there  is  but  woe,  failure,  frustration,  disappointment,  when  God  departs  fiom  lu.  The 
numbers  of  a  nation  are  in  God's  hand.  He  can  bless  or  he  can  blast.  His  judgment 
works  both  through  natural  laws  and  events  of  providence. 

II.  In  respect  of  pleasantness.  (Vers.  13,  14,  16.)  God  designed  for  Ephraim 
a  situation  pleasant  as  that  of  Tyre ;  he  had  in  reserve  for  him  all  "  precious  things  " — 
"  blessings  of  the  heaven  above,  blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  under  "  (Gen.  xlix.  25, 
26 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  13 — 15)j  Thus  gloriously  planted,  Ephraim  was  to  be  the  cynosure 
of  the  tribes,  a  paragon  of  sweetness  and  beauty,  flow  ghastly  the  contrast—"  But 
Ephraim  shall  bring  forth  his  children  to  the  murderer"  (ver.  13)1  1.  A  worm  at  the 
root.  "  Ephraim  is  smitten,  their  root  is  dried  up,  they  shall  bear  no  fruit,"  etc. 
(ver.  16).  This  is  the  fate  of  all  glory  without  God.  Its  root  is  not  drawn  from  the 
sources  of  perennial  life  in  the  eternal  One.  It  has  in  it  the  principle  of  decay.  It  is  a 
glory  of  the  world,  fading,  perishing.  8ie  transeat.  The  Christian's  inheritance  is 
incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  faileth  not  away  (1  Pet.  i.  4).  2.  Ruthless  butchery. 
(Vers.  13, 16.)  The  pleasantness  of  Ephraim  would  be  smutched  with  the  blood  of 
his  own  children — the  "beloved"  ones,  the  "darlings"  of  the  womb.  The  very 
thought  of  the  carnage  that  is  to  come  almost  makes  the  prophet's  brain  reeL  He  has 
threatened  Ephraim  with  barrenness,  but  now  that  he  has  to  frame  a  prayer  for  his 
people,  he  can  think  of  no  kinder  one  than  that  they  may  have  "  a  miscarrying  womb 
and  dry  breasts  "  (cf.  Luke  xxiii.  29).  One  woe  swallows  up  another,  and  makes  it  all 
but  seem  a  blessing  in  comparison.    Terrible,  truly,  when  God  departs  1 

III.  In  respect  of  settlemknt.  (Vers.  15,  17.)  Ephraim  would  be  driven  from 
God's  house,  ».e.  rejected  from  being  his  people,  or  spiritual  house,  and  would  be  sent 
abroad  as  "wanderers  among  the  nations."  This,  again,  was  in  contradistinction  to 
the  01  iginal  design  of  a  permanent  settlement  as  the  Lord's  people  in  the  Lord's  land. 
1.  The  often-reiterated  cause  of  the  banishment  is  here  again  specified.  The  people 
were  driven  out  (1)  for  their  wickedness,  which  had  assumed  peculiarly  aggravated  and 
concentrated  forms  ("  in  Gilgal ") ;  and  (2)  for  their  obduracy :  "  They  did  not  hearken 
unto  him,"  ».«.  God.  Even  their  wickedness  would  not  have  ruined  them,  had  they 
repented  of  it  when  Gkid  reproved  and  pleaded  with  them.    Now  the  day  for  Npentance 


298 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  X.  1 — 15. 


was  past.  "I  will  love  them  no  more."  2.  The  doom  is  further  individualized. 
"  Wacderers  among  the  nations."  Buch  tn  the  Jew*  at  this  day.  Prophecy  nerer 
■poke  a  truer  word.— J.  a 


BXPOSTTIOIT. 


CHAPTER  X. 


The  concluding  thought  of  the  last  chapter 
ia  the  commencing  one  of  this;  while  the 
■ad  subject  of  Israel's  guilt  being  resumed 
eontinnes  In  the  first  section  (vers.  1 — 8)  of 
the  chapter,  and  that  of  their  punishment 
in  the  second  section  (vers.  9 — 15),  with  a 
solemn  caution  to  make  a  better  use  of  the 
future  than  they  had  done  of  the  past. 

Ver.  '1. — Israel  is  an  empty  vine.  The 
oomparison  of  Israel  to  a  vine  is  frequent ; 
but  the  epithet  hoqeq  is  variously  rendered ; 
(1)  as  "  empty."  Thus  Aben  Ezra  explains  it 
as  "  empty  in  which  there  is  no  strength  to 
bring  forth  fruit,  nor  fruit ; "  and  thus  also 
Kimciii  explains  it:  "An  empty  vine  in  which 
there  is  not  any  life-sap ; "  and  in  the  same 
sense  'Dio,  "empty  and  sick,"  Nah.  ii.  11. 
This,  too,  is  the  meaning  of  the  Authorized 
Version,  but  is  irreconcilable  with  the  state- 
ment in  the  following  clause,  "  he  bringeth 
forth  fruit."  The  Chaldee  had  preceded  in 
giving  the  word  the  sense  of  "  plundered," 
"  empty,"  "  waste."  But  (2)  some  take  hoqeq 
transitively,  and  attach  to  it  the  significa- 
tion of  "  emptying  out  its  fruit."  In  this  way 
Kashi  explains  it ;  "  The  Israelites  resemble 
a  vine  which  casts  all  its  good  fruit;"  and 
similarly  the  marginal  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  has,  "  a  vine  emptying 
the  fruit  which  it  givefh."  There  is  (3)  a 
signification  derivable  from  the  primary 
meaning  of  boqeq  more  suitable  than  either 
of  the  preceding.  From  the  primary  sense  of 
"  pouring,"  "  pouring  itself  out,"  or  "  poured 
out,"  and  so  overflowing,  comes  that  of  V  luxu- 
riant." Accordingly  Gesenius  translates, "  a 
wide-spreading  vine."  This  agrees  with  the 
Septuagint  eSK\-niiaTov)ra, "  a  vine  with  goodly 
branches,"  to  which  the  Vulgate  frondosa, 
"  leafy,"  nearly  corresponds.  In  like  manner 
De  Wette  renders  it  wuchernder,  "growing 
prosperously."  It  was  thus  a  vine  of  vigorous 
growth,  and  extending  its  branches  far  and 
wide ;  a  parallel  expression  is  found  in  the 
nrnb ':  of  Ezek.  xvii.  6,  "  a  spreading  vine." 
He  (rather,  t'()  bringeth  forth  fruit  onto  him* 
self  (itself).  The  word  niK^'  literally  signifiei 
"  to  set  to  "  or  "  on,"  and  is  rightly  rendered 
by  Gesenius  "  to  set "  or  "  yield  fruit."  It  is 
variously  interpreted  by  the  Hebrew  com- 
mentators, but  more  or  less  erroneously  by 
them  all.   Bashi  takes  it  in  the  sense  of  "  to 


profit;"  Aben  Ezra,  "to  bear"  or  "make 
equal ; "  and  Kimohi  informs  us  that  theolder 
interpreters  understood  in  the  sense  of 
"lying,"  as  if  ttw,the  whole  phrase  meaning, 
"  ike  trmt  will  lie  to  him,"  that  is,  deceive  or 
fail  him  (like  ch.iz.2).  Kimchi  himself  takes 
the  verb  in  the  right  sense,  but,  misled  by 
his  erroneous  explanation  of  boqeq,  empty  or 
plundered,  takes  the  clause  interrogatively : 
«'  How  shall  he  set  on  himself  [equivalent  to 
'  yield '  any  fruit],  since  he  is  as  a  plundered 
vine ;  for  the  enemies  have  plundered  him 
and  set  him  as  an  empty  vessel  ?  how  should 
he  still  thrive  and  become  numerous  in 
childien  and  treasures?"  It  makes  little 
difference  whether  we  take  the  second  part 
of  the  first  clause  relativelyor  independently, 
as  the  sense  amounts  to  the  same.  The 
meaning  of  the  two  diflicult  and  disputed 
words  then  we  take  to  be  respecti^ly 
"  luxuriant "  and  "  yield ; "  and  the  sense  of  • 
the  whole  is  either  (1)  a  comparison  of  the 
former  state  of  Israel  to  a  vine  luxuriant 
and  likely,  as  far  as  appearance  went,  to 
set  forth  fruit;  but  the  luxuriance  degene- 
rated into  leafage,  and  the  likelihood  of 
fruitage  failed ;  or  (2)  Israel  is  compared  to 
a  vine  luxuriant  in  growth  and  abundant  in 
fruit — but  only  for  itself.  The  former  ex- 
planation accords  vrith  that  of  Jerome  when 
he  says,  "  Unpruned  vines  luxuriate  in  the 
juice  and  leaves  whicli  they  ought  to  trans- 
mute into  wine.  They  disperse  in  the  idle 
ambitious  show  of  leaves  and  branches." 
The  more  abundantly  a  fruit  tree  gives  out 
its  strength  in  leaves  and  branches,  the  less 
abundant  and  the  worse  the  quality  of  the 
fruit.  Thus  it  was  with  the  fig  tree,  with 
its  abundant  leaves  and  no  fruit,  which  our 
Lord  cursed.  But  with  the  same  or  a 
similar  rendering  there  is  the  alternative 
sense  of  prosperous  growth  and  plenteous 
fruit,  but  that  fruit  wasted  on  self  or  sin ; 
and  thus  the  meaning  in  either  case  is  much 
the  same.  The  Septuagint  favours  this  by 
6  Kapwit  fjSSiivSiv  aOr^s,  equivalent  to  "its  fruit 
exuberant."  Cyril  favours  this  latter  also 
in  saying,  "  When  Israel  still  wisely  led  a 
life  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  Law,  it 
was  as  a  beautiful  vine  adoi-ned  with 
branches,  which  even  the  neighbouring 
nations  admired."  This  was  exactly  the 
state  of  Israel  in  the  days  of  Joash  and 
Jeroboam  IL;  but  their  prosperity  was 
prostituted  to  purposes  of  idolatry.  Jerome 
also,  in   another   part  of  his    ezpositioa, 


OH.  I.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


299 


approaches  thia  sense.  Taking  rw  in  the 
sense  of  "  to  equal,"  he  says,  "  The  fecundity 
of  the  grapes  equalled  the  fecundity  of  the 
blanches;  but  they  who  had  previously 
been  so  fruitful  before  they  offended  God, 
afterwards  turned  the  abundance  of  &uits 
into  multiplied  occasions  of  offence;  and 
the  greater  the  population  they  possessed, 
the  more  altars  they  built,  and  exceeded  the 
abundant  produce  of  the  land  by  the  mul- 
titude of  their  idols."  Or  the  verb  may 
mean,  "  it  made  fruit  equal  to  itself;"  nearly 
BO  the  Vulgate.  The  fruit  is  agreeable  to 
it.  Accoiduig  to  the  mnltitude  of  his  fruit 
he  hath  increased  the  altars.  In  this  second 
or  middle  clause  of  the  verse  the  figure 
passes  into  the  fact  represented  by  it.  It  is 
no  longer  the  vine,  but  Israel.  The  altars 
kept  pace  with  the  increase  of  population 
and  abumlaut  produce ;  the  multiplication 
of  altars  for  idolatrous  sacrifice  and  service 
was  proportionate  to  their  prosperity.  The 
I'  here  and  in  next  clause  marks  the  circum- 
locutory genitive,  and  the  If  is  quantitative. 
According  to  the  goodness  of  his  land  they 
have  made  goodly  images  (margin,  statues, 
or,  standing  images).  The  matstsevoth  here 
mentioned  are  irT^Arjs  in  the  LXK.,  that  is, 
statues  or  pillars,  and  those  pillard  were 
erected  to  Baal  or  some  other  idol,  as  we 
read  in  1  Kings  ziv.  23.  The  plural  of  the 
verb  in  this  last  clause  arises  from  Isiael 
being  a  noun  of  multitude.  Bashi  gives 
the  following  brief  exposition :  "  Just  in 
proportion  as  I  caused  their  prosperity  to 
overflow  to  them,  they  multiplied  calves  for 
the  altars ; "  but  Kimchi  explains  both 
clauses  more  fully  and  accurately  thus: 
"  As  I  increased  their  prosperous  state  in 
treasures  and  children,  they  multiplied 
altars  to  Baal ;  as  I  did  good  to  their  land 
in  corn  and  wine  and  oil,  they  waxed 
strong  in  setting  up  pillars  for  other  gods ;  " 
the  verb  -on  has  the  same  sense  here  as  Tsm 
in  Jonah  iv.  9. 

Ver.  2. — Their  heart  is  divided.  Here 
their  wickedness  if  traced  to  its  fountain- 
head  ;  its  source  was  in  the  corrupt  state  of 
the  lieart.  Their  lieart  was  (1)  divided, 
and  so  they  halted  between  two  opinions — 
between  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  idolatry. 
Chalaq  is  taken  in  this  signification  by  the 
Chaldee,  Syriac,  Septuagiut,  and  Jerome, 
as  also  by  the  Hebrew  commentators.  The 
LXX.  have  (a)  ifiipunv  in  the  singular,  which 
affords  some  support  to  Hitzig's  rendering, 
«  He  (God)  divided  their  heart,"— but  this 
is  unsuitable  and  unscriptural ;  another  (6) 
reading  of  the  same  version  is  e/ispurcw, 
"  They  have  divided  their  hearts,"  which  is 
somewhat  better,  yet  incorrect,  (c)  The 
Authorized  Version  is  also  questionable,  as 
the  verb  is  not  used  intransitively  in  Qal. 
(2)  Kimchi,  indeed,  understands  chalaq  as 


equivalent  to  niehloq  in  the  Niphal,  and 
interprets,  "  Prom   the  fear  of  God    and 
from  his  Law  their  heart  is  divided,"  V.«. 
separated ;   similarly  Bashi :  "  Their  heart 
is  divided  from  me ;  "  Aben  Ezra  somewhat 
peculiarly,  though  to    the    same  purport : 
"  Tliey  (their  heart)  has  not  one  part  (but 
several),"  oris  divided.  But,  notwithstandin  g 
this  consensus  in  favour  of  the  meaning  of 
"  divide,"  the  rendering  preferred,  and  justly 
so,    by   modern   expositors    in   general,  is 
"smooth."  This  is,  indeed,  the  primary  sense, 
that  of  "  divide  "  beiirg  secondary,  as  division 
was  made  by  lot  era  smooth  btrfae,eheleq,xiBe(l 
for  the  purpose.  (3)  "  Their  iieart  is  smooth," 
that  is,  bland,  deceitful,  hypocritical ;  though 
it  must  be  admitted  that  the  word  is  mostly 
applied  to  the  tongue,  lip,  throat,  mouth, 
speech,  and  not  to  the  heart.     Their  heart 
was  hypocritical  and  faithless.    ^Now  shall 
they  be  found  faulty ;  rather,  they  shaU  he 
dealt  with  as  such,  or  punished;  better  still, 
perhaps,  is  the  rendering,  now  shall  they 
alone.      The    "now"   defines  sharply  the 
turning-point  between  God's  love  and  God's 
wrath.  The  state  of  things  hitherto  exiating 
cannot  continue;  it  must  soon  come  to  an 
end.    Ere  long  they  are  doomed  to  discover 
their  guilt  in  its  punishment;    they  shall 
find  ont  their  sin  by  suffering;   suddenly 
and  to  their  cost  they  shall  have  a  fearful 
awaking  to  a  sense  of  their  iniquity  by  the 
inflictions  of  Divine  wrath  upon  their  guilty 
heads.    He  shall  break  down  their  altars, 
he  shall  spoil  their  images.     The  verb  c|-ij; 
is  peculiar ;  being  a  denominative  from  P)np, 
the  neck,  it  signifies  "  to  break  the  neck  of," 
liUo  the  Greek  Tpaxij^iC^iv,  decollate,  tlien 
figuratively  "tear  down,"  "break  iu  pieces." 
This  bold  expression  of  breaking  the  neck 
of  the  altars  may  allude  to  their  destruction 
by  breaking  off  the  horns  of  the  altars,  or 
rather  to  their  beheading,  cutting  off  the 
heads   of  victims    at   those    altars.      The 
Hebrew  expositors  make  the  heart  of  the 
people,  not  God,  the  immediate  object  of 
the  verb.    "  Their  heart,"  says  one  of  them, 
"  shall  tear  down  their  altars  and  lay  waste 
their  pillars,  because  it  is  divided  from  me. 
It  will  tear  down  their  altars  wliich  they 
are  said  also  to  have  multiplied,  and  lay 
Vi'aste    their    pillars  which   tliey  made  so 
goodly."    The  means  of  sinning  shall  be 
taken  from  tliem  and  destroyed — their  altars 
broken  down  and  their  Images  spoiled.    As 
the  heads  of  victims  had  been  cut  off  at 
these  altars  erected  for  idolatrous  worship ; 
so  the  heads  of  their  altars  would  be  broken 
off. 

Ver.  3.— For  now  they  shall  say,  We  have 
no  Mng,  because  we  feared  not  the  Lord.  In 
the  day  of  their  destructiou  Israel  would  be 
brought  to  see  and  even  feel  that  the  king 
appointed  through  their  own  lelf-will  and 


300 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  X.  1—16. 


fancied  plenitude  of  power  was  unable  to 
protect  or  help  them,  and  that  because  they 
had  rejected  Jehovah  and  cast  aside  his 
fear.  The  point  of  time  denoted  by  "  now  " 
is  eitlier  when  they  see  destruction  before 
their  eyes,  or  when  Israel  is  already  in  cap- 
tivity. Eashi  explains  it  in  the  former 
fense :  "  ^Vhen  destruction  shall  come  upon 
them, they  shall  say,  'We  have  no  king,'  tlilit 
is,  our  king  on  whom  we  set  our  hopes  when 
we  said, '  Our  king  shall  go  out  before  us  and 
fight  our  battles,'  atfords  us  no  help  what- 
ever." Kimchi  explains  similarly,  but  fixes 
the  "  now  "  in  the  time  of  the  Captivity : 
"  Now,  when  they  shall  be  carried  out  of  their 
land,  they  shall  recognize  and  say, '  We  have 
no  king ; '  tlie  explanation  is,  as  if  we  had  no 
king  among  us,  for  there  is  no  strength  in  him 
to  deliver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies, 
as  we  thought  when  we  asked  for  a. king 
who  should  march  at  our  head  and  fight  our 
battles.  God — blessed behel — ^wasourKing, 
and  we  needed  no  king,  and  he  it  was  that 
delivered  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies 
when  we  did  his  will."  Aben  Ezra  and 
others  understand  it  as  the  expression  of  a 
wild  licence  on  the  part  of  Israel,  recklessly 
giving  Tent  to  an  anarchical  and  atheistic 
spirit :  "  Ab  soon  as  their  heart  was  divided 
tliey  had  no  wish  to  have  a  king  over  them, 
and  had  no  fear  of  Jehovah ;  therefore  they 
had  no  fear,  and  every  one  did  what  wa» 
right  in  his  own  eyes."  This  exposition 
neglects  the  note  of  time,  as  also  the  causal 
particle  that  follows.  They  bethought  them- 
selves that,  as  they  had  not  feared  Jehovah, 
but  neglected  liifl  Law,  the  Mog  which  they 
had  demanded  could  do  them  no  good. 
"  What,"  they  asked, "  can  the  king  do  for  us? 
He  has  no  power  to  deliver  us,  since  God  is 
angry  with  us,  for  we  have  sinned  against 
him  ?"  Such  is  the  confession  of  Israel  in 
captivity.  Pusey  remarks  in  reference  to 
this:  "bi  sin,  all  Israel  had  asked  for  a 
king,  when  the  Lord  was  their  King;  in  sin, 
Ephraim  had  made  Jeroboam  king ;  in  sin, 
their  subsequent  kings  were  made,  without 
the  counsel  and  advice  of  God ;  and  now,  as 
the  close  of  all,  they  reflect  how  fruitless  it 
all  was." 

Ver.  4. — God,  by  the  prophet,  had  charged 
Israel  with  fruitlessness,  or  with  bringing 
forth  fruit  to  themselves;  with  perverting 
the  bounties  of  his  providence  in  promoting 
idolatry ;  with  tlieir  division  of  heart,  or 
duceitfulness  of  heart.  He  had  also 
tlireatened  to  punish  them  for  their  sin, 
and  to  deprive  them  of  the  means  of  sinning 
by  destroying  tL«  instruments  thereof,  and 
to  prevent  their  obtaining  any  help  from 
their  king,  proving  to  them  the  folly  of 
depending  on  him.  He  now  proceeds,  in 
this  and  following  verses  (4 — 8),  to  point 
out  their  moral  corruption,  the  usual  conse- 


?|nence  or  concomitant  of  irreligion  and  of 
also  religion,  instancing  their  deceptive 
dealing  in  the  common  affairs  of  life  and 
their  perjury  in  public  compacts  or  cove- 
nants, as  also  their  general  unrighteousness. 
He  threatens  to  destroy  their  idols  to  the 
distress  of  their  worshippers  and  ministering 
priests  as  well  as  of  their  chief  city.  Ho 
tlireatens  further  to  cause  their  calf-idoU  to 
be  carried  into  captivity,  pouring  shame 
and  contempt  on  their  enterprises ;  to  cut ' 
off  their  king;  to  leave  the  places  of  their 
idol-worship  desolate,  filling  the  people 
with  distress  and  despair  because  of  all 
their  sins.  They  have  spoken  words,  swear- 
ing falsely  in  making  a  oovenant.  In  this 
fourth  verse  the  prophet  deplores  the  ab- 
sence of  truth,  faithfulness,  and  loyalty  to 
duty.  Tills  eipressipn,  "  they  have  spoken 
words,"  is  generally  understood  to  signify 
(o)  "empty  words,"  "false  words,"  only  words 
and  no  more,  like  the  Latin  verba  alicui 
dare.  Thus  their  vain,  deceitful,  lying 
words  in  private  transactions  and  common 
affairs  of  everyday  life  would  correspond 
to  their  perjury  in  public  treaties  and  cove- 
nants. Their  words  were  deceitful  and 
their  oaths  falsehood.  In  their  ordinary 
business  transactions  they  used  words, 
empty  words,  words  without  truth,  corre- 
sponding thereto ;  in  international  concerns 
they  had  pursued  the  same  course  of  falsi- 
fying and  covenant-breaking.  After  entering 
into  an  engagement  with  the  Assyrian  king 
Shalmaneser,  they  made  a  covenant  with 
So  King  of  Esypt,  as  we  read  in  2  Kings 
zvii.  4,  "  And  the  King  of  Assyria  found 
conspiracy  in  Hoshca:  for  he  had  sent 
messengers  to  So  King  of  Egypt,  and 
brought  no  present  to  the  King  of  Assyria, 
as  he  had  done  year  by  year."  In  this 
latter  case  they  acted  as  covenant-breakers, 
and  at  the  same  time  contravened  the  Divine 
command,  which  forbade  them  entering  into 
covenants  with  foreigners.  The  first  clause, 
however,  is  understood  by  some  (6)  in  the 
senseof  "deliberating."  Thus  Kimchi  under- 
stands it,  erroneously  referring  it  to  Jero- 
boam and  his  countrymen ;  thus  :  "  Jeroboam 
and  his  companions  took  counsel  what  they 
should  do  in  order  to  strengtlien  the  govern- 
ment in  his  hand,  and  they  deliberated  (or 
held  consultation)  that  tlie  people  should 
not  go  up  to  Jerusalem  to  the  house  of  the 
sanctuary;  and  for  this  purpose  they  bound 
themselves  by  oath  and  made  a  covenant. 
But  their  oath  was  a  vain  one,  because  their 
oath  was  intended  to  frnstrate  the  words  of 
the  Law  and  the  command  of  God,  and  to 
make  images  for  their  worship."  The  words 
Ky»  nhtf  have  been  explained  by  some  (1) 
as  "  oaths  of  vanity,"  that  is,  oaths  by  vanity 
or  an  idol,  as  an  oath  of  Jehovah  is  an  oath 
by  Jehovah,  n\hx  being  taken  for  a  noun  in 


OH.  X.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


301 


the  plural ;  (2)  sb  predicate,  while  the 
following  words  supply  the  subject;  thus: 
■'their  covenautcontraets  areoathsof  vauily." 
This  mietake  of  taking  nH^K  for  a  noun  aroie 
from  the  anomalous  form  of  the  word,  which 
is  really  a  verb.  The  farm  is  explained  by 
Aben  Ezra,  who  calls  it  an  irregular  forma- 
tion, as  if  it  were  compounded  of  the 
infinitive  construct  as  indicated  by  the 
ending  ni-,  and  the  infinitive  absolute  as 
indicated  by  the  qamets  in  the  first  syllable; 
it  is  in  reality  the  infinitive  absolute,  and 
the  irregularity  is  owing  to  the  assonance 
with  karoth  thence  resulting.  As  to  the 
eomtruction,  it  is  that  of  the  infinitive 
standing  in  place  of  the  finite  verb,  of 
whicli  Geseniug  says,  "  This  is  frequent , .  . 
in  the  expression  of  several  successive  acti 
or  states,  where  only  the  first  of  the  verbs 
employed  takes  the  required  form  in  respect 
to  tense  and  person,  the  others  being  simply 
put  in  the  infinitive  with  the  same  tense 
and  person  implied."  The  meaning  of  the 
clause  is  obviously  that  there  was  no  longer 
any  respect  for  the  sanctity  of  an  oath; 
while  the  treaties  refer  to  those  made  with 
the  Assyrian  king,  with  the  object  of 
securing  and  upholding  the  government. 
Thos  judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in 
the  furrows  of  the  field.  The  juilgment 
here  spoken  of  is  understood  (1)  by  the 
Hebrew  interpreters,  following  the  Chaldee 
Version,  as  the  judgment  of  God  and  conse- 
quent punishment  of  Israel  because  of  sin ; 
thus  Kinchi:  "Therefore  there  springs  up 
against  them  the  jurlgment  of  chastisements 
and  punishments  like  hemlock,  which  is  a 
bitter  herb  that  springs  up  on  the  furrows 
of  the  field."  Some,  again,  (2)  explain  it  of 
the  decree  of  the  kings  of  Israel  in  reference 
to  the  worship  of  idols,  whicli,  like  a  bitter 
herb,  was  to  issue  in  national  ruin.  We 
much  prefer  (3)  the  more  obvious  sense  of 
the  clause  which  refers  it  to  the  perversion 
of  judgment  and  justice.  Thus  Amos 
addresses  them  as  those  who  "turn  judg- 
ment to  wormwood,  and  leave  off  righteous- 
ness in  the  earth,"  and  calls  on  them  to 
"  establish  judgment  in  the  gate ;  "  and 
Habakkuk  writes,  "  Wroug  [wrested]  judg- 
ment prooeedetli."  It  is  implied  in  the 
mention  of  furrotoi  that  there  has  been 
careful  preparation  for  the  intended  crop. 
The  seed  they  sow  is  injustice;  and  the 
plant  that  springs  up  from  it  is  »  poison- 
plant — hemlock,  bitter  and  noxious,  and  is 
everywhere  rampant.  Another  (4)  explana- 
tion understands  "judgment "  in  the  sense  of 
orime  which  calls  on  judgment  for  punish- 
ment. The  field  is  that  of  the  Israelitish 
nation ;  in  all  the  furrows  of  that  wide  field 
judgment,  that  is,  crime,  springs  up'  as 
luxuriantly  and  abundantly  as  hemlock. 
The  multiplication  of  crime  in  Israel,  like 


s  luxurious  noxious  growth  in  some  large 
field,  is  the  idea  thus  conveyed.  This 
explanation  has  the  appearance  at  least  of 
being  somewhat  strained  and  forced,  though 
jt  yields  a  good  sense. 

Ver.  5. — The  inhabitants  of  Samaria  shall 
fear  because  of  the  calves  of  Beth-aven. 
Samaria  was  the  capital  of  Israel,  the 
northern  kingdom.  Beth-el  means  "house 
of  God,"  once  a  place  of  sacred  memory 
from  its  association  with  the  history  of  the 
patriarch  Jacob;  afterward  one  of  the  two 
centres  of  idolatrous  worsliip,  and  here  called 
Beth-aven,  "house  of  vanity,"  because  of 
the  idolatry.  The  word  for  "  calves  "  is  in 
the  feminine,  in  order  to  express  contempt 
for  those  idols  which  Jeroboam  set  up. 
With  this  have  been  compared  the  following 
expressions  in  Greek  and  Latin :  'AxaitSfs 
oSiK  er'  'Axoiol,  and  0  vere  Phrygise,  nee  enim 
Phryges  !  The  Hebrews  ignored  the  exist- 
ence of  female  divinities,  as  of  their  ten 
names  of  the  Deity  all  are  masculine.  The 
feminine  may  also  imply  their  weakness; 
so  far  from  helping  their  worshippers,  their 
worshippers  were  in  trepidation  for  them, 
or  rather  it,  lest  it  should  be  carried  away 
captive.  Further,  this  same  word  is  in  the 
plural,  to  cast  ridicule  on  it,  as  if  mimicking 
the  plural  of  majesty,  or  ratlier,  perhaps,  to 
include  that  of  Dan,  or  to  intimate  that 
the  calf  of  Bethel,  the  more  celebrated 
place,  was  that  after  which  the  calf  of  Dan 
and  probably  those  of  other  places  were 
fashioned,  especially  so  as  it  is  afterwards 
referred  to  in  the  singular.  Besides,  a  few 
— a  very  few — ^manuscripts,  it  is  true,  read 
the  singular,  as  also  the  LXX.,  which 
has  liocrxos,  and  the  Syriac;  while  Dathc, 
relying  on  these  authorities,  miiintains  the 
reading  to  have  been  n^jj^'?  in  the  singular. 
Others  suppose  an  enallage  of  both  gender 
and  number;  or  an  indefinite  generality  ia 
expressed  by  the  plural,  while  for  abstract.! 
the  feminine  is  used.  The  coming  punisli- 
ment  is  casting  its  shadow  before,  so  that 
the  inhabitants,  perceiving  symptoms  of  its 
approach,  tremble  for  their  god  of  gold,  now, 
like  themselves,  in  greatest  jeopardy.  For 
the  people  thereof  shall  mourn  over  it.  The 
people  of  Israel  are  now  called  the  people 
of  the  calf,  as  once  they  had  been  the  people 
of  Jehovah,  and  as  Hoab  was  called  tlie 
people  of  Ohemosh.  They  had  chosen  the 
calf  for  their  god.  Of  their  own  free-will 
they  had  done  so,  though  at  first  enjoined 
and  prompted  to  adopt  this  course  by  the 
mandate  of  their  king ;  they  had  even 
rejoiced  and  gloried  in  it.  Now  they  mourn 
for  their  idol,  which  can  neither  help  itself 
uor  them.  And  the  priests  thereof  that  re- 
joiced on  it,  for  the  glory  thereof,  because  it 
is  departed  from  it.  According  to  thia  ren- 
dering, the  relative   must  be  understood 


802 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[CH.  X.  1 — 16, 


before  VTejoiced,"  wUoh,  though  quite  poe- 
rible  and  not  tmgrammatioal,  ii,  however, 
nnnecessary.  The  Hebrew  commentator! 
all  understand  the  word  in  the  sense  of  "joy" 
or  "jubilation;"  thusBashi  says,"  Why  is  it 
that  its  people  mourn  over,  it  and  its  priests, 
who  always  rejoiced  over  it,  now  mourn  over 
its  gloiy  that  is  gone  away?"  The  word 
S<),  however,  is  primarily  "  to  twist  or  whirl 
one's  self,"  and  is  thence  applied  to  any 
violent  emotion,  generally  of  joy,  also  of 
anxiety  and  fear,  as  here,  so  tliat  the  simpler 
and  more  correct  rendering  is,  the  priestt 
thereof  shall  tremble  for  it,  for  its  glory,  be- 
eaute  it  t>  departed  from  it.  The  priests 
here  mentioned  have  a  peculiar  name, 
Icmarim,  from  hamar,  to  be  black,  from 
the  black  garments  in  which  they  minis- 
tered, and  are  thus  distinguished  as  ministers 
of  a  foreiga  cult ;  for  kohen  is  the  usual  word 
for  a  Hebrew  priest,  and  his  robe  of  office  is 
said  to  have  been  white.  The  glory  of  the 
calf-god  was  not  the  temple  treasure  at 
Bethel,  nor  its  glory  as  the  state  God  set  up 
there,  but  the  honour  and  the  Divine  halo 
with  which  its  worship  there  was  surrounded. 
Tlius  Kimchi :  "  When  its  glory  is  departed 
from  it ;  and  this  means  the  honour  of  its 
worship.  When  tlie  calf  is  broken  before 
their  eyes  its  glory  shall  depart  from  it" 
The  perfects  of  "  mourn  "  and  "  departed"  are 
prophetic,  denoting  the  certainty  of  the 
events,  though  yet  future ;  while  galah  and 
yagilu  form  the  favourite  assonance.  But 
a  question  still  remains — Wliy  is  Samaria 
and  not  Beth-aven  said  to  mourn  f  To  this 
the  explanation  of  Kimchi  is  a  satisfactory 
reply :  "  The  inhabitants  of  Samaria  tremble. 
And  the  prophet  makes  mention  of  Samaria, 
though  there  were  no  calves  there,  because 
it  was  the  metropolis  of  tlie  kingdom,  where 
the  kings  of  Israel  resided,  and  it  was  these 
kings  who  strengthened  the  people  in  the 
worship  of  the  calves.  And  he  says, "  When 
Bethel  is  laid  waste,  and  the  calves  cannot 
deliver  it,  the  inhabitantsof  Samaria  tremble 
for  themselves,  which  place  (Samaria)  the 
King  of  Assyria  laid  siege  to  for  three  years." 
Yer.  6. — ^It  shall  he  also  carried  unto  As- 
syria for  a  present  to  King  Jareb.  Here  we 
liave  an  explanation  and  confirmation  of 
what  has  just  been  said 'in  the  preceding 
verse.  The  calf,  the  glorious  and  mag- 
nificent national  god,  as  Israel  considered 
it,  is  brought  to  Assyria,  and  there  offered 
as  a  present  to  the  Assyrian  king.  The  word 
gam  is  emphatic ;  that  is,  •'  it  also,"  "  itself 
also,"  or  "  It  also  with  men  and  other  spoils  " 
— the  golden  idol  of  Beth-aven.  Kimchi's 
explanation  of  gam  is  as  follows :  "  Gam, 
extension  or  generalization  of  the  term, 
refers  to  tue  glory  he  had  mentioned.  He 
says, '  Lo,  in  its  place  the  glory  shall  depart 
tiom  it  as  soon  as  they  shall  break  it.    Also, 


the  stump  of  the  oal^  namely,  the  gold 
theieon,  after  its  form  is  broken,  they  shall 
take  sway  as  a  present  to  King  Jareb.' "  The 
aign  of  the  accusative  with  suffix  iniK,  which 
here  stands  before  a  passive  verb,  may  be 
taken  either  (1)  absolutely,  "as  to  it  also," 
"  it  shall  be  brought ; "  or  (2)  as  an  instance  of 
anaooluthon ;  or  (3),  according  to  Gesenius, 
the  passive  may  be  regarded  as  an  im- 
personal active,  and  thus  it  may  take  the 
object  of  the  action  in  the  accusative.  The 
word  yubhal  is  from  ydbhal,  primarily  used 
of  flowing  in  a  strong  and  violent  stream, 
and  so  the  root  of  Viaa,  the  flood;  then  it 
signifies  "  to  go,"  "  to  be  brought  or  carried." 
The  minnhah  here  spoken  of  cannot  well 
mean  tribute,  but  is  rather  a  gift  of  homage 
to  the  Assyrian  conqueror,  whom  the  prophet 
in  vision  sees  already  wasting  the  land  of 
Israel  and  carrying  away  all  its  treasures 
and  precious  things.  Ephraim  shaU  receive 
shame,  and  Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his 

own  counseL     The  feminine  form.  Die's 

of  which  ]v/3,  the  masculine,  by  analogy, 
is  not  in  use — is  wrongly  explained  by  the 
Hebrew  expositors  as  having  a  pleonastic 
nun.  The  construction  usually  preferred  is 
(1)  that  given  above.  (2)  Others  render  it, 
"  Shame  shall  seize  Epluraim ; "  but  this  con- 
structs a  feminine  noun  with  a  masculine 
verb,  contrary  to  grammar.  (3)  Hitzig 
translates,"He(theAssytiahking)  shall  take 
away  or  carry  off  the  shame  of  Ephraim;  that 
is,  the  calf-idol."  He  remarks  that  the  con- 
struct feminine  does  not  always  in  the  speech 
of  North  Israel  end  in  n~,  and  cites  several 
passages  in  proof.  The  counsel  of  which  Israel 
would  be  ashamed  is  understood  (1)  of  the 
consultation  held  before  making  a  covenant 
or  treaty  with  the  King  of  Assyria ;  (2)  it 
is  generally  and  more  correctly  understood 
of  Jeroboam  taking  conniel  with  his  tribes- 
men of  Ephraim  abont  setting  up  the  calf- 
idols.  Jareb  is  a  proper  name,  or  rather  an 
appellation.  The  King  of  Assyria,  or  the 
great  king,  was  looked  up  to  by  the  smaller 
Asiatic  states  for    protection,   and    conse- 

J[uently  styled  their  Jareb,  avenger  or  de- 
bnder,  just  as  inHrnp,  saviour,  was  a  title 
applied  to  or  assumeid  by  certain  kings  for 
a  similar  reason,  as  Ptolemy  Soter  and 
others.  Tlie  object  of  Israel's  idolatry  is 
carried  off  as  a  present  to  propitiate  or 
appease  the  wrath  of  the  Assyrian  patron 
and  proteotor — probably  Shalmaneser  in  the 
present  instance — or  taken  as  a  trophy  to 
graoe  the  triumph  of  the  conqueror.  So  far 
from  defending  the  calf-people,  aa  Israel 
had  become,  their  calf-god  could  not  defend 
itself;  instead  of  preserving  its  worshippers 
from  deportation,  it  was  doomed  itself  to 
deportation.  Ephraim,  the  premier  tribe, 
received  shame,  and  Israel,  the  remaining 
tribes  that  had  followed  its  lead  and  adopted 


CH.  X.  1—16.1 


THE  BOOK  OF  UOSEA. 


V03 


iti  evil  coniuel,  ihaied  the  ihame;  »U  of 
them  together  were  thoroughly  put  to  shame 
because  of  their  mistaken  and  wicked  policy. 
The  counael  of  Jeroboam — ^for  to  it,  in  onr 
opinion,  is  the  reference — appeared  an  able 
stroke  of  policy ;  but  this  policy,  bv  which 
he  hoped  to  detach  Israel  from  Judah,  wag 
not  only  frnatrated,  but  proved  positively 
ruinous,  so  far  were  the  means  from  effecting 
the  end,  or  the  end  from  justifying  the  wisdom 
of  the  means. 

Ver.  7. — As  for  Samaria,  her  king  is  out 
off  as  the  foam  upon  the  water  (Jace  of  (he 
icateri).  Instead  of  the  throne  of  Samaria 
being  established,  or  the  kingdom  consoli- 
dated by  the  idolatrous  measures  which 
Jeroboam  had  adopted  for  the  purpose,  the 
king  himself  was  cut  off  as  foam  upon  the 
surface  of  the  waters,  or  as  a  chip  carried  off 
by  the  cnrrent,  and  the  kingdom  inglorious]  y 
ruined.  Though  the  sense  is  sufScienily 
plain,  the  sentence  has  been  variously  con- 
structed. Thus  (1)  one  of  the  Hebre* 
commentators  renders  it,  "In  the  city  of 
Samaria  her  king  has  been  made  like  foam 
on  the  surface  of  the  water  "  (ix  being  under- 
stood and  nsii  taken  in  the  sense  of  "  being 
like  "}.  (2)  Bashi,  understanding  the  verb 
to  signify  being  "reduced  to  silence,"  ex- 
plains, **  The  King  of  Samaria  is  brought  to 
silence."  (3)  The  correct  signification  of  the 
verb,  however,  is  "  out  off"  or  "  annihilated," 
whUe  the  construction  may  be  (a)  an  asyn- 
deton; thus:  "Samaria  (and)  her  king;" 
or  (6)  Samaria  taken  as  nominative  absolute, 
— thus  in  the  Authorized  Version,  "  (As  for) 
Samaria,  her  king  is  cut  off; "  or  (c),  sup- 
plying rta-ii  to  the  second  noun,  with  Aben 
Ezra, "  Samaria  is  out  off,  her  king  is  out 
off."  Some  (d)  consider  it  simpler  to  translate 
as  follows:  ''  Samaria  is  cut  off;  her  king  is 
like  [literally,  'as']  a  chip  on  the  surface 
of  the  waters."  In  this  way  the  Massoretio 
punctuation  is  neglected,  Shomron  is  femi- 
nine, 88  the  names  of  cities  and  countries 
usually  are,  and  therefore  the  sufSx  to 
"king"  is  feminine,  while  the  masculine 
form,  npnp,  is  justified  by  its  position  at  the 
head  of'  the  sentence;  for,  according  to 
Geeenius,  the  predicate  at  the  beginning 
of  a  clause  or  sentence  "often  takes  its 
simplest  and  readiest  form,  viz.  the  mas- 
culine singular,  even  when  the  subject,"  not 
yet  expressed,  but  coming  after,  "  is  femi- 
nine or  plural."  e)xp  is  explained  either  as 
"foam"  or  "splinter."  The  latter  is,  perhaps, 
preferable,  as  the  verbal  root  cognate  with 
the  Arabic  hatsapha  signifies  "to  break," 
"break  off,"  "crack; "  then  "to  be  angry"  (its 
most  common  meaning)  from  the  sudden 
breaking  out  or  breaking  loose  of  passion, 
with  which  may  be  compared  the  Greek 
^■liypv/j.!.  The  word  nsxp  in  Joel  i.  7,  from 
the  same  root,  is  literally  a  "  breaking  or 


breaking  ofl^"  "  barking.*  He  word  nen, 
again,  has  two  prinoiptl  meanings— one  "to 
be  like,"  the  other  "  to  be  silent "  (connected, 
according  to  Geseniui,  with  a  different  toot, 
damam,  dam,  like  the  English  "dumb"); 
or  the  meanings  are  traceable  to  one  root, 
in  the  sense  of  '* making  flat,"  "plane," 
"smooth ;"  then  "silent," and  w  "reduced  to 
silence,"  "  destroyed." 

Yer.  8. — The  high  places  also  of  Aven,  the 
sin  of  Israel,  shall  be  destroyed.  By  Aven 
is  generally  understood  Beth-aven,  that  is, 
Bethel;  but  some  take  the  word  as  an 
appellative,  and  thus  bamoth^iien  wonld 
signify  the  "high  places  of  iniquity." 
Tijese  unlawful  places  of  sacrifice  and 
unholy  places  of  iniquity  are  farther  eha- 
racterized  by  the  appositional  "  the  sin  of 
Israel."  By  constructing  and  fret^umting 
such  places  Israel  had  primarily  and 
grievously  sinned.  By  sacnficing  to  and 
worshipping  even  Jehovah  on  these  high 
places  instead  of  in  Jerusalem,  the  only 
legal  place  for  Divine  service  under  the 
Law,  their  national  sin  in  the  matter  of 
worship  began ;  subsequently,  however, 
things  became  worse,  and  these  high  places 
became  scenes  of  most  abominable  idolatries 
snd  shamelessly  sinful  practices.  Those 
places — one  and  all — are  in  the  words  before 
us  doomed  to  destruction.  The  thorn  and 
the  thistle  shall  oome  up  on  their  altars. 
The  destruction  is  thus  vividly  described  as 
total  and  complete;  those  bad  eminences 
were  devoted  to  entire  wasteness  and  desola- 
tion. "It  is  a  sign  of  extreme  solitiide," 
says  Jerome,  "so  that  no  traces  even  of  wall 
or  buildings  remained  to  be  seen ; "  similarly 
Bashi  says, "  Thorns  and  thistles  shall  grow 
up  upon  their  altars,  because  the  wor- 
shippers thereof  have  departed  and  no  one 
longer  remains  to  attend  to  them ; "  so 
Eimcbi :  "  On  the  altars  of  Israel  which  they 
(the  enemies)  shall  lay  waste  shall  thorns 
spring  up."  And  they  shall  say  to  the 
mountains,  Cover  us ;  and  to  the  hills,  Fall 
on  us.  The  sight  of  such  fearful  ruin  and 
desolation  overwhelms  the  wretched  inhabit- 
ants of  the  land  with  distress  and  dismay ; 
in  sheer  despair  and  even  desperation  they 
invoke  a  sure  and  sudden  death  as  much 
preferable  to  their  remaining  longer  specta- 
tors of  such  heart-rending  scenes.  Their 
exclamation  appears  to  be  proverbial,  and  to 
hare  had  its  origin  in  tiie  custom  of  the 
Israelites  fleeing,  in  seasons  of  great  cala- 
mities, to  the  mountains  and  clefts  of  the 
rocks  to  hide  themselves;  thus  in  Judg.  iv. 
2  we  read  that  "  because  of  the  Hidianites 
the  children  of  Israel  made  them  the  dens 
which  are  in  the  mountains,  and  caves,  and 
strongholds."  The  object  of  their  exclama^ 
tion  is  to  be  buried  under  the  hiUs  or  moun- 
taiuB  rather  than  endure  snch  calamities 


30* 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  X.  1—1". 


longer ;  or  rather  than  the  enemies  should 
see  them  in  their  shame.  Aben  Ezra  makes 
"  altara"  the  subject  of  "  shall  say,"  aa  if  it 
were  the  wish  of  the  altars  to  be  covered 
that  they  may  never  more  be  seen.  Theo- 
rloret  considers  tlie  sense  of  the  passage  to 
be  that  the  multitude  of  calamities  in  the 
war  occasioned  by  hostile  invasion  would  be 
so  great  that  there  would  be  no  one  who 
would  not  prefer  being  Overwhelmed  in  an 
earthquake  or  by  the  sudden  fail  of  the 
mountains,  rather  than  endure  the  calamities 
inflicted  by  the  enemies.  Similarly,  but 
more  concisely,  Jerome  ssys,  "  They  are 
more  willing  to  die  than  see  the  evils  that 
bring  death." 

Ter.  9. — 0  Israel,  fhon  hast  sinned  from 
the  days  of  Gibeah.  Two  explanations  given 
of  this  clause — namely,  that  which  under- 
stands, ntfo  comparatively,  that  is,  **  more 
than  " — their  sins  were  greater  than  those  of 
the  Benjamites  in  the  days  of  Gibeah ;  and 
that  which  refers  the  sin  here  spoken  of  to  the 
appointment  of  Saul,  who  was  of  Gibeah  of 
Benjamin,  tobe  king — must  be  unhesitatingly 
rejected.  The  sin  of  the  men  of  Gibeah 
was  the  shameful  outrage  committed  on  the 
Levite's  concubine  by  the  men  of  Gibeah, 
which  with  its  consequences  is  recorded  in 
Judg.  six.  and  xx.  That  sin  became  pro- 
verbial, overtopping,  as  it  did,  all  ordinary 
iniquities  by  its  shameless  atrocity  and 
heiuouinesa.  By  •  long-continued  course  of 
sin,  even  from  aninent  days,  Bphraim  has 
been  preparing  for  a  fearful  doom.  There 
they  stood :  the  battle  in  Oiheah  against  the 
children  of  iniquity  did  not  overtake  them. 
This  portion  of  the  verse  is  not  a  little  per- 
plexing, and  in  consequence  has  called  forth 
considerable  diversity  of  exposition  There 
is  (1)  that  which  is  implied  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version,  viz.  "there  they  ttood,"  smitten 
twice  but  not  destroyed,  chastened  but  not 
killed,  the  battle  in  Gibeah  against  the 
children  of  iniquity  did  not  overtake  them 
then  so  as  utterly  to  destroy  them,  but  it 
shall  overtake  them  now.  Or  if  the  verb 
"overtake,"  which  is  future,  be  strictly 
rendered,  the  meaning  is — Not  a  battle  like 
that  in  Gibeah  against  the  children  of 
iniquity  shall  overtake  them,  but  one  much 
more  sanguinary  and  terrible,  resulting,  not 
in  the  reduction  of  a  single  tribe  to  six 
hundred  men,  but  iu  the  extirpation  of  ten 
tribes.  (2)  That  of  Keil  and  others,  though 
not  the  same,  is  similar.  It  is :  "  There,  in 
Gibeah,  did  they  remain,  persevering  in  the 
sin  of  Gibeah,  •nd  yet  the  war  in  Gibeah 
against  the  sinners  hai  not  overtaken  them." 
This  makes  the  meaning  of  the  prophet  to  be 
that  since  the  days  of  Gibeah  the  Israelites 
persevered  in  the  same  or  like  sin  as  the 
Oibeahites;  and,  though  the  Gibeahites 
were  so   severely  punished,  actually   de- 


stroyed, because  of  their  sin,  the  ten  tribes 
of  Israel,  persisting  in  the  same  or  similar 
sin,  have  not  yet  been  resisted  with  any  such 
exterminating  war.    Jehovah  announces  his 
intention  now  to  visit  them  with  punish- 
ment and    severest    chastisement  for    all. 
The  meaning  which  Keil  aims  at  may  Ibe 
better  brought  out  by  rendering  the  latter 
clause  interrogatively;  thus:  "There  they 
stood  —  persisting   in    the    criminality    ol 
Gibeah  — shall  there    not  overtake   them, 
living  as  they  do  in  Gibeah,  the  war  which 
exterminated  the  children  of  crime?  "    It  is 
admitted  that  tov  may  hare  been  the  mean- 
ing of  «  persevering;  "  but  a  better  sense  (3) 
is  gained  by  Wiinsche  referring  the  subject 
of  HDj)  to  the  Benjamites ;  the  suffix  ol  Di'inn 
to  the  n V  '",  or  "  children  of  iniquity,"  that 
is,  their  guilty  tribesmen  in  Gibeah ;  taking 
the    intermediate    clause    parentlietically ; 
and  -my  with  hy  to  "stand  in  defence  of ; " 
thus :  "  Since  the  days  of  Gibeah  hast  thou 
sinned,  O  Israel:  there  they  (the  Benjamites) 
stood  in  defence  of  the  children  of  iniquity, 
that  the   war    might  not  reach   them   in 
Gibeah."    This  gives  a  satisfactory  sense, 
and   intimates  that,  by  a  long-continued 
course  of  iniquity  and  crime,  the  Ephraimites 
were  preparing  themselves  for  a  fearful  fate. 
Already  from  days  long  gone  by  grievous 
guilt  cleaved  to  them ;  thus  in  flie  days  of 
Gibeah  they  (the  Benjamites)  stood  by  their 
iniquitous  brethren  that  the  battle  in  Gibeah 
might  not  reach  them.    As  this  was  before 
the  disruption,  the  Benjamites  were  part  an  I 
parcel  of  Israel  here  represented  by  tiiem. 
^4)  Eosenmiiller's  explanation  is  the  follow- 
ing :  "  They  (the  Benjamites)  survived  (inj;, 
opposed  to  nas,  as  in  Ps.  cii.  27)  being 
severely  punished,  though   they  did  not 
entirely  perish,  six  hundred  being  left  to 
revive  the  tribe."   But  a  still  severer  punish- 
ment awaits  the  Israelites  (the  person  bein^ 
changed  from  the  second  to  the  third,  and 
the  prophet  addressing  himself  to  hearer  or 
reader):  not  the  war  waged  in  Gibeah  (or 
on  account  of  the  crime  committed  there) 
against  the  children  of  iniquity  shall  overtake 
them,  but  a  far  more  deadly  and  destructive 
war.     The  word  ivhy  is  by  metathesis  for 
n^ip  as  niD.T    fornjJJT,  commotion;  atop  for 
\»23 ;  and'  ria'fa  for  nfeto. 

Yer.  10. — It  is  in  my  desire  that  I  should 
chastise  them ;  and  the  people  shall  be 
gathered  against  them.  This  is  better  trans- 
lated thus :  Wlien  I  desire  it,  then  (van  o{ 
the  apodosis)  shall  I  chastise  them ;  and  the 
peopUs  shall  be  gathered  against  them. 
This  expresses  God's  determination  to 
punish  sin  and  vindicate  his  justice  aa  the 
infinitely  Holy  One.  It  means,  not  only 
that  his  desire  to  punish  them  does  exist, 


OH.  X.  1—15.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  H08EA. 


806 


bat  that,  thii  desire  being  taken  foi  granted, 
there  ehall  be  no  let  nor  Hindrance ;  nothiug 
can  stay  his  hand.  Then  the  mode  and 
means  of  chastisement  are  indicated — 
peoples,  foreign  invaders,  shall  be  gathered 
against  them.  The  verb  nbtj  is  future  Qal 
of  ^D'  irregularly,  as  if  coming  from  nD3,  the 
daghesh  in  $amech  compensating  for  the 
absorbed  yod.  When  they  shall  bind  them- 
selves in  their  two  furrows ;  margin,  When 
I  shall  hind  them  for  their  two  tranegreseione, 
or,  in  their  two  habitations.  (1)  Gescnius, 
Ewald,  and  others,  abiding  by  the  Kethir  or 
textual  reading  of  the  original,  translate, 
"Jehovah  will  oliaslise  them  before  with 
their  eyes,"  that  is,  not  in  secret,  but  openly 
before  the  world.  They  thus  refer  the  word 
to  p5,  eye,  but  niry  is  "fountains,"  not 
"eyes."  (2)  The  Hebrew  commentators, 
Aben  Ezra  and  Kimclii,  explain  the  word  in 
the  sense  of  "  two  furrows  "  as  in  Authorized 
Version;  and  refer  them  to  Judah  and 
Ephraim.  Thus  Kimchi  says,  "The  pro- 
phet compares  Judah  and  Ephraim  to  two 
ploughing  oxen.  I  thought  they  would 
plough  well,  but  they  have  ploughed  ill, 
since  they  have  bound  themselves  together 
one  with  the  other  and  have  allied  them- 
selves the  one  with  the  other  to  do  evil  in 
the  eyes  of  Jehovah."  Similarly  Kosen- 
miiller:  "To  be  bound  to  two  furrows  is 
said  of  oxen  ploughing  when  they  are 
bound  together  in  a  common  yoke,  so  that 
in  two  adjacent  furrows  they  walk  together 
and  witli  equal  pace."  (3)  The  SepUiagint 
rendering,  based  on  the  Qeri  and  followed 
by  the  Syriac  and  Arabic,  gives  a  better  and 
clearer  sense  than  the  preceding.  It  is,  'Ev 
TOiS  Sucnv  dSixiats  aJrSiv,  and  is  followed  by 
Jerome  in  Super  duos  iniquitates  euas,  as  also 
by  the  most  judicious  expositors  of  ancient 
and  modem  times.  Yet  there  is  great  variety 
as  to  what  those  iniquities  are.  Some,  like 
Jerome,  refer  to  the  double  idolatry — that  of 
Micah  and  that  of  Jeroboam ;  others,  like 
Uathe,  to  the  two  golden  calves  set  up  at 
Dan  and  Bethel;  Cyril  and  Theodoret  to 
the  apostasy  of  Israel  from  Jehovah,  and 
devotion  to  idols ;  De  Wette  and  Keil  to  the 
double  unfaithfulness  of  Israel  to  Jehovah 
and  the  royal  boiise  of  David.  The  exact 
rendering  would,  according  to  any  of  these 
views,  be,  "  When  I  bind  them  to  their  two 
transgressions,"  or,  "  When  I  allow  the 
foreigners  to  bind  them  on  account  of  their 
two  transgressions;  "  that  is  to  connect  or 
yoke  them  to  their  two  transgressions  by  the 
punishment,  so  that  they,  like  beasts  of 
burden,  must  drag  them  after  them,  what- 
ever be  the  view  we  take  of  the  nature  of 
those  transgressions. 

Ver.  11.— And  Ephraim  is  at  an  heifer 
that  is  taught,  and  loveth  to  tread  out  the 
corn.     Ephraim  is  compared  to  a  heifer 
HOSEA. 


trained.  The  work  she  was  tanght  to  do  was 
treading  out  the  com ;  by  training  and  habit 
it  had  become  a  second  nature,  so  that  she 
took  delight  in  it.  The  connecting  vowel 
t  occurs  seldom,  and  usually  with  an  antique 
colouring  in  prose,  according  to  Ewald ;  it 
is  poetical  besides,  and  used  in  the  concourse 
of  words  somewhat  closely  connected,  but 
not  in  the  strict  construct  state.  Thug  is 
'nanl*  accounted  for.  This  work  was  probably 
easier,  at  all  events  pleasanter,  than  plough- 
ing or  harrowing.  In  treading  out  corn 
oxen  were  not  yoked  together,  but  worked 
singly,  treading  it  with  their  feet,  or 
drawing  a  threshing-sledge,  or  iron-armed 
cylinder,  over  it ;  they  were  unmuzzled  also, 
so  that  they  were  free  to  suatch  an  occasional 
moutliful  of  the  grain,  and  frequently  fat- 
tened by  such  indulgence.  Such  had  been 
the  position  of  Ephraim  in  easy  employ- 
ment, comfortable  circumstances  like  the 
heifer  thresliing  and  allowed  to  eat  at  plea- 
sure, pleasantly  situated,  prosperous,  self- 
indulgent,  and  luxurious.  The  victories  of 
Ephraim — threshing  and  treading  down- 
may  perhaps  he  also  hinted  at.  But  I  passed 
over  upon  her  fair  neok  (margin,  the  beauty  of 
her  nech) :  I  will  make  Ephraim  to  ride ;  Judah 
shall  plough,  and  Jacob  shall  break  his  clods. 
Times  have  changed,  as  is  here  indicated  : 
a  yoke,  that  of  Assyria,  is  placed  on  the  fair 
neck,  a  rider  is  set  on  the  sleek  back.  More 
onerous  and  less  pleasant  labour  is  now  im- 
posed. Judah  too  is  to  share  the  toil,  being 
put  to  the  heavier  work  of  ploughing ;  while 
Jacob — the  ten  tribes,  or  the  twelve  inehul- 
ing  both  Judah  and  Israel — shall  cross- 
plougli ;  and  thus  both  alike  shall  be  hence- 
forth employed  in  the  heaviest  labours  of  the 
field  and  the  severest  toils  of  agriculture. 
Once  victorious,  Ephraim  is  now  to  be  sub- 
dued ;  once  free  and  intractable,  it  must 
now  receive  the  yoke  and  engage  in  laborious 
service.  The  expression  "ay,  followed  by  hy, 
is  generally  used  in  a  bad  sense ;  "  to  pass 
over,"  says  Jerome,  "  especially  when  it  is 
said  of  God,  always  signifies  inflictions  and 
troubles."  The  fatness  of  the  neck  is  the 
ox's  ornament  or  beauty.  That  is  now  to 
be  assaulted  or  invaded  gently  it  may  be, 
and  softly,  as  men  are  wont  to  approach  a 
young  untamed  animal  in  order  to  put  the 
yoke  upon  it.  This  passing  over,  however 
tender,  fixes  the  yoke  on  Ephraim's  neck  all 
the  same.  A  more  difficult  word  is  3'D"in, 
which  Ewald  (1)  renders,  "I  will  set  a 
rider  "  on  Ephraim,  of  course  to  subdue  and 
tame ;  (2)  Jerome  has,  "  I  will  mount  or 
ride,"  thus  representing  Jehovah  himself  as 
the  mediate  rider  on  Ephraim,  The  first 
sense  has  a  parallel  in  Ps.  Ivi.  12,  "  Thou 
hast  made  men  to  ride  over  our  head,"  and 
thus  ruling  them  at  pleasnre.  Unwilling  to 
bear  the  easy  yoke  of  their  Divine  Buler, 

X 


306 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oil  X.  1—15. 


they  shall  be  inbjected  to  the  tyrant  mastery 
of  man.  But  (3)  Eeil  laVs  the  word  here  la 
"  not '  to  mount  or  ride,'  but '  to  drive  or  use 
for  drawing  and  driving,'  i.e.  to  harness,"  as 
to  tl]e  plough  and  harrow.  This  meaning 
is  best  reached  by  understanding  the  words 
thus:  "I  will  make  the  yoke  to  ride  on 
Epbraim's  neck ; "  as  33in  is  used  in  2  Kings 
xiii.  16,  for  "  put  thine  hand  upon  the  bow," 
margin,  "  make  thine  hand  to  ride  upon  the 
bow."  The  remaining  clauses  of  the  verse 
is  a  further  deyelopment  of  this  expression, 
but  extending  to  Judah ;  and  thus  includ- 
ing both  Judah  and  Bphraim,  or  Jacob — both 
kingdoms.  The  Septuagint  version  of  the 
last  clause  is  peculiar;  it  is  Tlapacnanriiaonai 
'loiSav,  IvurxiKTft  air^  '\aK<i$.  That  is,  at 
explained  by  Jerome,  "  I  shall  leave  Judah 
for  the  present  and  say  nothing  about  him ; 
but  whoever,  wliether  of  Ephraim  or  Judah, 
shall  observe  my  precepts,  he  shall  acquire 
strength  for  himself  and  be  called  Jacob." 

Vers.  12, 13.—  Sow  to  yourselves  in  right- 
eousness, reap  in  mercy.  These  two  verses 
contain  a  call  to  repentance  and  reformation 
of  life,  in  figurative  language  borrowed  from 
the  same  department  of  human  industry, 
'txh  is  "  for  rightuousness ; "  that  is,  sow 
such  seed  as  that  righteousness  may  spring 
from  it.  'n  'S^  is  "  according  to,"  or  "in  pro- 
portion to,  mercy."  When  two  imperatives 
are  joined,  as  here,  the  latter  indicates  a  pro- 
raise,  and  may  be  expressed  by  a  future,  as, 
"  Do  this  and  live,"  i.e.  "  yesliall  live  "  (Gen. 
xlii.  1 8).  Kimchi  explains  it  correctly,  thus : 
"  Sow  to  yourselves,  etc.,  that  is,  do  good  in 
mine  eyes,  and  the  recompense  from  me  shall 
be  far  greater  than  your  good  deeds,  just  as 
if  one  sows  a  measure  (scab),  and  hopes  to 
reap  therefor  two  measures  (seahs)  or  still 
more.  Therefore,  he  uses  in  sowing  right- 
eousness, and  in  connection  with  reaping 
grace,  in  order  to  intimate  that  giace  sur- 
passes righteousness."  Or  tliat  God  rewards 
men's  actions,  not  according  to  merit,  but 
according  to  grace,  As  men  sow,  they 
reap;  accordingly  Israel  isdirected  to  sowac- 
-  cording  to  righteousness — to  act  righteously 
in  their  dealings  with  their  fellow-men; 
and  their  reaping  or  reward  would  be,  not 
in  proportion  to  what  they  had  sown,  not 
merely  commensurate  with  their  righteous 
actions  or  dealings,  not  proportionate  to 
what  justice  would  give,  but  in  proportion 
to  mercy — Divine  mercy,  and  so  far  above 
their  highest  deserts.  They  are  promised 
a  reward  far  above  their  poor  doings,  and 
irrespective  of  their  sad.  failings — a  reward, 
not  of  debt,  not  of  merit,  but  of  grace. 
Tlie  seed-time  of  righteousness  would  be 
followed  by  a  reaping-time  proportionate  to 
the  boundless  measure  of  the  Divine  mercy. 
Break  up  your  fallow  ground:  for  it  is  time 
to  seek  the  Lord,  till  he  come  and  rain  right- 


eousness upon  yon.  Here  they  are  urged 
to  turn  over  a  new  leaf,  as  we  say ;  to  begin 
a  new  life ;  to  root  out  the  weeds  of  sin ;  to 
eradicate  those  evil  passions  that  checked 
and  stifled  any  noble  feelings,  as  the  hus- 
bandman runs  his  plough  through  the  fallow 
field,  and  breaks  it  up,  clearing  out  the 
weeds  and  roots,  that  tlie  ground  may  be 
pure  and  clean  for  the.  sowing  of  the 
seed  in  spring.  Tbe  LXX.,  reading  nu, 
instead  of  iT],  t:  for  t?,  and  njfi  for  njn. 
translates  accordingly  by  ^arlaare  eau- 
ToTs  (pas  yv<i<rtas.  They  are  further  re- 
minded that  it  is  high  time  to  begin  this 
process,  laying  aside  their  stiff-necked,  per- 
verse ways ;  expelling  from  their  heart  the 
noxious  grow  Ih  that  had  overspread  it ;  and 
by  every  way  and  means  working  earnestly 
and  zealously  for  a  renewal  of  life  and  return 
to  the  long-neglected  work  and  worship  of 
Jehovah.  Neither  were  they  to  relax  tiieir 
efforts  till  the  blessed  end  was  attained, 
iy,  with  imperfect,  marking  tbe  goal  to 
be  reached;  nor  would  their  efforts  be  in 
vain.  The  Lord  would  rain — bestow  abun- 
dantly— upon  them,  or  touch  (another  and 
more  frequent  meaning  of  the  word),  their 
righteousness.  Thus  the  ground  that  had 
long  lain  fallow  must  be  broken  up ;  its 
waste,  wild  state  must  cease  and  give  place 
to  cultivation ;  the  ploughshare  must  be 
driven  through  it;  its  wild  growths  and 
weeds  must  be  cut  down  and  uprooted.  A 
process  of  renewal  must  succeed ;  the  vices 
of  their  natural  state,  the  idolatrous  and 
wicked  practices  that  hiid  sprung  up,  must 
be  abandtmed.  Eenewal  and  radical  reform 
are  imperatively  demanded.  Matters  had 
remained  too  long  in  a  miserable  and  un- 
satisfactory condition.  A  long  night  of 
sinful  slumber  had  overcome  them ;  it  was 
high  time  to  awake  out  of  that  sleep.  Too 
long  had  they  shamefully  forgotten  and  for- 
saken God ;  it  wa«  more  than  time  to  wait 
upon  him.  Nor  would  such  waiting,  it 
persevered  in,  end  in  dis  .ppointment ;  not- 
withslaniling  their  gieat  and  manifold 
provocations,  he  would  come  and  rain  right- 
eousness in  welcome,  refreshing,  and  plen- 
teous showers  upon  returning  penitents ; 
and  with  righteousness  would  be  conjoined 
its  reward  of  blessing  and  salvation,  both 
temporal  and  spiritual. 

Ver.  13. — Ye  have  ploughed  wickedness, 
ye  have  reaped  iniquity ;  ye  have  eaten  the 
fruit  of  lies.  Hitherto  their  course  had 
been  the  veiy  opposite  of  that  which  they 
are  now  exhorted  to  enter  on.  Hitherto 
their  work  had  been  wickedness,  and  their 
wages,  as  might  be  expected,  the  fruit  of 
iniquity.  What  they  had  wrought  for  they 
reaped.  Their  ploughing  had  been  sin, 
their  sowing  wickedness,  and  their  harvest 
sorrow.    Wickedness  against  God  and  man 


CM.  X.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


807 


was  what  they  both  ploughed  and  enwed ; 
oppreaBion  at  the  hand  of  their  enemies  was 
the  harvest  or  reward  of  iniquity  which 
thev  reaped.  Their  lies,  including  their 
idolatry  in  reference  .to  CJod,  disloyalty  to 
t)ieir  king,  their  false  words  and  false  works 
w  ith  one  another,  bore  fruit,  bitter  fruit, 
B(.ur  fruit,  and  they  were  obliged  to  eat 
thut  fruit  till  their  teeth  were  set  on  edge. 
Thus  Kimchi  explains  it :  "  After  tlie 
ploughing  follows  the  sowing,  and  both  of 
them  at«  a  figurative  rpprcsentation  of 
work,  as  we  have  explained  it.  The  pro- 
phet says,  'Ye  have  done  the  opposite  of 
that  which  I  commanded  you,  when  I  said. 
Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness.' "  The 
harvest  is  the  reward  of  the  work  done; 
the  genitive  is  expressive  of  contents — that 
in  whicli  the  fruit  consists;  the  fruit  of  lies 
against  God  is  the  fruit  which  disappoints 
those  who  wait  for  it.  Ki  directs  attention 
to  tlie  ground  of  Israel's  gradual  declension 
and  final  destruction ;  the  two  fundamental 
errors,  or  rather  evils,  that  led  on  to  Israel's 
ruid,  were  apostasy  from  Jehovah  and  sinful 
self-confidence.  Sunk  in  idolatry,  they  no 
longer  looked  to  Jehovah  as  the  Source  of 
their  power  and  strength ;  while  they  pur- 
sued their  own  ways,  confident  of  the  excel- 
lence of  their  own  sagacity  and  foresight. 
Because  thou  didst  trust  in  thy  way,  in  the 
multitude  of  thy  mighty  men.  They  had 
placed  theii  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of 
their  own  ways — their  prudent  plans  and 
wise  counsels;  in  the  heroism  of  their 
soldiers  and  the  excellence  of  their  pre- . 
parationa  of  war.  By  these  means  they 
fancied  themselves  independent  of  the  Al- 
mighty, and  BufSoiently  defended  against 
their  enemies.  "  Thou  hast  trusted,"  says 
Kimchi,  in  his  exposition,  "to  thine  own 
way  which  thou  goest ;  and  that  is  the  way 
of  iniquity  and  of  confidence  in  eril ;  and 
in  like  manner  thou  hast  trusted  in  the 
multitude  of  thy  men  of  war  which  thou 
hast  had  among  thine  own  people,  or  among 
the  Egyptians,  from  whom  they  sought 
help,  and  thou  hast  made  flesh  thine  arm, 
and  not  trusted  in  me ;  therefore  thou  hMt 
stumbled." 

Yer.  14. — Therefore  shall  a  tnmTilt  arias 
among  thy  people,  and  all  thy  fortressei 
shall  be  spoiled.  This  was  the  fruit  of 
their  doings,  the  result  of  their  sins.  The 
tumult  of  war  is  already  heard,  and  the 
work  of  destruction  has  begun.  The  word 
thaan,  tumult,  is  from  n^t^,  as  applied  to  the 
loud  rushing  of  waters,  then  the  tumult  of 
advancing  warriors.  The  preposition  &•  is 
rendered  (1)  as  aboTe  by  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, Umbreit,  and  others ;  and,  joined  with 
"peoples"  (which  i>  plural),  signifies  that 
the  confused  noise  of  wu  would  be  heard 
among  their  own  peoples,  or  the  multitude 


of  the  mighty  ones  in  whom  they  had 
had  such  confidence;  or  the  plural  may 
refer  to  the  tribes  of  Israel,  each  of  which 
was  an  D^,  thougli  Keil  would  confine  this 
meaning  to  Pentateuchal  times.  Most  of 
the  versions  read  the  singular,  like  our  own 
Authorized  Version,  yet  it  must  still  be  re- 
ferred to  the  people  of  Israel  But  (2)  the 
preposition  is  translated  "  against "  by  many 
modern  interpreters,  and  thus  tlie  confused 
noise  of  the  advance  of  the  enemy. against 
Israel  is  denoted.  The  attack  of  the  in- 
vaders is  directed  against  the  fortreiies,  or 
fenced  cities,  so  called  from  a  verb  denoting 
"to  out  off"  (113),  as  if  aU  approach  to 
them  were  cut  off,  and  assault  impossible. 
Nevertheless  they  were  to  go  down,  all  of 
them,  before  the  enemy — laid  waste  and 
spoiled ;  while  inhuman  cruelty  would  cha- 
racterize the  conquerors.  As  an  lustration 
of  or  specimen  resembling  that  cruelty,  an 
obscure  piece  of  history  is  quoted.  As 
Shalman  spoiled  Beth-arbel  in  the  day  of 
battle:  the  mother  was  dashed  in  pieces 
upon  her  children.  In  the  great  variety  of 
opinion  with  respect  to  the  event  referred 
to,  and  the  consequent  diversity  of  exposi- 
tion, we  shall  not  venture  to  do  more  than 
select  that  which  on  the  whole,  notwith- 
standing a  certain  chronological  difiSculty 
that  lies  against  it,  appears  the  most  pro- 
bable. Accordingly,  Beth-arbel  may  have 
been  Arbela,  mentioned  in  1  Mace.  ix.  2 
and  more  than  once  by  Joiephns,  in  Upper 
Galilee,  in  the  tribe  of  NaphtaU,  between 
Sephoris  and  Tiberias,  now  IMd;  and 
Shalman  may  be  an  abbreviation  for  Shal- 
maneser ;  while  the  circumstance  here  men- 
tioned may  have  been  an  incident  of  the 
campaign  of  which  we  read  in  2  Kings  xvii. 
3,  5,  "Against  him  came  up  Shalmaneser 
King  of  Assyria ;  and  Hoshea  became  his 
servant.  .  .  .Then  the  King  of  Assyria  came 
up  throughout  all  the  land,  and  went  up  to 
Samaria,  and  besieged  it  three  years."  The 
manifestation  of  the  cruelty  was  when  the 
mother,  with  true  motherly  affection,  bent 
over  her  children  to  defejid  them,  and  she 
and  they  perished  in  a  common  ruin,  or 
when  the  children  were  dashed  to  the  ground 
before  their  mother's  eyet,  and  she,  done  to 
death,  hurled  upon  them. 

Ver.  15. — So  shall  Bethel  do  onto  yon 
beoanse  of  your  great  wickedness  (margin, 
the  evil  of  your  evil);  in  a  morning  shall 
the  King  of  Israel  utterly  he  cut  off.  Their 
coming  sufferings  were  all  traceable  to  their 
sin.  Bethel,  the  principal  place  of  calf- 
worshipi  was  the  cause  of  their  coming 
calamities,  not  the  place  itself,  but  the 
wickedness  of  which  it  was  the  scene.  The 
real  cause  was  the  great  and  crowning 
wickedness  practised  there.  Bethel,  once 
the  house  of  God,  would  in  conseqnenct 


M6 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  X.  1 — 16. 


become  another  Beth-arbel,  the  honse  of  the 
ttmbush  of  God.  In  the  moming,  ^hen 
perhaps  a  season  of  prosperity  seemed  he- 
ginning  to  dawn,  ot  at  an  early  date  and 
in  a  speedy  manner,  quickly  at  the  moming 
dawn  gives  place  before  the  rising  sun,  the 
king,  Hoshea,  or   perhaps  no  particular 


king,  but  merely  the  representative  of  the 
royal  office,  womd  be  cut  off— entirely  cut 
off.  Thus  their  main  refuge  would  come  to 
an  ignominious  end,  bringing  along  with  it 
the  frustration  of  all  their  hopes  and  the 
conclusion  of  their  mistaken  and  misplaced 
confidences. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  l—3.—-8ln  and  iU  retribution.  I.  Pbevebted  dbb  of  rRospERirr.  Israel  is 
a  vine  not  empty,  nor  emptied,  nor  plundered,  according  to  Calvin,  say,  by  the  tribute 
paid  to  Pul ;  for,  if  empty,  how  then  could  he  bring  forth  fruit,  except,  indeed,  at  some 
subsequent  season  ?  He  is  compared,  rather,  to  a  wide-spreading  vine,  pouiing  out  its 
strrngih  in  luxuriant  leafage  and  show  of  fruit ;  or  even  suitable  fruit.  But  the  frnit 
thus  yielded  was  not  fruit  to  God,  as  it  should  have  been,  but  fruit  to  itself  and  for 
itself.  The  figure  of  a  flourishing  vine,  condensed  by  the  prophet  here,  is  fully  expanded 
and  developed  by  the  psalmist  in  the  eightieth  psalm:  "Thou  hast  brought  a  vine 
out  of  Egypt :  thou  hast  cast  out  the  heathen,  and  planted  it.  Thou  preparedst  room 
before  it,  and  didst  cause  it  to  take  deep  root,  and  it  filled  the  land.  The  hills  were 
covered  with  the  shadow  of  it,  and  the  boughs  thereof  were  like  the  goodly  cedars. 
She  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea,  and  her  branches  unto  the  river."  Such  had 
Israel  been  aforetime.  Their  fruit  trees  produced  abundantly;  their  land  was  very 
fertile;  the  fruit  of  man  and  beast  and  tree  multiplied,  and  their  land  increased  in 
fertility ;  but  these  blessings  of  Providence  were  abused.  Instead  of  leading  them  to 
repentance,  these  good  gifts  of  God's  providence  were  sadly  misused  and  shockingly 
perverted ;  instead  of  being  employed  in  the  service  and  to  the  glory  of  the  Giver,  they 
were  used  for  idolatrous  purposes,  and  thus  they  ministered  to  sin.  Altars  were  reared 
to  Idols  and  statues  set  up ;  they  multiplied  their  altars  and  made  goodly  images. 

II.  FuKisHMENT  18  BUBE  TO  FOLLOW  SUCH  FEBTEBsiON.  God  had  blessed  them 
with  prosperity  and  plenty,  but  they  made  a  poor  return ;  nay,  they  returned  evil  for 
his  goodness.  They  might  well  be  compared  to  an  emptying  vine,  casting  its  fruit 
before  it  was  ripe,  according  to  one  explanation  of  the  word,  for  they  emptied  them- 
selves of  the  riches  he  conferred  on  them  by  sending  presents  to  foreign  princes,  or 
purchasing  their  alliance,  or  paying  tribute  to  their  conquerors ;  or  they  wasted  their 
wealth  on  their  idols  and  in  idolatrous  practices,  or  on  self  and  sin  in  some  form.  Or, 
if  they  brought  forth  fruit  unto  maturity,  that  fruit  did  not  redound  to  the  Divine  glory ; 
the  fruit  borne  by  them  was  not  the  fruit  of  righteousness ;  the  seemingly  good  works 
done  by  them  were  not  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  What  they  did  they  did  for 
their  own  profit  or  pleasure,  or  to  gain  the  praise  of  men.  The  blessings  bestowed  on 
them  were  not  used  to  promote  the  Divine  glory,  or  to  help  the  Divine  service,  or  to 
advance  the  cause  of  true  religion  in  any  way,  but  were  lavished  on  their  own  lusts,  or 
selfish  gratifications,  or  abominable  idolatries,  multiplying  altars  to  their  idols,  offering 
sacrifices  more  numerous  and  expensive,  making  pillars  or  statues  of  costlier  metal  and 
with  richer  ornaments.  1.  The  root  of  the  evil  was  within.  The  seat  of  all  their  sin 
was  within,  and  out  of  the  heart  it  proceeded ;  their  heart  was  divided,  or  hypocritical, 
and  therefore  not  right  with  God.  Persons  guilty  of  such  sin  and  folly  and  gross 
ingratitude  God  could  not  hold  guiltless.  They  were  dealt  with  as  guilty  and  punished, 
or  wei  e  left  desolate — their  land  wasted,  and  themselves  led  into  captivity.  2.  Accumu< 
lated  wrath  issues  in  aggravated  punishment.  The  means  God  graciously  gave  them 
for  charitable  and  noble  purposes  of  benevolence,  or  for  high  and  holy  service,  they  threw 
away  recklessly  on  vile  and  worthless  objects ;  as  the  means  increased,  the  wickedness 
increased.  God  tried  them  with  prosperity ;  be  proved  them,  but  they  did  not  stand 
the  test ;  every  day  they  persisted  in  their  mad  career  of  sin.  They  were  treasuring 
up  for  themselves  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath.  3.  God  corrects  in  measure  that  men 
may  roprnt  of  sin  and'  turn  to  God.  If  the  day  of  visitation  is  improved,  it  is  well;  if, 
when  God  withdraws  his  hand  and  grants  a  respite,  or  suspends  the  stroke,  his  gracious 
desij.'n  is  duly  responded  to,  the  chastisement  is  sanotifled,  and  the  person  so  treated 


OH.  X.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  309 

has  good  cause  to  Bay,  "  It  is  good  for  me  tliat  I  hare  been  afflicted."  If  otherwise,  il 
individuals  are  found  faulty,  if  their  sin  has  found  them  out,  then  tlie  means  of  sinning 
are  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  snatched  from  them,  and  themselves  swept  awfully  as 
with  the  besom  of  destruction.  4.  Whoever  be  the  instrument  or  whatever  the  means, 
the  Author  of  the  infliction  is  God.  The  subject  here  is  not  specified ;  as  far  as  the 
grammar  goes,  it  might  be  the  Assyrian  or  other  enemy  that  broke  down  their  altars 
and  spoiled  their  images,  but  sense  and  Scripture  lead  the  thoughts  up  to  God.  Though 
indefinite,  the  emphatic  use  of  the  pronoun  fixes  the  sense. 

III.  Prospect  of  a  oIiOomy  future  is  the  natubal  beqitel  of  a  siNFtn.  peebent. 
Thus  it  is  with  those  who,  having  perverted  the  gifts  of  God's  goorlnes8,do  not  profit  by 
punishment  mildly  administered.  Israel,  who  had  rejected  their  heavenly  King,  were 
soon  to  find  themselves  deprived  of  their  earthly  king,  and  reduced  to  a  state  of  anarchy. 
They  would  soon  be  forced  to  say, "  We  have  no  king,  no  protector."  This  is  assigned  as 
the  cause  of  the  preceding  statement  about  the  wreck  of  their  altars  and  the  ruin  of  their 
statues  or  pillars.  This  catastrophe  is  looked  upon  as  brought  about  in  consequence 
of  their  having  no  kingly  protection  or  defence.  Their  rejection  of  Jehovah  in  the 
double  capacity  of  God  and  King,  by  their  turning  to  idolatry  and  refusing  the  theocracy, 
led  eventually  to  ecclesiastical  disaster,  and  civil  or  secular  distress.  Forsaking  God  as 
King,  they  have  now  no  king — ^no  upholder  of  either  Church  or  state ;  consequently  their 
altars,  as  they  conceived,  were  broken  down  and  their  images  spoiled.  Thus  they 
bemoan  their  present  anomalous  and  perilous  position.  But  they  bethink  themselves  that 
even  if  they  had  a  king  he  could  do  them  no  good,  seeing  that  Divine  power  was  opposed 
to  them,  and  Divine  wrath  incurred  by  them.  What,  then,  under  such  untoward 
circumstances,  could  a  king  do  for  them  ?  Here  is  the  exact  converse  of  the  believer's 
confidence  :  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  Jerome's  exposition  brings  out 
the  sense  well,  as  followis :  "  After  God  shall  have  shattered  the  images  of  Israel,  and 
utterly  destroyed  their  altars  and  statues,  and  the  final  captivity  shall  have  come,  they 
shall  say,  "  We  have  no  king."  And  lest  they  should  think  that  the  sentence  would  be 
deferred  fur  a  long  time,  he  added,  They  shall  say  now:  when  they  are  being  laid 
waste,  when  they  shall  perceive  that  Hoshea,  their  last  king,  has  been  removed  from 
them — '  a  king  is  taken  away  from  us,  because  we  did  not  fear  God,  our  true  King ; 
for  what  could  a  human  king  avail  us ? '" 

Vers,  4 — 8. — Israel's  sin,  sorrow,  sJuime,  and  suffering.  These  verses  exhibit  them 
with  marvellous  conciseness  and  great  imprcssiveness. 

I.  Israel's  sin  of  unfaithfulness.  Israel's  unfaithfulness  at  the  period  of  whi(  h 
the  prophet  speaks  was  of  the  most  reckless  kind.  It  took  the  form  (1)  of  idolatry 
with  respect  to  God,  (2)  of  disloyalty  to  their  sovereign,  and  (3)  of  falsehood  in  th(  ir 
dealings  with  their  fellow-men  in  general.  By  their  idolatry  they  renounced  the 
covenant  of  their  Goil,  which  had  the  seal  of  circumcision ;  their  promises  of  reforma- 
tion, when  they  made  such,  were  falsified ;  the  vows  wrung  from  them  in  distress  or 
otherwise  they  failed  to  pay.  The  most  sacred  bonds  did  not  bind  them;  subjects 
violated  their  oath  of  allegiance,  and  sovereigns  their  coronation  oath ;  alike  in  treaties 
with  foreign  powers  as  in  contracts  with  their  fellow-men,  they  made  no  conscience  of 
keeping  faith.  Add  to  all  this  the  perversion  of  justice  and  the  misuse  of  judgment, 
and  the  picture  is  complete;  perfidy,  perjury,  and  the  perversion  of  judgment  being  in 
the  foreground,  and  untruthfulness  the  dark  background  of  all.  Such  was  the  growth, 
prolific  and  pestiferous  as  hemlock,  which  at  this  period  overspread  the  land  of  Israel 
as  if  in  furrows  specially  prepared  for  it. 

II.  Israel's  sorrow  in  consequence  or  sin.  Men  may  be  sure  that  their  sin  shall 
find  them  out,  by  detection,  or  punishment,  or  both  ;  while  sorrow  follows  in  the  wake 
of  sin.  The  inhabitants  of  the  northern  capital,  like  the  people  of  Bethel  or  Beth-aven, 
being  calf-worshippers,  and  therefore  called  the  people  of  the  calf,  would  naturally  be 
overwhelmed  with  consteination  and  alarm,  when  the  news  of  an  invading  host  approach- 
ing the  provincial  town,  which  was  the  chief  seat  of  the  calf-worship,  reached  them ;  still 
more  so  when  that  hostile  host  had  actually  entered  it  and  carried  off  their  idol.  Their 
fear  before  the  event  would  be  succeeded  by  sorrow  after  it.  Not  only  would  the 
Samaritans  sympathize  with  their  coreligionists  of  Bethel  in  their  calamity  and  loss, 
but  tremble  because  of  their  own  proximity  to  peril,  not  knowing  how  soon  the  tide  of 


310  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA,  [oh.  x.  1—16. 

conquest  ihould  sweep  over  themselves.  Both  peoples,  Samaritans  and  Beth-aTonites, 
united  in  a  common  cause,  and,  involved  in  a  common  calamity  or  soon  to  be  so,  would 
mourn  for  the  loss  of  their  idol.  This  Scripture  may  well  impress  its  lesson,  and  a 
most  salutaiy  one,  on  all  idolaters,  whether  those  who  bow  down  to  those  idol  vanities 
of  wood,  or  stone,  or  metal,  made  by  their  own  hands,  or  those  spiritual  idolaters  whose 
hearts  are  swayed  by  some  lust  or  passion,  or  any  other  object  than  God.  Any  earthly 
object  that  engrosses  our  affections,  or  usurps  that  place  in  our  heart  which  belongs  to 
God  alone,  is  our  god  for  the  time  being— our  idol,  and  that  which  commands  our 
homage  or  adoration.  And  surely,  as  we  set  up  any  such  object  of  spiritual  idolatry  in 
our  heart  and  elevate  it  to  the  throne  of  our  affections,  we  shall  come  to  grief;  we  shall 
be  disappointed  in  it  while  we  possess  it,  or  disappointed  of  it  when  we  lose  it.  Bitterly 
shall  we  be  made  to  feel  and  to  mourn  its  loss;  nor  is  this  to  be  wondered  at  or 
complained  of,  for  God  is  a  jealous  God,  and  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another. 
Matthew  Henry  has  well  observed  that  "whatever  men  make  a  god  of,  they  will 
mourn  for  the  loss  of;  and  inordinate  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  any  worldly  good  is  a  sign 
we  made  an  idol  of  it."  The  idol-priests  who  derived  their  emolument  and  livelihood 
from  idolatry  were  plunged  in  still  greater  mourning  than  the  people  for  whom  they 
ministered.  The  wages  uf  sin  do  not  last  long,  and  do  not  satisfy  the  short  time  they 
do  last.  Thus  it  was  with  the  priests  when  the  source  of  their  gain  and  the  object  of 
their  glory  departed. 

III.  Israel's  shame  was  another  concouitant,  ob  batheb  ooksequence,  ofIbbael's 
BIN.  The  shame  was  twofold ;  shame  to  see  their  idol  thrown  down  and  defaced,  and 
yet  more  to  see  it,  or  at  least  the  gold  that  adorned  it,  carried  away  in  triumph  as  a 
present  or  peace  offering  to  King  Jareb.  There  was  yet  deeper  cause  of  shame.  It  was 
not  only  that  they  gloried  in  their  god  of  gold,  and  confided  in  it  for  protection,  but 
that  their  policy  was  completely  frustrated.  The  political  sagacity  on  which,  no  doubt, 
they  piqued  themselves,  as  certain  to  keep  Israel  separate  from  Judah  by  detaching  the 
former  from  the  latter  in  worshipping  at  the  national  sanctuary  in  Jerusalem,  resulted 
in  Israel's  ruin.  No  wonder  that  Ephraim,  the  tribe  with  which  this  separation  origi- 
nated, received  shame ;  while  the  remaining  tribes  of  Israel,  that  with  such  facile  com- 
pliance acquiesced  in  their  counsel  and  followed  their  example,  were  put  to  shame. 
Thus  the  wise  are  often  caught  in  their  own  craftiness. 

"  The  sinners'  hands  do  make  the  snare* 
Wherewith  themselves  are  caught" 

rV.  SuFFEBiNO  18  ANOTHEB  BESULT  OP  SIN.  Creature-coufidences  fail  to  succour; 
without  Divine  help  and  blessing,  sovereign  and  subject  are  alike  powerless  and  resource- 
less.  The  king,  on  the  appointment  of  whom  the  people  had  so  set  their  heart  at  first, 
and  on  whose  power  all  along  they  continued  to  place  such  confidence,  was  too  weak  to 
help ;  and  in  utter  impotence  was  himself  cut  off— cut  off  ignominiously  as  foam  on  the 
face  of  the  water,  or  chip  carried  headlong  by  the  current.  The  scenes  of  their  sin  were 
so  desolated,  and  left  without  a  single  worshipper,  that  thorns  and  thistles  came  up 
upon  those  altars  where  multitudes  once  had  worshipped.  So  true  it  is  that  "  if  the 
grace  of  God  prevail  not  to  destroy  the  love  of  sin  in  us,  it  is  just  that  the  providence  of 
God  should  destroy  the  food  and  fuel  of  sin  about  us."  Sinners  in  general  suffer  sooner 
or  later  shame  and  contempt,  disgrace  and  disappointment,  poignant  sorrow  and  mental 
anguish.  To  such  an  extent  was  this  the  case  with  the  hapless  idolaters,  that  their 
distress  was  so  intolerable  that,  feeling  life  not  worth  living,  they  preferred  death  to  life. 
Times  there  are  so  sad,  and  suffering,  both  bodily  and  mental,  so  acute,  that  death  is 
more  than  welcome.  To  be  swallowed  in  the  yawning  earth,  or  covered  by  the  falling 
hill,  or  whelmed  in  the  surging  sea,  was  welcome  to  such  sufferers.  So  with  impenitent 
sinners  in  the  day  of  judgment  (Rev.  vi.  16).  So  with  the  Jews  in  their  distressful 
circumstances  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  (Luke  xxiiL  30).  This  cry  for 
death  passed  into  a  proverb ;  it  was  the  offspring  of  despair. 

y.  Summary  of  this  section.  Such  a  summary  is  contained  in  vera.  7  and  8. 
Israel's  two  chief  sources  of  confidence  were  their  king  and  their  idolatry — one  civil  or 
secular,  the  other  ecclesiastical  or  sacied,  both  to  the  rejection  and  neglect  of  the  true 
Source  of  hope  and  help.  Neither  of  these  is  any  longer  available  or  any  longer  reliable. 
The  king  or  head  of  their  civil  polity  is  cut  off  like  foam  on  the  surface  of  a  stream — 
a  moment  there,  then  gone  for  ever.    The  high  places  of  Aven,  that  is,  Beth-aven, 


OH.  X.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  311 

"  house  of,Yanity,"  the  name  given  in  contemptuous  reproof  of  idolatry  to  6eth-el,  onca 
the  "house  of  God  " — these  high  places  consecrated  to  idolatry,  at  once  the  occasions  of 
sin  to  Israel,  and  places  polluted  by  that  people's  sin,  are  doomed  to  destruction,  total 
destruction.  The  altars  erected  thereon  are  destined  to  be  heaps  of  ruins,  so  forsaken 
and  desolate,  that  where  the  whole  burnt  offering  went  vp  in  smoke  (n^p,  whole  burnt 
offering,  from  n^p,  to  go  up),  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  now  go  up  (i^r)>  ^"^  ^'^'^  undis- 
puted sway.  The  sin-laden  people  who  had  forsaken  their  own  mercies  and  pursued 
their  idolatrous  practices  on  those  hills  and  at  those  altars,  are  in  the  end  so  over- 
whelmed with  calamity  and  so  thoroughly  miserable,  that,  as  we  have  seen,  they  prefer 
death  to  life,  reckoning  a  life  so  wretched  not  worth  living.  Hence  arose  their  cry  of 
desperation — a  cry  that  may  have  had  its  origin  in  the  local  situation  of  the  people  who 
uttered  it.  Situated  on  a  hill  as  Samaria  was,  and  surrounded  by  an  amphitheatre  of 
hilla  still  higher,  the  intervening  valley  and  narrow  outlets  being  occupied  by  the 
enemy,  those  hills  to  which  they  once  looked  for  safety,  instead  of  helping,  now 
hemmed  them  in,  and  the  only  help  they  could  now  afford  was  to  fall  on  thdr  devoted 
heads,  to  screen  them  from  wrath  and  deliver  them  from  misery. 

Yen.  9—12.—^  chequered  picture.  These  verses  exhibit  the  continuance  In  sin  and 
its  consequences,  chastisement  and  its  lessons,  change  of  clrcumatances  and  its  bitter 
ezperiencesj  the  call  to  repentance  and  the  blessed  promises  to  the  penitent. 

I.  CoNTiNiTANOK  IN  BIN.  Israel  had  corrupted  themselves  as  in  the  days  of  Gibeah 
(ch.  ix.  9),  and,  as  we  are  told  in  ch.  x.  9,  had  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibeah.  1,  Giievous 
as  their  sin  had  been  at  first,  it  was  greatly  aggravated  by  being  long  continued.  Age 
aftw  age  sin  had  run  its  course ;  one  generation  after  another  had  helped  to  fill  up  the 
cup  of  iniquity  until  it  had  become  brimrul.  A  heathen  complains  of  successive 
generations  thus  corrupting  themselves,  each  outstripping  that  which  preceded  in 
iniquity :  "  What  is  there  wasting  time  does  not  impair  ?  The  age  of  our  parents,  worse 
than  our  grandsires,  has  borne  us  yet  more  wicked,  who  in  our  turn  are  destined  to 
beget  a  progeny  more  sinful  still."  2.  This  continuance  in  sin  shall  be  attended  by 
dreadful  consequences  some  day.  This  is  a  legitimate  inference^  whatever  view  we 
take  of  this  difficult  ninth  verse.  Whether  the  meaning  be  that  the  Israelites  stood 
their  ground,  and  did  not  perish  though  twice  defeated  by  the  men  of  Benjamin,  and 
that  with  a  loss  of  forty  thousand  slain ;  and  that,  though  spared,  their  destruction  as 
dreadful  as  deserved  shall  overtake  them  now,  and  that  without  any  possibility  of 
escape,  and  when  it  does  come  it  shall  be  found  all  the  more  dreadful  from  having  been 
delayed  in  its  course ;  or  whether  the  sense  is  that  Israel,  as  if  forsaken  of  God  and 
alienated  from  his  favour  (possibly  implied  by  the  change  from  the  second  to  the  third 
person),  have  stood,  ttiat  is,  persisted  in  their  sin  as  there  and  then  so  ever  since ;  shall 
not  the  battle  overtalce  such  incorrigible  offenders  ;  persevering  so  long  in  sin  like  the 
men  of  Gibeah,  can  they  expect  to  escape  the  war  that  of  old  did  all  but  exterminate 
the  transgressors  ?  Or  whether  the  sense  be  that  the  Benjamites,  then  an  integral  part 
of  Israel,  stood  by  the  Gibeahites,  defending,  and  so  virtually  abetting  them  in  their 
iniquity,  that  the  battle  in  Gibeah  might  not  overtake  those  vile  delinquents,  and  that 
Israel,  resembling  the  Benjamites  in  spirit,  have  sinned  ever  since,  aiding,  abetting, 
and  taking  part  in  similar  or  greater  atrocities  and  abominations.  They  are  than  left 
to  infer  that  a  day  of  reckoning  still  more  terrible  was  to  be  expected  by  thorn. 

II.  Chastisement  and  its  lessons.  In  the  case  of  Israel,  they  were  not  left  merely 
to  infer  the  approach  of  chastisement,  they  were  positively  assured  of  it.  1.  Men  «re 
forewarned  that  they  may  be  forearmed.  God  had  exercised  much  long-suffering  and 
forbearance,  but  his  goodness  failed  to  lead  them  to  repentance.  They  had  abused  his 
patience,  and  now  his  purpose  is  to  chastise ;  but  even  in  chastising  them  he  is  exercising 
mercy  in  order  to  prevent  final  and  inevitable  ruin.  He  had  rejoiced  over  them  to  do 
them  good ;  he  now  takes  pleasure  in  correcting  them— it  is  his  desire.  The  nature  of 
the  chastisement  with  which  Israel  is  to  be  visited  closely  resembles  that  which  had 
been  inflicted  on  the  Benjamites.  2.  The  reference  to  that  transaction  may  have  sug- 
gested to  the  prophet  his  description  of  the  coming  chastisement.  The  tribes  of  Israel 
banded  themselves  against  Benjamin  in  the  battle  of  Gibeah ;  so  the  peoples,  the 
Assyrians  and  their  allies,  would  be  gathered  against  Israel.    Eimchi  has  well  expressed 


812  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.x.1— 15. 

the  cause  of  the  chastisement  by  representing  God  as  saying,  "  According  to  my  good 
will  and  pleasure  will  I  chastise  them ;  because  they  do  not  receive  chastisement  from 
me  by  my  prophets  who  rebuke  them  in  my  Name,  I  will  chastise  them  by  the  handi  of 
the  peoples  which  shall  be  gathered  against  them."  3.  When  men  refuse  to  be  God's 
freemen,  and  prefer  continuing  to  be  servants  of  sin,  they  are  preparing  themselves  to  be 
the  bondmen  of  their  enemies.  The  allusion  in  the  last  clause  of  ver.  10  is  obscure,  and 
yet  the  general  sense  is  tolerably  plain.  Much  depends  on  tlie  one  word  variously  ren- 
dered "  eyes,"  "  furrows,"  "  habitations,''  or  "  sins."  Tlie  figure  may  be  taken  from  two 
oxen  abreast  in  a  yoke,  ploughing  together  side  by  side  in  two  adjacent  furrows ;  and  it 
may  indicate  the  combination  of  the  Israelites  to  ward  off  the  threatened  danger,  but 
to  no  purpose,  since  Jehovah  had  decreed  their  chastisement,  and,  in  case  it  fail^,  their 
destruction ;  or  the  two  divisions  of  Israel  and  Jiidah,and  their  respective  places  of  habi- 
tation ;  or  the  two  places  of  idolatrous  worship,  Dan  and  Bethel;  or  their  two  cohabitations 
with  God  and  idols ;  or  their  two  transgressions,  which  appears  the  preferable  sense. 
Whichever  of  these  we  adopt,  the  idea  of  binding,  that  is,  of  thraldom  or  captivity, 
remains  the  same.  4.  There  are  two  kinds  of  service  and  two  claimants  for  the  soul  of 
man  :  there  is  the  service  of  sin,  and  the  wages  of  th  it  service  is  death ;  there  is  the 
service  of  God,  and  the  fruit  of  that  service  is  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting 
life.  Satan  claims  us,  but  he  is  a  usurper;  besides,  be  is  the  worst  of  all  masters — 
keeping  his  servants  in  bondage,  working  them  to  death,  and  at  last  paying  them  with 
damnation.  God  claims  us.  His  claim  is  just ;  he  is  the  rightful  Proprietor;  he  made  us, 
and  not  we  ourselves.  His  claim  is,  in  fact,  threefold — creation,  preservation,  and  redemp- 
tion. We  cannot  serve  two  masters ;  we  cannot  obey  both ;  and  we  may  not  attempt 
the  unholy  compromise  made  by  the  peoples  brought  from  the  regions  of  Assyria  and 
planted  in  the  lands  of  the  dispossessed  Israelites,  who  worshipped  the  Lord  and  served 
their  own  gods.  To  be  the  slaves  of  Satan  or  the  freemen  of  Jehovah,  that  is  the 
question ;  the  bondage  of  sin  or  the  freedom  of  righttousness  is  the  alternative.  There 
must  be  decision  in  the  matter.  Let  our  determination  be  like  Joshua's,  that  whatever 
others  do,  we  will  serve  the  Lord. 

III.  Chanse  of  0IB0UM8TAN0ES  AKS  BITTEB  EXFEBiGNCEa.  When  Israel  had,  by 
idolatry  and  other  sins,  bound  themselves  for  slavery,  like  oxen  labouring  in  the  yoke 
up  and  down  the  furrows  of  the  field,  the  change  came.  Ephraim  had  been  treated 
gently  and  trained  indulgently ;  their  yoke  had  been  an  easy  one,  and  their  burden  a 
light  one ;  but  they  did  not  value  their  privileges,  nor  know  the  day  of  their  merciful 
visitation.  They  had  been  in  easy  circumstances;  the  lines  had  fallen  to  them  in 
pleasant  places ;  they  had  long  enjoyed  privileges  and  advantages  of  no  ordinary  kind. 
But  times  are  now  changed,  and  that  change,  the  bitter  fruit  of  their  own  doings,  was 
sad  us  it  was  sudden.  A  yoke  is  now  put  on  the  neck,  a  rider  on  the  back,  and 
dnulgery  becomes  the  lot  of  the  once  fair  and  delicate  heifer.  Subjection  and  slavery  to 
foreigners,  with  hardships  great  and  many,  and  such  as  they  had  never  experienced 
bufoi  e,  now  awaited  Ephraim ;  while  Judah  too  would  come  in  for  share  of  the  punish- 
ment, as  they  had  had  part  in  the  sin  ;  and  thus  at  last  Jacob,  that  is,  both  kingdoms, 
the  northern  and  the  southern,  having  thrown  off  the  yoke  of  Jehovah,  fall  each  in 
turn  under  the  galling  yoke  of  Assv'rian  and  Chaldean  conqueror.  Let  men  beware  of 
exchanging  the  pleasant  service  of  the  Saviour  for  the  painful  drudgery  of  Satan  1 

IV.  Thb  call  to  bepbntance  and  its  blessed  prospects.  The  severity  of  the 
foregoing  threatenings  is  alleviated  by  the  present  call  to  reformation  and  repentance, 
with  the  accompanying  promises.  1.  A  seed-time  of  righteousness  must  precede  a 
reaping-time  of  mercy.  The  figures  are  still  borrowed  from  husbandry ;  and  thus 
every  action  is  represented  as  seed  sown,  and  every  good  work  is  seed  sown  in  righteous- 
ness. The  rule  of  righteousness  is  the  Law  of  God,  and  the  directions  of  that  rule 
include  our  duty  both  to  God  and  man.  To  sow  in  righteousness,  therefore,  is  to  dis- 
charge the  duties  of  righteousness,  comprehendiag  piety  towards  God,  justice  and  charity 
towards  man,  together  with  propriety  of  personal  conduct.  2.  The  seed  sown  shall 
come  up  one  day.  If  we  sow  tares,  they  will  come  up ;  if  we  sow  wheat,  it  will  come  up. 
The  seed  of  righteousness  is  called  by  the  psalmist  precious  seed.  It  is  not  in  the  power 
of  man  to  cause  a  single  seed  to  germinate  and  spring  up ;  but  God  in  his  justice  will 
bring  up  the  bad  seed  for  punishment,  and  in  bis  mercy  the  good  seed  for  reward.  3. 
There  is  a  correspondence  between  the  seed-time  and  the  harvest.    If  men  sow  to  the 


CO.  X.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  813 

flesh,  they  shall  reap  corruption ;  if  to  the  Spirit,  they  shall  reap  life  everlasting.  Ab 
we  sow  we  reap,  and  what  we  sow  we  reap.  Our  reaping  shall  be  according  to  the 
measure  of  God's  mercy.  Not  a  reward  of  merit,  but  of  mercy  ;  not  a  recompense  of 
desert,  but  of  grace.  Men  often  sow  in  tears,  but  if  the  seed  be  that  of  righteouiness, 
and  the  sowing  after  the  right  method  and  with  the  right  motive,  they  shall  reap  in  joy. 
"  Blessed,"  says  the  saintly  Burroughs,  "  are  those  who  hare  sown  much  for  Ood  in  their 
lifetime  1  Oh,  the  glorious  harvest  that  these  shall  have  I  The  very  angels  shall  help 
them  to  take  in  their  harvest  at  the  great  day ;  and  they  need  not  take  thought  for 
bams — ^the  very  heavens  shall  be  their  barns.  And  oh,  the  joy  that  there  shall  be  in  that 
harvest  1  The  angels  will  help  to  sing  the  harvest-song  that  they  shall  sing  who  have 
been  sowers  in  righteousness."  4.  Reformation  is  the  effect  and  evidence  of  repentance. 
If  reformation  be  genuine,  repentance  must  go  before ;  a  change  of  life  that  is  real  and 
permanent  must  be  preceded  by  a  change  of  heart.  Thus,  in  order  to  sow  in  righteous- 
ness, the  fallow  ground  must  be  broken  up.  If  the  seed  is  to  take  root  in  the  soil,  grow 
up  and  yield  an  abundant  increase  at  the  time  of  harvest,  the  soil  must  be  carefully 
prepared.  The  ploughing,  though  mentioned  after  the  sowing,  must  precede  it,  other- 
wise the  seed  of  truth  will  be  lost  or  choked  by  the  weeds  of  sin.  Dropping  the  figure, 
or  realizing  the  fact  set  forth  by  it,  we  must  break  up  the  fallow  ground  of  the  heart. 
The  weeds  and  thorns  and  thistles  that  overspread  it  in  its  natural  state  must  be  rooted 
out ;  the  evil  passions,  corrupt  affections,  and  hateful  lusts  must  be  eradicated ;  the 
heart  itself  must  be  broken  and  contrite  on  account  of  sin ;  the  spirit  must  be  subdued 
by  a  sense  of  sin ;  shame  and  sorrow  must  penetrate  the  soul  because  of  sin ;  like  land 
long  untitled,  and  so  hard  and  difficult  to  plough,  the  hard  heart  must  be  broken  with 
contrition  and  softened,  and  the  stubborn  will  subdued.  Thus,  too,  the  field  that  had 
lain  fallow  after  a  first  ploughing  must  be  broken  up  anew  and  made  to  shine  (as  ihe 
original  word,  from  iu,  according  to  Gesenius  and  Ewald,  signifies),  and  prepared  for 
future  and  abundant  fruitfulness.  5.  The  exhortation  is  enforced  by  two  arguments — 
the  past  loss  of  time,  and  prospective  spiritual  prosperity.  (1)  Much  time  had  been 
misspent ;  the  duty  of  seeking  God  had  been  sadly  and  sinfully  neglected.  The  language 
of  the  prophet  here  is  expanded  and  enforced  by  the  apostle,  when  lie  says,  "  The  time 
past  of  our  life  may  suffice  us  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  Gentiles,  when  we 
walked  in  lasciviousness,  lusts,  excess  of  wine,  revellings,  banquetings,  and  abominable 
idolatries."  We  are  now  called  to  redeem  the  time.  It  is  our  duty  at  all  times  to  seek 
the  Lord,  but  especially  so  after  such  long  delay  on  our  part,  and  such  forbearance  and 
long-suffering  on  God's  part.  And  yet  there  is  time.  It  is  of  his  mercy  that  we  are 
still  allowed  opportunity  to  repent  and  return  to  him.  Even  now  is  the  accepted  time  ; 
but  soon  it  may  be  too  late.  Let  us,  then,  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  and 
call  upon  him  while  he  is  near,  before  he  withdraws  himself,  and  swears  in  his  wrath 
that  we  shall  not  enter  into  his  rest.  (2)  Another  source  of  encouragement  is  here  pre- 
sented. If  we  seek  him  he  shall  be  found  of  us,  according  to  the  promise,  "  Seek,  and 
ye  shall  find."  Thus  encouraged,  let  us  seek  him  presently,  patiently,  and  perseveringly 
until  he  comes,  as  he  will  be  sure  to  do,  and  rain  righteousness  upon  us.  In  the  fulness 
of  time  the  Saviour  came,  who  is  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness ; "  he  came  as  "  a  Light 
to  lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Glory  of  his  people  Israel."  He  will  come  to  the  indi- 
vidual soul.  Gentile  or  Jew,  that  seeks  him,  and  when  he  comes  he  will  rain  righteous- 
ness upon  us.  6.  Righteousness,  like  the  rain,  descends  from  above ;  for  "  every  good 
gift  and  every  perfect  gift  cometh  down  from  above,  even  from  the  Father  of  lights, 
with  whom  there  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning."  He  will  bestow  it  in 
great  abundance,  for  he  will  rain  it  upon  us ;  sending  down,  not  merely  a  few  drops,  but 
a  plentiful  rain  and  copious  showers.  The  righteousness  so  abundantly  vouchsafed 
includes  his  righteous  fulfilment  of  his  promises ;  the  righteousness,  moreover,  that  is 
witnessed  both  by  the  Law  and  the  prophets — righteousness  reckoned  to  us  for  justi- 
fication, and  righteousness  wrought  in  us  for  sanctiBcation.  The  effect  of  this  right- 
eousness is  blessed  and  beneficent.  As  the  natural  seeds  sown  in  the  soil  of  the  earth 
which  has  been  ploughed  and  prepared  for  them  require,  besides,  the  rain  of  heaven  to 
make  them  bud  and  bring  forth  the  blade,  the  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear ;  so  the 
spiritual  seeds  that  men  sow  in  righteousness  require  the  rain  of  righteousness  and 
the  rich  blessing  of  heaven  to  fructify  and  refresh. 


314  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  z.  1—15. 

Vers.  13 — 16. — 2%e  proUfie  fruits  of  evil.  The  Israelites  are  not  only  charged  with 
neglect  of  duty,  but  with  sins  of  commission.  The  concluding  verses  of  the  chapter 
point  out  tliis  contrariety  of  their  conduct  to  the  foregoing  exhortation,  and  its  con- 
sequences; trace  the  source  of  their  sinful  courses  to  their  carnal  confidences ;  and  fore- 
tell the  coming  calamities  caused  thereby. 

I.  Thb  conduct  of  the  people  had  been  dibeotlt  oonteabt  to  the  admonition 
JCST  arvEN.  1.  They  bad  been  not  only  neglectful  of  duty,  indifferent  and  careless 
about  spiritual  concerns,  and  self-satisfied  with  their  sinful  course,  but  had  taken  much 
pains  in  pursuing  a  course  the  opposite  of  what  duty  demanded.  They  had  not  only 
lived  in  sin,  enjoying  its  so-called  pleasures,  but  had  laboured  in  the  practice  of  it, 
serving  Satan  and  doing  his  drudgery.  Thus  they  ploughed  wickedness.  Nut  cuntent 
with  the  spontaneous  growth  thereof,  which  is  sufficiently  abundant  in  every  natural 
heart,  they  actually  cultivated  it,  sparing  no  pains  and  grudging  no  diligence  in  its 
culture.  Thus  they  ploughed  and  sowed  laboriously ;  but  it  was  tares,  not  wheat  or  good 
grain  they  spent  their  labour  on.  2.  As  they  ploughed  and  sowed,  so  they  reaped ;  the 
crop  in  harvest-time  corresponded  with  the  seed  which  they  bad  sown,  and  for  which 
they  had  made  such  careful  preparation.  The  harvest  was  abundant,  the  increase  thirty, 
or  sixty,  or  a  hundredfold.  The  quantity  was  large,  but  the  quality  was  bad.  "  In  all 
labour  there  is  profit,"  said  a  minister  to  ft  man  at  work.  "  There  is  one  exception,"  was 
the  reply ;  "  for  years  I  laboured  in  the  service  of  Satan,  and  of  that  labour  I  can  truly 
say, '  What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  for  the  end  of 
those  things  is  death.' "  3.  The  &uit  of  lies,  like  lies  themselves,  is  deceptive  ;  such  fruit 
resembles  the  fabled  apples  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea — attractive  in  appearance,  but 
ashes  in  the  mouth.  The  pleasures  of  the  wicked  don't  satisfy;  their  gains  don't  profit 
in  the  end;  all  sinful  works  are  unfhiitful  works.  Thus  it  was  with  Israel's  hypocrisy, 
idolatry,  and  other  abominations. 

II.  Tbeib  oabnal  confidences  webe  the  bouboe  of  IsbaeIi'b  bins.  They  are 
also  a  common  source  of  sin  still.  The  people  of  Israel  trusted  in  their  ways  of 
political  wisdom,  and  the  power  and  prowess  ot  their  mighty  men.  Their  statecraft, 
their  calf-worship,  their  military  preparations,  were  their  confidences.  The  fountain- 
head  of  their  offending,  the  source  whence  such  bitter  waters  flowed,  and  flowed  so 
copiously,  was  the  confidence  they  reposed  in  refuges  of  lies — their  way  inclusive  of 
their  wicked  calf-worship,  their  tortuous  worldly  policy,  and  their  forbidden  foreign 
allianceB  with  the  heathen.  Such  was  their  internal  safeguard,  while  the  multitude  of 
their  mighty  men  was  their  external  defence.  All  these  confidences  failed  them.  Every 
]a-omise  that  sin  makes  to  the  sinner  is  a  lie ;  the  fruit  of  sin,  like  siu  itself,  is  fallacious 
and  deceptive. 

IIL  Calamities  obowded  on  them  ab  the  consequences,  and  in  punishment,  or 
SIN.  1.  Their  cities  were  sacked,  their  fortresses  dismantled,  their  citizens  and  coun- 
trymen butchered,  and  unheard-of  cruelties  perpetrated.  2.  Here  we  see  how  the 
worldly  wise  are  taken  in  their  own  craftiness,  and  how  gin  finds  the  sinner  out.  The 
consequence  of  all  was  not  a  time  of  peace,  but  the  tuthult  of  war  extending  to  the 
whole  people  in  their  tribal  divisions,  and  probably  to  their  neighbouris,  with  whom 
they  were  in  alliance ;  while  the  issue  of  the  war  was  defeat  and  disaster — their  defences 
were  destroyed,  their  strongholds  rifled,  the  triumph  of  the  enemy  complete,  ftnd  their 
cruelty  unchecked.    8.  See  the  bitter  fruit  of  ain. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ven.  1 — 8. — The  calves  and  the  kings.  The  "burden"  is  still  the  Bame — Israel'l 
guilt  and  punishment.  But  in  the  verses  before  us  these  are  dealt  with  mainly  in  their 
(xternal  and  national  aspects.  The  most  prominent  thought  of  the  passage  centres  in 
the  calves  and  the  kings. 

I.  The  national  bin.  Although  the  prophet  handles  his  theme  in  this  strophe  for 
the  most  part  on  its  external  side,  yet  in  one  or  two  expressions  he  refers  to  the  root  of 
the  evil  in  the  hearts  of  the  people.  "  We  feared  not  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3) ;  <.«,  the  men 
of  Israel  had  forsaken  the  service  of  Jehovah,  and  rejected  him  as  th^  Portion. 
"  Their  heart  is  divided"  (ver.  2).  o;  "  smooth,"  ».e.  insincere.    They  did  not  devote 


OH.  z.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  SiS 

thenuelvw  to  the  love  and  worship  of  God,  snd  yet  they  could  not  make  np  their 
minds  to  part  altogether  either  with  him  or  with  their  idols.  Such  was  the  root  of  the 
national  sinfulness.  But  Hosea  here  calls  attention  rather  to :  1.  Its  forms  in  the 
national  life.  These  were  principally  two,  (1)  Trust  in  idols.  Israel  had  allowed  his 
sense  of  the  solitariness  of  the  Godhead  to  be  broken  down,  and  had  "  increased  "  the 
number  of  altars  to  heathen  divinities.  So  far  from  realizing  that  all  the  "  springs  "  of 
the  nation  were  in  Jehovah  alone,  the  people  gave  "  his  praise  to  graven  images  ; "  and 
the  glory  which  was  his  due,  to  the  personified  powers  of  physical  natnre.  (2)  Trust 
in  kings.  The  Hebrews  had  been  guilty  of  high  treason  against  Jehovah  when,  in  tlie 
days  of  Samuel,  they  insisted  upon  having  an  earthly  king  set  over  them.  And  this 
sin  became  even  more  aggravated,  on  the  part  of  the  ten  tribes,  when  they  revolted 
from  the  theocratic  monarchy  which  God  had  established  at  Jerusalem,  and  gave  their 
allegiance  to  the  usurpers  who  exercised  the  functions  of  royalty  at  Samaria.  2.  Its 
manifestations  in  the  national  character.  The  people's  sin  incorporated  itself  with 
them,  and  they  lapsed  further  and  further  into  moral  degradation.  There  was :  (1) 
Self-indulgence.  (Ver.  1.)  Israel  had  been  a  thriving  and  luxuriant  "  vine ; "  but  his 
fruitfulness  took  a  wrong  direction :  "  he  brought  forth  fruit  unto  himself,"  and  was 
"empty  "  towards  God.  The  people  regarded  themselves  as  at  once  the  source  and  tlie 
end  of  their  Own  prosperity ;  so,  they  abused  it  by  spending  it  upon  tlieir  lusts.  (2) 
Ingratitude,  (Ver.  1.)  Increase  of  wealth,  instead  of  attracting  them°to  God's  temple 
to  express  thankfulness  to  him  as  the  great  Giver,  led  them  instead  to  multiply  their 
altars  and  idolatrous  superstitions.  (3)  Deceit  and  perjury.  (Ver.  4.)  Their  "words" 
were  insincere  and  untruthful ;  the  "  covenants  "  which  they  made  (fi.g.  with  Assyria) 
were  deceitfuL  Nothing  that  the  nation  said  could  he  depended  on  ;  the  life  of  the 
community  was  a  lie.  ^)  Perversion  of  justice.  (Ver.  4.)  A  wicked  king  and  a  corrupt 
court  poisoned  the  administration  of  law  among  the  people.  The  judges  took  bribes, 
and  their  unrighteous  decisions  were  as  "  hemlock  "  overgrowing  fields  which  ought  to 
have  been  waving  with  a  healthful  harvest  of  righteousness. 

II.  The  national  punishment.  Israel  is  about  to  lose  all  the  false  defences  in 
which  he  gloried,  and  his  heart  shall  have  fear  and  shame  for  its  melancholy  heritage. 
The  ptmishment  is  in  these  verses  contemplated  from  a  twofold  point  of  view,  viz. :  1, 
Its  forms  in  the  national  lift,.  (1)  As  regards  the  idols.  There  would  presently  be 
"fear"  for  them  (ver.  5).  The  very  calves  which  had  been  an  object  of  trust  and  stay 
would  become  a  source  of  anxious  solicitude.  Instead  of  feeling  safe  under  the  protection 
of  their  golden  gods,  the  people  would  tremble  for  the  safety  of  the  gods  themselves. 
"  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence ; "  but  the  men  of  Israel "  feared  not  the 
Lord  "  (ver.  3),  and  their  punishment  was  to  "  fear  because  of  the  calves."  More  than 
this,  they  would  suffer  the  loss  of  them  (vers.  2,  5,  6,  8).  The  images  which  Jeroboam 
had  set  up  would  be  carried  into  captivity  as  a  tribute  "  to  King  Jareb,"  the  avenging 
Assyrian.  In  that  way  the  calf-worship  of  the  northern  kingdom  would  come  to  an  end. 
Bethel  and  Dan,  Samaria  and  Gilgal,  the  centres  of  Israel's  idolatry,  would  be  destroyed. 
The  shrines  of  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  would  be  broken  down,  and  thorns  and  thistles 
would  grow  luxuriantly  upon  the  idol-altars.  (2)  As  regards  the  kings.  Already  the 
monarchy  was  helpless  (ver.  3).  Although  it  may  be  that  Hoshea  (who  i>roved  to  be  the 
last  king  in  Ephraim)  was  still  upon  the  throne,  the  people  were  saying,  "  We  have  no 
king ; "  "What  would  a  king  do  for  us?"  They  see  now,  when  it  is  too  late,  that  it 
is  vain  to  expect  deliverance  from  monarchs  who  themselves  do  not  fear  God,  and  who 
have  assumed  their  rojalty  in  opposition  to  his  will.  Soon,  too,  the  monarchy  shall  be 
finally  destroyed  (ver.  7).  The  king  shall  be  "cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the  water,"  or 
as  a  chip  which  is  carried  down  the  stream  and  lost.  Presently  the  long  siege  of 
Samaria  shall  begin;  and  in  three  years  thereafter  the  standards  of  Shalmaneser  shall 
wave  over  the  ruined  strongholds  of  that  wicked  city.  But,  again,  the  prophet  refers  to 
the  national  punishment  in :  2.  Its  moral  results  upon  the  people.  It  would  produce : 
(1)  Mourning.  (Ver.  6.)  The  people  would  lament  because  of  the  helplessness  of  the 
golden  idols,  in  which  they  had  gloried,  and  in  which  their  false  priests  had  rejoiced. 
They  would  sadly  grieve  liecause  of  the  ignominious  deportation  of  the  calves  to 
Assyria.  (2)  Shame  (ver.  6),  because  of  "  their  own  counsel ; "  the  reference  being  to 
the  untheocratic  policy  of  the  ten  tribes  in  separating  themselves  ecclesiastically  and 
politically  from  Judahand  Jerusalem.    The  worldly-wise  statecraft  of  Jeroboam,  which 


316  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [c«.x.l-lB. 

for  •  time  leemed  to  ba  80  niccessful,  involved  lerael  in  an  inheritaiice  of  ihame. 
(3)  Despair.  (Ver.  8.)  The  calamities  that  were  impenrUng  would  he  so  dreadful, 
that  thousands  of  the  people  would  choose  death  rather  than  life.  To  die  outright  they 
would  hail  as  a  welcome  relief  from  their  hurden  of  wretchedness  and  shame.  They 
would  desire  that  the  bills  upon  which  their  idol-altars  had  stood  might  not  merely  hide 
them,  hut  overwhelm  and  destroy  them. 

LxsBONS.  1.  The  spiritual  dangers  which  accompany  material  prosperity.  "  Jeshu- 
run  waxed  fat,  and  kicked  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  It  is  difficult  to  carry  the  full  cup 
steadily  (ver.  1).  2.  The  necessity,  in  order  to  a  man's  spiritual  well-heing,  that  he 
"  keep  his  heart  with  all  diligence  "  (ver.  2).  3.  The  sadness  which  comes  from  learn- 
ing the  truth  too  late,  and  the  horrors  of  a  too-late  repentance  (ver.  3).  4.  The  diffu- 
sive and  self-disseminating  power  of  evil  (ver.  4).  6.  The  mourning  of  the  wicked  is 
for  their  losses  rather  than  for  their  sius  (vers.  5,  6).  6.  The  one  true  security  and 
strength  of  a  nation  consists  in  the  fear  of  Grod  (vers.  3,  7).  7.  The  judgment 
denounced  here  upon  the  ten  tribes,  like  that  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
Komans,  is  a  type  of  the  final  general  judgment  (ver.  8 ;  Luke  xxiii.  30 ;  Bev.  vi.  16). 
— O.J. 

Yers.  9 — 15. — National  prosperity  and  calamity.  In  this  passage,  for  the  aecond 
time  (vide  ch.  ix.  10),  the  prophet  starts  with  a  brief  reminiscence  of  former  days,  and 
then  proceeds  to  deliver  an  urgent  exhortation  to  present  duty ;  but  all  serves  merely 
as  a  basis  for  more  denunciation  and  announcement  of  retribution. 

I.  The  ideal  life  of  a  nation.  (Ver.  12.)  Although  this  verse  is  in  the  first 
instance  a  summons  to  Israel  to  repent  and  reform,  we  may  view  it  as  indicating  also 
what  the  life  of  every  commonwealth  ought  to  be.  1.  Its  activities.  Foremost  amongst 
these  is:  (1)  The  pursuit  of  godliness.  The  ideal  nation  "  seeks  the  Lord,"  and  recog- 
nizes that  always  "  it  is  time  "  to  do  so.  It  acknowledges  Jehovah  as  its  supreme 
King.  It  aims  at  making  all  the  legislation  upon  its  statute-book  in  harmony  with 
the  laws  of  the  Bible.  The  Lord  of  hosts  regards  such  a  country  as  "  a  delightsome 
land  "  (Mai.  iii.  12).  "  Happy  is  that  people,  whose  God  is  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxliv.  15). 
(2)  The  cultivation  of  mwality.  "  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness."  Ploughing 
and  sowing  and  reaping  in  this  passage  denote  the  moral  conduct  of  the  community. 
And  the  one  great  principle  which  should  determine  the  activities  of  a  nation  should  be 
that  of  "  righteousness."  Its  supreme  aim  should  be,  not  the  accumulation  of  wealth, 
nor  the  acquisition  of  power  and  prestige,  but  the  establishment  of  righteousness.  It 
should  strive  after  what  is  true  and  just  and  equitable  in  everything.  (3)  The 
accomplishment  of  needful  reforms.  "  Break  up  your  fallow  ground."  The  model 
nation  looks  out  for  new  soil  as  well  as  for  right  seed,  and  for  that  Divine  influence 
which  is  necessary  to  the  harvest.  As  soon  as  it  discovers  any  neglected  portion  of 
its  own  life,  it  will  endeavour  to  subject  that  to  spiritual  husbandry,  and  bring  it  into 
cultivation.  It  will  be  continually  anxious  to  reform,  wherever  it  finds  at  any  time 
that  reform  is  necessary.  But  the  life  of  the  model  nation  has  also :  2.  Jt$  rewards. 
(1)  The  Lord  inUl  "  come"  to  the  community  that  seek  him.  He  will  dwell  among 
them,  and  be  "  unto  them  a  wall  of  fire  round  about."  He  will  "  come  "  in  Christ,  the 
King  of  nations ;  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  the  principle  of  the  life  of  every  godly 
commonwealth.  (2)  The  holy  nation  shall  reap  a  harvest  of  mercy.  They  shall 
gather  mercy  as  the  fruit  of  the  good  seed  of  righteousness  which  they  have  sown. 
The  best  of  men,  when  they  have  done  their  best,  are  "  unprofitable  servants ; "  so 
that  the  rewards  which  shall  accrue  from  their  works  of  faith  and  love  must  be  all 
of  grace.  But  the  harvest  shall  be  a  glorious  one ;  for  it  shall  be  proportionate,  not 
only  to  our  humble  sowing,  but  to  God's  infinite  mercy.  (3)  They  shall  receive  a 
rain  of  righteousness.  Wherever  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  as  King,  he  brings  with  him 
this  blessing  (Ps.  Ixxii.  1 — 7).  Wherever  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells,  he  "  creates  a  clean 
heart,"  and  "  renews  a  right  spirit "  (Ps.  li.  10 — 12).  The  people  that  sow  righteous- 
ness sow  "  to  themselves ; "  for  "  to  him  that  soweth  righteousness  shall  be  a  sure 
reward  "  (Prov.  xi.  18).  In  proportion  to  their  willingness  to  "  do  God's  will,"  shall 
they  "  know  of  the  doctrine,"  and  reap  its  blessed  fruits  in  their  hearts  and  lives. 
The  angle  of  reflection  shall  be  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence  ;  that  is,  their  obedience 
shall  be  the  measure  of  their  assurance  and  of  their  reward. 


OH.  X.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  817 

n.  The  actual  life  of  Isbael.  This  was  quite  the  reverse  of  the  ideal  above 
described.  Its  wrongness  had  begun  very  earlj',  for  the  nation  had  "  sinned  from  the 
days  of  Gibeah "  (Judg.  six.,  xx.) ;  and,  alas !  it  persisted  in  the  sin  of  Gibeah  still. 
The  coiTuption  of  the  community  was  deeply  looted  in  ancestral  habit.  In  describing 
the  actual  life  of  Israel,  Hosea  refers  to :  1.  Its  basis.  (Ver.  13.)  The  foundation  of  the 
whole  lay  in  sinful  self-confidence.  Israel  "  trusted  in  his  way,"  i.e.  in  his  own  political 
devices  and  idolatrous  worship.  He  relied  also  upon  "  the  multitude  of  his  mighty 
men,"  as  if  Providence  were  on  the  side  of  the  strong  battalions.  2.  Its  pursuits. 
Ephraim  led  a  self-indulgent  life.  In  the  days  of  Jeroboam  XL,  when  he  was  victorious 
and  prosperous,  he  was  "  as  a  heifer  that  loveth  to  tread  out  the  corn  "  (ver.  11).  The 
nation  was  self-reliant,  and  it  grew  rich ;  so  it  became  pampered  and  selfish.  Cealiy, 
however,  the  people  all  the  while  were  following  a  career  of  laborious  sin.  "  They 
ploughed  wickedness,  and  reaped  iniquity "  fver.  13).  Like  self-made  slaves,  they 
"  bound  themselves  in  their  two  transgressions  (ver.  10) — their  double  sin  of  apostasy 
from  Jehovah  and  revolt  from  the  dynasty  of  David.  3.  Its  results.  As,  sin  is  the 
evil  of  evils,  the  consequence  of  the  people's  long  course  of  iniquity  could  not  but  be 
ruinous.  Disaster  fell  upon  them  as  the  outcome  of  natural  law,  and  also  because  at 
last  it  was  God's  "desire  to  chastise  them"  (ver.  10).  Hitherto  the  ten  tribes,  although 
they  had  lived  in  the  commission  of  the  sin  of  Gibeah,  had  not  been  destroyed  in  war, 
like  the  Gibeahites ;  now  at  last,  however,  the  Divine  vengeance  is  to  descend  npon 
them.  There  is  to  be:  (1) /ftvosjon.  (Ver.  10.)  The  Assyrians,  with  their  allies, "  shall 
be  gathered  against  them."  (2)  Bondage.  (Ver.  11.)  A  heavy  yoke  shall  he  put  upon 
the  "  fair  neck  "  of  the  heifer  Ephraim ;  and  in  her  state  of  'subjugation  she  shall 
have  to  perform  hard  labour.  Judah  also  shall  undergo  a  similar  punishment.  This 
threatening  was  fulfilled  in  the  two  captivities,  the  Assyrian  and  the  Babylonish.  (3) 
Disappointment.  (Ver.  13.)  Israel's  reward  for  his  wickedness  was  that  he  had  "  eaten 
the  fruit  of  lies."  The  idolatry  which  he  practised  was  a  lie ;  and  this,  instead  of  pro- 
moting the  prosperity  of  the  nation,  as  for  a  time  it  seemed  to  be  doing,  led  to  its 
utter  humiliation  and  decay.  (4)  National  ruin.  (Vers.  14,  15.)  The  "  tumult "  of 
war  is  soon  to  arise.  Shalmaneser  shall  overthrow  the  strongholds  of  Ephraim,  as 
he  had  lately  "  spoiled  Beth-arbel."  The  land  shall  be  devastated,  and  its  inhabitants 
cruelly  murdered.  And,  in  consequence,  the  kingdom  of  Israel  shall  be  destroyed  for 
ever. 

Lessons.  1,  God's  long  forbearance  with  a  wicked  nation  before  he  proceeds  to  visit 
it  according  to  its  works  (ver.  9).  2.  The  determination  to  which  at  length  he  must 
inevitably  come,  to  vindicate  his  justice  (ver.  10).  3.  The  folly  of  those  who  expect 
to  enjoy  the  comforts  of  religion  while  neglecting  to  discharge  its  duties  (ver.  11).  4. 
The  history  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes  an  illustration  of  the  truth  that  "pride 
goeth  before  destruction  "  (ver.  11).  5.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin,  as  buing  "  the  fruit  of 
lies  "  (ver.  13).  6.  This  passage  should  lead  us  to  cherish  gratitude  to  Almighty  God 
for  his  goodness  to  our  nation,  and  should  suggest  to  Great  Britain  to  take  warning 
from  the  doom  of  Ephraim. — C.  J. 

Ver.  2  (first  clause). — The  divided  heart.  The  preceding  verse  describes  the  sin  of 
the  people ;  this  points  us  to  its  source.  Like  a  vine,  luxuriant  in  branch  yet  yielding 
no  sound  fruit,  Israel  deserved  the  curse  which,  daring  the  ministry  of  our  Lord,  fell  on 
the  barren  fig  tree.  The  first  verse  may  be  compared  advantageously  with  the  descrip- 
tion given  of  Israel  in  Ps.  Ixxx.  8 — 15.  The,  third  clause  in  thai  verse  does  not  continue 
to  develop  the  figure,  but  makes  a  declaration  which  was  literally  true,  viz.  that  in 
proportion  as  the  fields  were  fruitful  Israel  multiplied  idolatrous  altars;  and  as  the  land 
was  made  good,  so  the  images  they  worshipped  were  adorned  witli  beauty.  In  other 
words,  God's  gifts  were  abused,  and  were  dedicated,  not  to  him,  but  to  false  gods.  The  fear 
of  Moses  was  justified.  Now  tliey  enjoyed  the  goodly  land  they  were  forgetting  the 
Lord  their  God.  Point  out  the  enervating  effect  of  prosperity  in  such  men  as  Hezekiah, 
and  in  the  decline  and  fall  of  great  nations.  The  cause  of  Israel's  sin  was  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  that  they  were  not  whole-hearted  in  the  worship  of  God ;  but  while  they 
kept  up  still  the  outward  forms  of  the  old  religion,  with  "  divided  hearts  "  they  mingled 
with  it,  or  supported  beside  it,  idolatrous  practices.  The  question  of  Elijah,  "  How 
long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?"  needed  repetition  in  those  days,  and  in  these. 


818  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  x.  1— 1& 

Our  Lord  has  distinctly  declared  tliat  tlie  frequent  and  sinful  attempt  of  men  to  serve 
God  and  mammon  is  vain.    Subject^ 3%«  divided  heart, 

L  Its  oonditiok  first  demands  consideration.  Whether  in  tlie  physical  or  in  the 
moral  life  of  man,  if  we  are  in  doubt  about  the  state  of  our  heart,  we  cannot  be  too 
careftil  in  diagnosis.  Diseases  assail  it  which  are  so  occult  that  they  may  not  reveal 
themselves  till  they  become  fatal  in  result.  Other  diseaf^es  may  have  outward  signs 
which  any  onlooker  can  recognize.  Some  heart-diseases  are  as  insidious  as  they  are 
perilous,  betraying  themselves  neither  by  rash  nor  by  pain.  As  the  heart  is  the  centre 
of  onr  physical  life,  so  here  and  elsewhere  in  Scripture  it  is  alluded  to  as  the  centre  of 
moral  life ;  and  in  that  aspect  of  it  the  words  are  true,  "The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things."  (Some  such  idea  underlies  the  Hebrew  word  which  Keil  translates  "smooth," 
or  "flattering.")  None  but  God  and  a  man's  own  consciousness  can  declare  whether  this 
bo  true  of  any  one,  "  his  heart  is  divided."  This  is  so,  however,  with  any  whose  a  ttitude 
towards  God  and  his  truth  is  as  follows :  (1)  If  their  minds  are  convinced ;  (2)  if  their 
fears  are  araused ;  (3)  if  their  consciences  are  disturbed ;  while  yet  they  yield  no  genuine 
homage  to  him  whose  existence  and  claims  they  dare  not  deny. 

IL  Its  evidences  may  be  discovered  in  such  characteristics  as  these :  1.  Formality 
in  worMp.  "  This  people  draweth  nigh  to  me  with  their  mouth,"  etc.  "  God  is  a 
Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  The 
scribes  and  Pharisees  were  examples  of  this,  exposed  and  rebuked  by  our  Lord.  2. 
Inconsistency  in  conduct.  This  may  be  glaringly  conspicuous,  or  it  may  be  that  the 
unholiness  or  unrighteousness  is  too  secretly  practised  to  be  discovered  by  the  world,  or 
t'lo  subtle  to  be  described  and  condemned  by  the  Church,  or  too  geherally  practised  to 
be  reprobated  by  society.  CHve  examples  of  each  in  professional,  or  commercial,  or 
social  life.  S.  Fickleness  in  effort.  It  is  a  sure  sign  of  reality  when  we  are  "  steadfast 
and  immovable,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord ; "  when  the  world  frowns 
as  well  as  when  it  smiles;  when  the  service  is  uncongenial  as  well  as  when  it  is  delightful. 
He  who  readily  takes  up  Christian  work  and  then  suddenly  abandons  it,  may  fairly  ask 
himself  whether  his  heart  is  not  divided.  The  great  Sower  still  sees  the  shallow  soil  of 
a  sentimental  character,  where  there  is  no  depth  and  therefore  no  stability. 

III.  Its  causes.  1.  The  love  of  sin.  We  must  lay  aside  "  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily 
beset,  us  "  if  we  would  run  the  race  and  win  the  crown.  He  who  will  not  give  sin  up 
for  Christ's  sake  has  the  "  divided  heart."  2.  The  fear  of  man.  The  lad  at  school,  or 
the  man  in  business,  is  often  disloyal  to  conviction,  and  refuses  to  lay  to  heart  the  decla- 
ration of  Christ,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me."  3.  The  habit  of  procrasti- 
nation. The  child  says,  "  I  will  wait  till  I  am  old  enough  to  take  my  own  place  in 
life;"  the  busy  man  or  woman  waits  the  leisure  of  old  age;  the  vigorous  delay  till 
illness  gives  time  for  thought ;  and  so  life  speeds  away,  and  the  words  of  Christ  are 
unheeded,    "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart." 

IV.  Its  effects.  1.  Present  unhappiness.  The  undecided  roan  knows  too  much 
to  find  rest  in  the  world,  but  he  loves  too  little  to  find  rest  in  Christ.  The  conscious- 
ness of  being  wrong,  the  thought  of  a  solemn  duty  left  undone,  the  fear  of  discovery  by 
Christian  friends,  the  dread  of  death  and  its  issue,  with  more  or  less  frequency  and 
intensity,  bring  him  misery.  2.  Disastrous  influence.  If  he  professes  to  be  a  Christian, 
he  dishonours  his  Lord  by  his  conduct  in  the  world  far  more  than  one  who  avows  him- 
self to  be  an  unbeliever.  His  Christian  name  injures  the  world,  while  his  worldly 
character  injures  the  Church.  Examples :  Judas,  Demas,  Ananias.  3.  Certain  retriba- 
iioa.  "  Some  will  awake  ...  to  everlasting  contempt."  "  Let  both  grow  together  to 
the  harvest,"  etc. 

CoNOLUBiON.  Encouratgement  to  offer  to  oar  Qod  the  broken  heart  of  true  penitence, 
which  he  will  not  despise. — ^A.  B. 

Ver.  11. — Moral  abasement.  Figures  drawn  from  the  work  of  husbandry  are  fre- 
quently found  in  the  sacred  Scriptures.  No  others  could  have  been  so  wisely  emjiloyed. 
As  Divine  truths  were  intended  for  all  nations,  it  was  well  that  illustvations  of  them 
should  be  found  in  all  lauds.  The  breaking  up  of  the  ground,  the  sowing  of  seed,  the 
reaping  of  the  harvest,  are  phenomena  well  known  in  every  country,  and  the  process 
has  been  essentially  the  same  in  every  age.  Whether  the  harvest  grows  in  the  small 
allotment  of  the  Eastern  labourer,  who  irrigates  it  with  toil  and  care,  or  whether  it  is 


OH.  X.  1—16.]  ^THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  319 

seen  oa  vut  i«alTie-lands,  rippling  under  the  breeze  like  a  sea  of  gold,  the  lawi  of 
its  growth,  the  mode  of  its  production,  are  not  different ;  and  so  wherever  he  may  be 
the  religious  teacher  may  find  the  old  illustrations  of  spiritual  truths.  How  much 
poorer  would  the  world  haye  been  had  Divine  lessons  been  represented  by  the  variable 
fashions  or  changefvd  macMnery  of  man's  invention,  which  only  the  archasologist  would 
understand,  instead  of  being  written  aa  they  are  in  the  harvest-fields  where  any  way- 
farer may  read  themi  Still  are  the  different  conditions  of  "hearers  of  the  Word"  repre- 
sented truly  by  the  different  soils  which  the  sower  sees  in  any  land.  Another  and 
profounder  reason  for  the  Divine  choice  of  such  illustrations  lies  in  the  truth  that  both 
nature  and  grace  are  of  God.  The  two  spheres  of  being  proceed  from  the  same  Source, 
the  material  being  the  image  of  the  spiritual.  There  is  a  true  sowing  and  reaping 
in  the  inward  as  well  as  in  the  outward  world ;  lo  that  in  these  inspired  words  we 
get,  not  only  illustrations,  but  analogies.  Hence  the  wisdom  of  the  metaphor  which  is 
found  in  vers.  11 — 13.  The  twelfth  verse  shows  Israel  what  it  should  be,  while  our 
text  depicts  what  Israel  actually  was,  and  affords  us  an  example  of  moral  abasement 
which  we  shall  do  well  to  consider. 

I.  Moral  abasement  ib  shows  in  fbefebbiko  thb  loweb  to  thx  hioheb  litb. 
"Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer;"  whereas,  in  the  next  verse,  Ephraim  is  exhorted  to  he 
as  a  husbandman.  The  former  is  what  the  people  had  become,  the  latter  is  what 
God  meant  them  to  be.  It  is  the  constant  tendency  of  man  thus  to  sink  below  a 
possible  ideal.  Men  of  the  highest  intellectual  culture  will  deprive  themselves  in  their 
religious  life  of  the  liberty  and  dignity  of  the  sons  of  God.  Many  hearers  avowedly 
wait  for  some  overpowering  manifestation  of  God's  presence  before  they  believe  in  him. 
They  would  have  upon  them  some  influence  so  mighty  as  to  be  resistless.  The  evil 
and  adulterous  generation  is  still  seeking  a  sign ;  and  gathers  around  the  Christ,  asking, 
"  What  sign  showest  thou  7  what  dost  thou  work  ?  "  Now,  the  tendency  of  all  this  is 
to  ask  God  that  we  may  be  dealt  with  as  animals,  not  as  men —  as  those  who  are  with- 
out the  spiritual  capacities  which  belong  to  beings  made  in  the  image  of  God.  We 
would  be  as  the  heifer,  wanting  the  yoke  and  the  goad ;  not  as  the  husbandman,  who, 
obedient  to  the  inner  thought  that  is  given  to  him,  intelligently,  and  freely  breaks  up  the 
fallow  ground,  sows  the  seed,  and  seeks  upon  it  the  blessing  of  Ohd.  But  listen  to  the 
exhortation  of  the  psalmist :  "  Be  ye  not  as  the  horse,  or  aa  the  mule,  which  have  no 
understanding,  whose  mouth  must  be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle  [not,  '  lest  they  come 
near,'  but]  because  they  will  not  come  near  to  thee  "  to  do  thee  service ;  but  rather 
be  as  a  child,  so  looking  for  the  Father's  glance,  so  ready  to  obey  bis  faintest  sign,  that 
he  can  say,  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  mine  eye  "  (Ps.  xxxii.  8,  9).  Ephraim  was  called 
to  be  as  the  husbandman  (ver.  12),  but  was  content  to  he  as  the  heifer. 

II.  MOBAL    ABASEMENT    IS    SHOWN   IN   BBNDEBINa    A  PEBFUNCTOBT   AND  IBBBUaiOX7B 

8EBVICE.  "  Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer  that  is  taught."  She  is  accustomed  to  do  a  cei  tain 
kind  of  work,  and  does  it  day  after  day  from  the  memory  of  the  past ;  as  a  perfunctory 
performance,  without  the  inspiration  of  the  thought  that  it  will  please  her  master.  Such 
obedience  abounds  amongst  men.  Bight  acts  are  done  by  multitudes,  as  they  were  by 
scribes  and  Pharisees,  without  there  being  in  them  the  moral  worth  God  looks  for. 
For  example,  it  is  right  for  a  man  to  be  diligent  in  business,  to  do  his  work  with  all 
his  might.  The  idle  and  thriftless  sink  even  lower  in  character  and  circumstances. 
But  it  would  not  be  difiBcult  to  find  one  who  is  regular  and  punctual,  failing  in  no 
engagement,  prompt  in  all  his  dealings,  setting  before  others  a  coraraendable  example 
of  hard  work  thoroughly  done,  who  never  has  a  thought  of  his  Lord's  approval,  sees 
nothing  of  the  eternal  issues  which  may  flow  from  the  present  life,  but  is  "as  a 
heifer  accustomed  to  the  yoke."  Such  perfunctoriness  may  creep  into  religiout  service  ; 
into  the  prayer*  which  are  said  by  rote,  into  the  gifts  which  are  given  from  custom, 
into  the  work  and  organization  which  is  the  outcome  of  habit,  etc. 

III.  MOBAL  ABASEMENT  IB  SHOWN  IN  OBETINO  FBOFITABLB  COMMANDS  FOB  THB  BAKE 

OF  THEiB  FBOFiT.  "  Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer  that . . .  loveth  to  tread  out  the  com."  The 
allusion  is  to  the  Eastern  custom  of  driving  oxen  over  the  reaped  corn,  that  by  their 
feet  or  by  the  implement  they  dragged  behind  them  the  grain  might  be  separated  from 
the  straw.  In  the  Pentateuch  (Deut.  xxv.  4)  the  command  was  given,  "  Thou  ahatt  not 
muBsle  the  ox  when  he  treadeth  out  the  corn."  The  ox  was  to  share  in  the  bounti- 
ful gifts  God  had  bestowed  on  man  in  the  harvest,  and  might  eat  what  ha  pbaiad. 


320  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  x  I— 16. 

Hence,  when  it  is  said  "  Ephraim  is  as  a  heifer  that . . .  loreth  to  tread  out  the  oom," 
yet  refuses  to  plough  till  the  yoke  is  forced  on  its  fair  neck,  the  meaning  is  that  Israel 
obeyed  the  command  of  God  when  they  could  get  any  immediate  good  as  the  result  of 
obedience,  but  refused  to  obey  when  obedience,  like  ploughing,  brought  no  instant  fruit. 
Well  may  Trapp  remark, "  It  is  an  ill  sign  when  men  must  pick  and  choose  their  work  ; 
this  they  will  do  for  God,  but  not  that . . .  Judas  will  bear  the  cross,  so  he  may  have  the 
bag."  It  was  because  our  Lord  discerned  this  spirit  in  his  hearers  at  Capernaum  that  he 
rebuked  them,  saying,  "Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,  but  because  36 
did  eat  of  the  loaves,  and  were  filled.  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  but 
for  that  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life,  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  give 
unto  you  "  (John  vi.  26,  27  ;  see  also  Matt.  vi.  33).  The  true  test  of  character  is  to 
be  found,  not  in  the  morality  that  wins  applause  and  popularity,  but  in  the  righteous- 
ness which  is  followed  through  evil  as  well  as  good  report.  To  all  those  who  are  toiling 
for  the  sake  of  what  they  can  get  of  earthly  good,  Christ  says,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon 
you,  and  learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your  souls."  If  the  Spirit  of  Christ  be 
oun,  then  we  «hall  find — 


"  A  life  of  lelf-renouncing  knw 
la  a  life  of  liberty." 


A.B. 


Ver.  12. — Spiritual  hutbandty.  The  union  of  precept  and  promise  In  Scripture 
runs  parallel  with  the  union  of  work  and  blessing  in  life.  The  same  mind  and  will 
is  the  source  of  both.  Our  t«xt  reminds  us  of  the  co-operation  of  the  human  and 
Divine  as  essential  to  the  harvest  of  good.  A  true  reformation  is  only  accomplished 
by  God  indirectly,  through  the  agency  of  man.  Thus  the  coming  of  Christ  Jesus  was 
prepared  for  by  the  ministry  of  John,  which  roused  men  to  thoughts  of  sin  and  of 
righteousness.  In  the  graphic  imagery  of  Isaiah,  "  crooked  things  were  made  straight, 
and  rough  places  plain,  and  then  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  revealed."  So  in  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Christian  Church:  God  wrought  through  the  energies  of  men.  The 
Holy  Spirit  was  not  poured  down  directly  from  heaven  upon  the  nations,  but  upon 
a  few  men  whose  hearts  were  prepared,  and  through  their  ministry  the  conscience  of 
the  world  was  stirred.  No  farmer  waits  inactively  in  the  spring-time,  when  the  earth 
is  made  soft  with  showers,  expecting  a  harvest  to  corae,  while  his  plough  rusts  in  the 
shod  and  his  seed  rots  in  the  granary ;  and  no  true  Christian  is  satisfied  to  pray  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  while  he  does  nothing  of  the  work  that  lies  to  his  band. 
The  message  comes  home  to  him,  "  Sow  to  yourselves,"  etc.  Human  responsibility 
and  Divine  recompense  are  the  two  factors  in  spiritual  husbandry  which  demand 
consideration. 

I.  Hdhan  resfonsidilitt  lies  in  the  direction  of  these  activities.  1.  Sowing  the  seed. 
"  Sow  to  yourselves  in  righteousness."  Show  how  deficient  Israel  was  in  righteousness, 
both  in  national  affairs  and  in  social  and  civil  life,  during  Hosea's  ministry.  (1) 
National  rii/hteousness  is  demanded.  Honesty  in  diplomacy,  equitable  dealing  with 
weaker  peoples,  fairness  in  commercial  enterprise,  choice  of  the  right,  and  not  of  the 
profitable,  etc.  (2)  Church  righteousness,  which  will  not  allow  us  to  neglect  the  poor, 
or  to  be  careless  to  the  interests  of  Divine  truth,  or  to  restrain  prayer  before  God.  (3)  Indi- 
vidual righteousness,  whicli  may  be  shown  by  every  Christian  in  all  the  varied  relations 
of  life.  Sowing  to  ourselves  in  righteousness  is  not  always  easy,  and  is  not  often 
immediately  recompensed ;  but  "  in  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not."  2.  Pre- 
paring the  soil,  "  Break  up  your  fallow  ground."  The  work  referred  to  is  monotonous, 
hard,  continuous.  The  ploughman  does  not  see  around  him  the  glow  of  the  golden 
harvest ;  he  does  not  hear  the  merriment  of  those  who  are  binding  the  sheaves ;  he  lias 
not  the  Btimulug  of  the  happy  speed  which  the  hope  of  finishing  gives  the  reaper.  Yet 
Ills  work  is  as  necessary.  The  reference  is  not  to  the  cleaning  from  weeds  of  land 
already  sown,  but  to  the  breaking  up  of  virgin  soil,  t.e.  of  the  parts  of  a  field  which 
were  neglected  before.  (1)  Make  application  to  the  development  of  Christian  character. 
There  is  generally  a  want  of  completeness  about  this.  Sins  of  pleasure  and  indolence 
are  gone ;  but  if  sins  of  pride,  ambition,  censoriousness,  remain,  these  also  must  be 
turned  up  by  the  plough  of  resolution.  We  must  not  be  content  with  saying,  "  This 
part  of  my  character  is  fertile,"  while  that  part  lies  fallow.    So  w  ith  Christian  graces. 


OH.  X.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  321 


We  may  have  courage  without  tenderness,  patience  without  enterprise,  and  thus 
have  fallow  ground  yet  to  he  hroken  up.  C'-^)  Make  application  to  the  advance  of 
Chrisfs  kingdom.  Parts  of  the  world  sown  with  the  good  seed  are  fairly  productive, 
other  parts  are  moral  wastes.  This  calls  for  missionary  enterprise.  Congregations 
comfortably  worship,  yet  amongst  the  godless  and  ignorant  "fallow  ground"  still  lies 
around  them.  The  world  will  become  a  paradise  only  when  each  does  his  own  work  in 
his  own  sphere.  In  the  Western  States,  land  is  not  brought  under  cultivation  by  the 
expenditure  of  a  millionaire ;  but  each  settler  has  his  own  allotment,  effects  bis  own 
clearing,  builds  his  own  log  hut,  adds  field  to  field  till  his  farm  touches  the  next,  and 
by  this  pocess  the  wilderness  begins  to  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  rose.  8.  Seeking 
the  Lord.  Hosea  would  have  the  people  eagerly  expecting  Messiah,  and  ready  to 
welcome  him.  Some  of  John's  disciples  were  thus  "  seeking  the  Lord,"  and  it  was  on 
these  Christ  rained  righteousness,  in  the  truths  he  taught  and  the  Spirit  he  gave. 
Eeadiness  for  the  second  advent  becomes  the  Christian  still ;  and  the  Church  is  sighing 
for  it.  Meantime  the  Lord  comes  in  holy  thought,  in  right  resolve,  in  chastened" feel- 
ing. He  comes  down  on  weary  hearts  Uke."rain  upon  the  mown  grass,  as  showers 
that  water  the  earth." 

II.  Divine  eecompensb.  1.  It  is  generous,  "Reap  [not  'in,'  but]  according  to 
mercy ; "  not  in  proportion  to  desert,  or  to  justice,  but  to  the  boundless  mercy  of  the 
Lord.  Of  all  reaping  that  is  true.  When  we  sow  our  seed  we  give  it  over  to  the  care 
of  God.  It  would  be  something  to  receive  it  back  again  uninjured ;  biit  it  is  multiplied, 
"  ac-cording  to  the  mercy  "  of  God,  and  harvest-fields  come  from  a  few  bushels  of  seed. 
God  gives  "  good  measure,  pressed  down,  shaken  together,  and  running  over."  If  we 
are  thus  requited  in  the  natural,  we  shall  be  in  the  moral  husbandry,  Grace  used 
brings  more  grace.  The  five  talents  employed  become  the  ten  talents.  If  we  give, 
the  habit  of  giving  becomes  a  luxury.  If  we  pray,  prayer  becomes  easier,  more  refresh- 
ing, more  essential.  If  ours  are  the  tears  of  penitence,  the  light  of  God's  love  shines 
through  them  and  creates  the  rainbow  of  peace.  If,  like  the  prodigal,  we  sow  in 
righteous  acknowledgment  of  sin,  we  reap  peace  and  joy  "according  to  God's  mercy." 
2.  /*  is  from  above.  "  Until  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you."  When  rain 
falls  from  heaven  it  blesses  your  garden,  or  your  carefully  tended  plant,  but  it  does 
not  content  itself  with  that.  Fields  you  never  saw  are  greener,  limpid  streams  in 
distant  counties  are  fuller,  leaves  and  ferns  and  unnoticed  flowers  are  touched  and 
blessed.  All  Churches  need  this  outpouring  from  above.  To  do  the  right,  to  break 
up  the  fallow  ground  which  has  been  unblessed  before  by  enterprise,  will  all  be  use- 
less unless  he  rains  righteousness  upon  us.  And  for  this  great  blessing  a  sinful  world, 
a  weakened  Church,  a  conscious  yearning,  say,  "  It  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord." 

Conclusion.  Beware  lest,  in  the  sight  of  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  your  condition  should 
he  described  by  the  words  which  follow  our  text.  "Ye  have  ploughed  wickedness,  ye 
have  reaped  iniquity."  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man 
loweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." — ^A.  R. 

Ver.  2. — A  divided  heart.  The  history  of  the  people  of  Israel  furnishes  many  an 
illustration  of  the  state  of  mind  vividly  depicted  in  these  words.  For  instance,  in  the 
time  of  Elijah,  the  heart  of  Israel  was  divided  between  Jehovah  and  Baal.  Hosea  had 
to  complain  of  the  same  distraction  of  mind  as  characteristic  of  the  generation  to  which 
he  ministered.  And  what  congregation  is  there  addressed  by  a  Christian  preacher 
which  does  not  contain  many  "a  divided  heart " ? 

I.  The  causes  of  a  divided  heart.  1.  Others  beside  the  Lord  lay  claim  to  the  heart. 
In  the  case  of  Israel,  there  were  idols  who  were  reputed  by  neighbouring  nations  to  be 
powerful  and  helpful.  In  the  case  of  those  professing  Christianity,  there  are  many 
rivals,  in  the  person  of  earthly  and  human  claimants,  and  in  the  shape  of  various  pre- 
occupations, pleasures,  and  pursuits.  2.  There  is  native  weakness  and  vacillation, 
Hany  natures  are  by  constitution  unstable ;  and  many  have  encouraged  weakness  by 
yielding  to  temptation. 

II.  The  byhftomb  of  a  divided  heabt.  The  case  is  not  that  of  one  who  haa 
actually  renounced  and  abjured  the  worship  and  service  of  the  Lord.  But  in  hesitat- 
ing between  the  two  different  and  inconsistent  allegiances,  the  divided  heart  is  faithful 
to  neither.    We  meet  with  instances  of  fiuch  indecision  in  domestic  and  social  Ufa, 


322  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  x.  1—16. 

There  may  be  a  rigorous  intellect  where  there  is  a  Tacillating  heart,  affections  easily- 
won  and  easily  lost,  prone  to  transference  hither  and  thither.  And  in  religion  we  find 
persons  who  strive  to  serve  God  and  mammon  at  the  same  time ;  or  who  seem  to  be 
earnest  in  the  service  of  Qod,  and  shortly  after  equally  devoted  to  the  incompatible 
service  of  God's  enemy. 

III.  The  mischiefs  of  a  divided  heart.  1.  Tt  is  ruinous  to  the  individual  nature. 
No  man  can  live  an  inconsistent  life,  such  as  a  divided  heart  involves,  without  moral 
deterioration.  He  loses  self-respect  and  moral  dignity.  2.  It  is  injurious  to  society. 
Men  respect  decision,  but  they  are  repelled  by  its  opposite,  and  thoy  despise  a  professor 
of  religion  whose  spirit  and  demeanour  are  inconsistent  with  his  profession.  3.  It  is 
hateful  to  God,  who  says,  "  Give  me  thy  heart,"  and  who  will  accept  no  compromise  or 
composition. 

IV.  The  cure  fob  a  divided  heart.  The  only  cure  is  a  radical  and  severe  one. 
The  heart  must  be  withdrawn  from  God's  rivals,  and  yielded,  without  reserve  and  with- 
out delay,  to  him  who  has  a  right  to  it,  and  who  claims  it  as  his  own. 

**  Prone  to  wander,  Lord,  I  feel  it ; 
Prone  to  leave  the  God  I  love  1 
Here's  my  heart,  Lord  ;  take  and  seal  it- 
Seal  it  from  thy  oourta  above." 

T. 

Ver.  7.^"  Foam  upon  the  water.''  A  graphic  and  picturesque  image  is  this,  aptly 
setting  forth  the  emptiness  and  transitoriness  of  that  monarchy  which  was  establisheil 
at  Samaria,  in  defiance  of  God's  will;  and  which  was  continued  by  vacillating  or  by 
wholly  idolatrous  kings,  with  uo  regard  to  God's  honour,  to  God's  ordinances,  to  God's 
pruphets  and  messengers. 

L  The  principle  figuratively  enunciated.  All  persons  and  systems  and  prin- 
ciples which  are  opposed  to  God  are  doomed  to  perisb.  As  the  foam  raised  upon  the 
surface  of  the  torrent  as  it  pUmges  over  the  rocks  vanishes  even  whilst  it  is  borne  down 
by  the  swiftness  of  the  current,  so  all  persons,  things,  and  institutions  which  God  con- 
demns as  inimical  to  himself,  as  hostile  to  his  authority  and  reign,  are  destined  to 
disappear  and  sink  into  the  dark  depths  of  oblivion.  As  our  Lord  Jesus  declared, 
making  use  of  a  different  figure,  "  Every  plant  which  my  heavenly  Father  hath  not 
planted  shall  be  rooted  up." 

II.  Actual  exemplifications  of  this  principle.  1.  The  instance  of  the  passage 
from  which  the  text  is  taken.  The  godless  and  often  idolatrous  kingdom,  established  in 
Samaria  as  its  capital,  comes  to  nought.  2,  National  examples  abound.  Peoples  who 
have  been  unfaithful  to  their  trust,  or  negligent  of  their  privileges,  or  wavering  in  theii 
policy,  have  come  to  nought. 

"And,  like  a  snow-flake  on  the  river, 
One  moment  seen,  then  gone  for  ever." 

3.  How  many  cases  of  individuals  known  to  us  exemplify  the  principle  thus  figuratively 
set  forth  1  Brilliant  gifts,  fine  opportunities,  glowing  hopes,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
want  of  true  principle,  of  thorough  const  oration  to  God, — who  has  not  seen  the  combina- 
tion ?  And  who  that  has  watched  and  followed  such  cases  has  not  had  occasion  to 
remark  that  the  laws  of  God  cannot  be  violated  with  impunity,  that  tlie  Lordreigneth, 
and  that  all  which  is  not  based  upon  a  right  relation  with  the  supreme  Lord  and  Saviour 
must  surely  come  to  nought,  and  be  no  more  seen? — ^T. 

Ver.  8. — Despair.  The  picture  of  the  text  is  awful  in  the  extreme.  The  condition  of 
those  to  whom  destruction  and  annihilation  would  be  a  relief  is  appalling  to  contem- 
plate. What  fearful  vengeance  must  be  overtaking  those,  what  indescribable  forebod- 
ings must  have  taken  possession  of  their  nature,  who  cry,  "Mountains,  cover  us  1  Bocks, 
fall  upon  us  1 "    It  is  the  language  of  despair  I 

I.  The  causes  of  despaib.  Much  must  have  transpired  before  such  a  state  of  mind 
could  exist.  There  must  have  been  (1)  sin  committed,  (2)  mercy  rejected,  (3) 
authority  defied,  (4)  forbearance  abused.  Wore  the  soul  of  man  could  have  abandoned 
itself  to  hopelessness  like  this. 


0B.Z.1— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


n.  Tbb  hobbob  or  debpaib.'  This  ig  not  unnatural.  It  arises  from  reflection  upon 
tlie  rebellion  and  inexcusable  wilfulness  of  the  past ;  from  the  deckiration  of  conscience 
to  the  effect  that  G-od  has  observed  that  rebellion,  that  sinfulness,  with  indignatioa,  and 
from  the  anticipation  of  impending  judgment.  Only  such  thoughts  and  feelings  oould 
account  for  the  unparalleled  horror  declaring  itself  in  such  invocations  and  impreca- 
tions as  these. 

III.  The  obt  of  despaib.  The  dreadful  language  proceeding  from  the  Upi  of  the 
hopeless  is  an  appeal  to  nature  to  save  the  sinner  from  nature's  Lord.  It  is  an  appeal 
unreasonable  and  absurd,  but  not  unnatural,  as  uttered  by  a  bewildered,  terrified,  and 
unfriended  souL  Can  anything  give  a  more  awful  and  impressive  representation  of  the 
wretchedness  into  which  he  is  surely  led  who  perseveres  in  sin,  and  hardens  himself 
against  both  the  Law  and  the  Gospel  ? 

IV.  The  pbevention  of  debpaib.  It  may  be  well  to  see  whither  a  certain  course 
leads  us,  if  the  result  be  to  save  us  from  the  issue,  by  saving  us  from  what  inrolTcs  it. 
It  is  to  be  remembered  with  gratitude  that  hearers  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  have  not 
reached  the  stage  now  described.  They  may  be  prisoners,  but  they  are  "  prisoners  of 
hope."  The  word  of  the  Lord  does  indeed  come  as  a  word  of  warning,  but  it  comes 
also  as  a  word  of  promise.  Neglected,  it  will  be  a  sentence  of  condemnation ;  accepted, 
it  will  be  an  assurance  of  pardon  and  a  pledge  of  life  eternaL — ^T. 

Ver.  12. — Prepare  for  the  time  of  Divine  favmir.  This  is  one  of  many  passages  in 
which  the  inspired  writers  make  use  of  imagery  derived  from  the  processes  of  nature 
and  the  practices  of  husbandry,  with  the  view  of  explaining  and  enforcing  apiritual 
truth  and  personal  duty. 

I.  Human  pbefabation  fob  Divine  BLsssiNa.  Man  must  do  his  part,  and  is 
admonished  by  authority  to  do  so.  The  readiness  which  is  here  required,  as  a  condi- 
tion of  heavenly  blessing  and  spiritual  prpsperity,  is  twofold.  1.  In  the  heart  and  life. 
t!y  "  breaking  up  the  fallow  ground  "  may  be  understood  repentance,  by  which  the 
heart  long  hard  and  stony  becomes  soft  and  pliable  to  what  is  good,  and  receptive  of 
heavenly  seed.  By  "sowing  to  one's  self  in  righteousness"  may  be  understood  reforma- 
tion of  principles  and  of  practice.  It  is  not  enough  to  forsake  the  evil ;  it  is  necessary 
to  seek,  to  cleave  to,  that  which  is  good.  All  this,  it  is  presumed,  will  be  done  by  the 
aid  of  Divine  grace,  and  under  the  influence  of  Christian  motives.  2.  By  prayer.  "It 
is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  Human  means  are  good;  it  is  by  express  instruction  from 
on  high  that  they  are  employed ;  but  alone  they  are  insufficient.  The  spiritual  life  has 
its  devotional  as  well  as  its  practical  side.  We  have  to  look  earthwards,  that  we  may 
till  the  soil  and  sow  the  seed ;  but  we  have  also  to  look  heavenwards,  that  we  may 
obtain  the  needed  blessing. 

II,  Divine  blessing  in  besponsb  to  human  peepabation.  1.  God  shall  "rain 
righteousness,"  by  which  we  may  understand  he  will  bestow  those  favours  which  his 
own  Word  has  pledged  him  to  confer.  By  rain  we  understand  also  the  abundance  of 
those  blessings ;  which  are  bestowed,  not  in  drops,  but  in  showers — copious  showers  from 
the  opened  windows  of  heaven.  2.  God's  people  shall  "  reap  mercy."  This  is  the  harvest 
for  which  all  human  cultivation  and  all  Divine  efSuences  are  designed  to  concur.  Mercy 
for  time  and  mercy  for  eternity,  from  a  merciful  God,  for  a  mercy-needing  huBBMUty. 
"  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  all  obtain  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day  I "— T. 

Ver.  1. — The  abuse  of  worldly  prosperity.  "Israel  is  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth 
forth  fruit  unto  himself."    Were  this  version  correct  we  should  have  two  ideas  suggested. 

1.  Afruitlessness  that  makes  life  worthless.  This  empty  vine  produced  fruit,  but  the 
fruit  was  worthless.  A  fruitless  vine  is  among  the  most  worthless  of  all  plants.  It  is 
unbeautiful.    Its  aspect  is  dry,  stringy,  deadly.    It  is  true  its  foliage  is  luxuriant,  but 

.  that  is  short-lived  and  disappointing ;  and  it  is  as  inutile  as  it  is  unbeautiful,     What~ 
piece  of  furniture  or  art  can  you  make  out  of  the  vine  tree?    It  is  only  fit  for  the  fire. 

2.  A  fruitfulness  that  malies  life  wicked.  "  Bringeth  forth  fruit  unto  himself."  What- 
ever is  produced  is  laid  out  on  self — aggrandizement  and  indulgence.  But  our  version 
is  undoubtedly  faulty.  "  Israel  is  a  luxuriant  vine,  he  putteth  forth  his  firuit  (Hender- 
son) ;  "  Israel  is  a  running  vine,  it  settpth  fruit  for  itself  (Keil) ;  "  Israel  is  a  luxurious 
vine,  whose  fruit  is  very  abundant "  (Elzas).    Israel  is  often  represented  as  a  vin«, 


S24  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  x.  1-15. 

"  Thon  hast  brought  a  vine  out  of  Egjpt, 
Then  hast  cast  out  the  heathen  and  planted 
Thou  preparedst  room  before  it, 
And  dicJet  cause  it  to  take  deep  root; 
And  it  filled  tUe  land. 

The  hills  were  covered  with  the  shadow  of  it, 
And  the  bonghs  thereof  were  Uke  goodly  cedan." 

(Pb.  Ixxx.  8-10) 

Out  Bubject  If  the  aJnue  of  worldly  prosperity.  Some  men  are  very  prosperous ;  they  are 
like  the  luxuriant  vine.  Every  branch  of  their  life  clusters  with  fruit.  Some  nations 
are  very  prosperous.  England  was  never  more  prosperous  than  now  ;  the  sim  of  pros- 
perity shines  on  our  island  home.  Great  Britain  is  just  now  a  luxuriant  vine,  and  its 
clustering  branches  enrich  distant  nations.     When  is  prosperity  abused  ? 

I.  When  it  ib  used  with  an  exclubivb  beqaed  to  cub  own  selfish  ends.  When 
men  employ  it :  1.  For  self-indulgence.  How  much  wealth  is  lavished  on  the  pampering; 
of  appetites,  and  the  gratification  of  the  sensuous,  the  carnal,  and  the  gross  ?  2.  For 
self-aggrandizement.  How  much  wealth  is  expended  in  order  to  make  a  grand  appear- 
ance, to  move  through  life  in  pageantry  and  pomp,  and  thus  to  gratify  mere  vanity  and 
pride  I  All  selfish  use  of  property  is  an  abuse  of  it.  What  we  have  obtained  is  only 
common  property,  which,  because  it  has  come  into  our  possession,  we  have  a  right  to 
distribute, for  the  common  weal.  The  right  which  property  gives  us  is  not  the  right  to 
lay  it  out  purely  for  our  own  selfish  ends,  but  the  right  to  lay  it  out  for  the  benefit  ot 
our  fellow-men. 

II.  When  it  is  used  without  a  supbeme  besard  to  the  claims  of  God.  What- 
ever we  have  we  hold  as  stewards,  and  unless  we  employ  our  property  according  to  the 
directions  of  the  great  Proprietor  we  abuse  the  trust.  How  does  God  require  us  to 
employ  our  property  ?  1.  For  the  amelioration  of  human  woes,  2.  For  the  dispersion 
of  human  ignorance.  3.  For  the  elevation  of  the  human  soul.  To  raise  it  to  the  know- 
ledge, the  image,  the  fellowship,  and  the  enjoyment  of  God. 

Conclusion.  How  are  we  as  a  nation  using  our  enormous  prosperity?  Let  the 
increase  of  grand  mansions,  palaces  of  amusement,  temples  of  intemperance,  worthless 
and  putrescent  literary  productions,  be  compared  with  the  increase  of  our  churches,  our 
schools,  and  our  bouks  of  real,  intellectual,  and  moral  merit ;  and  the  humiliating 
answer  will  come. — D.  T. 

Ver.  4. — Social  sins  and  their  result.  "  They  have  spoken  words,  swearing  falsely 
in  making  a  covenant :  thus  judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the 
field." 

J.  Social  sins.  There  are  three  sins  referred  to  in  this  verse.  1.  Vain  ipeech. 
"They  have  spoken  words."  This  means,  acconling  to  Henderson,  Elzas,  and  others, 
"  They  utter  empty  speeches."  Not  only  are  words  of  falsehood,  blasphemy,  and  unchas- 
tity  sinful,  but  empty  words.  For  every  "  idle  word "  we  shall  have  to  give  an  account, 
How  much  idle  language  is  there  current  in  society !  The  chat  of  gossip,  the  formali- 
ties of  etiquette,  the  vapid  compliments  of  society,  as  well  as  those  airy  words  of  wit 
and  humour  which  sometimes  delude,  sometimes  pain,  and  sometimes  please.  2. 
False  swea/ring.  False  speech  is  bad  enough,  for  it  misrepresents  facts,  and  often  does 
serious  mischief ;  but  when  backed  by  an  oath  its  heinousuess  is  intensified  and  black- 
ened. How  much  false  swearing  there  is  in  society  1  Not  merely  in  judicial  courts, 
but  in  homes,  in  shops,  in  fields,  in  general  society.  3.  Unrighteous  treaties.  "  Making 
a  covenant."  The  word  "bad  "is  implied  here,  for  there  is  no  harm  in  making  covenants. 
Making  a  bad  covenant.  The  primal  reference,  perhaps,  is  to  certain  treaties  Israel 
had  formed  with  foreign  nations.  How  much  wicked  contracting  there  is  going  on  in 
society  every  day  in  commerce,  in  politics,  as  well  as  in  private  life.  Untruthful  as  well 
as  unrighteous  bargains  are  being  struck  every  hour  in  all  circles.  In  truth,  the  sing 
here  charged  to  Israel  are  not  uncommon  in  England  this  day — empty  speech,  false 
swearing,  and  making  unrighteous  treaties. 

II.  Besults  of  social  sins.  "Thus  judgment  springeth  up  as  hemlock  in  the 
furrows  of  tlie  field."  It  matters  not  to  the  sense  of  the  passage  whether  you  rea  1 
"  P^'PPy  "  for  "  hemlock,"  or  ridges  "  for  "  furrows  ; "  the  idea  is  the  same — viz.  that  ou  t 


oa.x.1— 16J  THE  Book  OF  HOSEA.  826 

of  the  social  Bins  certain  results  appear.  How  do  they  come  ?  1.  They  come  as  ■ 
growth.  They  "  spring  up"  or  blossom.  Sins  bring  with  them  their  own  punishment 
—no  positive  infliction  is  required ;  every  sin  is  a  seed  from  which  a  pestiferous  plant 
must  spring.  2,  They  come  as  a  poison,  '*  Hemlock ; "  some,  read  "  poppy,"  and  soma 
"  darnel,"  but  all  agree  in  the  poisonousness  of  its  production.  In  any  case  it  is  a 
"  hemlock,"  a  small  decoction  of  which  destroyed  a  Socrates.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished, 
bringetb  forth  death."  8.  They  come  in  abundance.  "  That  springeth  up  as  hemlock 
in  the/urrows  of  the  field."  Very  prolific  is  sin.  See  its  plants  growing  in  the  ridges 
and  furrows  of  life ;  in  sick-chambers,  in  hospitals,  in  workfkousea,  in  prisons,  in  battle- 
fields also  1    How  thickly  the  hemlock  grows  l—D.  T. 

Ver.  12, — 77ie  Divine  voice  to  a  worthku people.  "Sow  to  yourselves  In  righteous- 
ness, reap  in  mercy ;  break  up  your  fallow  ground :  for  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord,  till 
he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  yon."  "  Sow  to  yourselves  for  righteousness,  reap 
according  to  love,  plough  for  yourselves  vir^n  soil ;  for  it  ia  time  to  seek  Jehovah,  till 
he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you"  (Delitzsch).  Sowing  and  reaping  are 
figures  here  used  to  denote  the  spiritual  and  moral  conduct  of  the  people.  Inde^,  all 
human  life  consists  of  sowing  and  reaping.  We  reap  to-day  what  we  sowed  yesterday, 
and  we  sow  to-day  what  we  shall  reap  to-morrow,  and  so  on  through  all  future.  Every 
intelligent  act  embodies  a  moral  principle,  contains  a  seed  that  must  germinate  and 
grow.    We  have  here  several  things  worthy  of  study. 

I.  A  WEETOHBD  uoBAL  8TATX.    "  Fallow  grouud,"  Uncultivated  earth.    A  state  of: 

1.  Unloveliness.    It  is  either  an  expanse  of  grey  earth,  or  of  weeds,  thistles,  and  thorns. 

2.  Unfruit/ulness.  Unless  the  earth  is  cultivated,  there  is  no  fruit,  and  the  land  is 
worthless.  3,  Wastefulness.  On  the  fallow  ground  fall  the  rain,  the  dew,  the  sun- 
shine, and  the  frost ;  but  all  in  vain.  How  much  Divine  grace  is  wasted  on  unregenerate 
men  I    Sermons,  books.  Bibles,  providences,  means  of  grace  all  wasted. 

IL  An  DBQENT  MOKAL  DUTY.  1.  MoTal  ploughing.  ,"  Break  up  your  fallow  ground." 
Drive  the  ploughshare  through  it.  How  can  you  break  up  the  soil  of  the  heart  ?  Not 
by  mere  volition,  but  by  thinking  on  the  subjects  suited  to  excite.  Think  especially 
on  two  things.  (I)  What  God  has  been  to  us.  (2)  What  we  have  been  to  him.  2. 
Moral  sowing.  "  Sow  in  righteousness."  Go  in  for  righteousness.  Work  to  put 
yourself  and  fellow-men  right  with  themselves,  God,  and  others ;  implant  everywhere 
righteous  ideas  and  actions,  3.  Moral  reaping,  "  Heap  in  mercy."  Accept  what  comes 
to  you  in  sentiments  of  love  and  mercy. 

III.  A  SOLEMN  HOBAL  BUGOEBTioN.  "  It  Is  time."  1.  No  time  to  lose.  2.  Much 
has  been  lost.    3.  It  is  only  now  the  work  can  be  effectively  done. 

IV.  A  OLOBions  MOBAii  FBOSPEOT.  He  will "  rain  righteousness,"  or,  as  some  render 
it,  "  teach  }  ou  righteousness."  Pursue  this  work  of  moral  agriculture  properly,  and 
God  himself  will  come  and  teach  you  righteousness. — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — 7%e  empty  vine.  "  Empty ; "  literally, "  poured  forth ; "  i,e.  poured  forth 
in  leaves  and  branches,  with  the  effect  that  there  is  comparatively  little  fruit.  When 
there  was  fruit,  Israel  gave  not  God  the  glory.  The  more  they  increased,  the  more 
they  transgressed.  The  result  was  degeneracy.  They  spumed  Quid's  control,  and  life, 
in  consequence,  ran  to  waste.  Undisciplined  luxuriance  becomes  degenerate  luxuri- 
ance.   Fruit  fails. 

I.  Fevvt,  BDT  NOT  UNTO  GoD.  (Ver.  1.)  Such  fruit  as  Israel  brought  forth  was 
"unto  himself."  Weh&veheierecoginzei:  1.  Anative  eapacitg  qf/ruitfulness.  God 
had  given  to  the  nation  a  thriving  vigorous  life,  capable  of  striking  out  in  many  noble 
directions,  and  of  achieving  distinction  in  many  kinds  of  enterprise.  This  was  its 
natural  endowment  It  enabled  it  at  times,  with  God's  assistance,  to  rise  to  a  high 
degree  of  prosperity.  So  God  bestows  on  men  the  gifts  of  body  and  mind,  the  natural 
ge^us,  the  powers  to  think  and  act,  which  form  the  basis  of  their  manifold  endeavours. 
2.  A  perversion  of  this  capacity.  This  power  of  fruitful  endeavour  in  Israel  was  not 
directed  to  God's  glory  as  its  end.  The  life  of  the  nation  was  solely  "  from  itself  to 
itself."  Its  bent  was  towards  self-gratification,  self-glory,  self-enrichment ;  not  towards 
the  realization  of  a  Divine  ideal.  They  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  God  (ch.  viii.  4).  The 
calf  was  "  from  Israel  also "  f  ver.  6).    This  is  the  root-siv  of  mankind.    They  have 


326  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch,  x.  1—15 

turned  aside  £rom  their  being's  end  and  aim.  There  is  endeavour,  bat  it  is  for  self, 
Qod's  glory  is  unthought  of,  unsought.  3.  Conseqtient  failure.  From  this  perrersion 
of  existence  in  Israel  arose  (1)  rejection  of  Divine  control,  figured  in  the  vine  s  lawless, 
untutored  luxuriance;  and  (2)  ultimate  degeneracy.  The  sinful  life,  however  vigorous, 
powerful,  and  thriving-looking  at  first,  Yias  this  as  its  penalty,  that  it  is  unable  perma- 
nently to  maintain  its  vitality.  Even  when,  to  outward  appearance,  it  seems  flourishing, 
it  is  found,  on  closer  examination,  to  be  without  substance,  without  healthy  fruitful- 
ness.  "  It  is  smitten,  its  root  is  dried  up,  it  bears  no  fruit "  (cf.  cb.  ix.  16).  Only  of 
the  righteous  can  it  be  said,  "  He  bringeth  forth  fruit  in  his  season  ;  his  leaf  also  shall 
not  wither  "  (Ps.  i.  3).  "  They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age ;  they  shall  be  fat  and 
flourishing  "  (Ps.  xcii.  14). 

II.  Glory,  but  not  to  the  Cbeatob.  (Ver.  1.)  The  more  God  gave  to  Israel,  the 
more  they  sinned  against  him.  Their  altars  were  multiplied  as  their  fruit  increased. 
The  better  God  made  their  land,  the  goodlier  became  their  images.  1.  They  withhdd 
from  Ood  the  glory  due  to  him.  They  denied  him  in  his  gifts.  They  did  not  own  him 
as  the  Author  of  their  prosperity.  They  felt  no  thankfulness.  They  did  not  glorify  him 
in  the  use  they  made  of  what  be  gave.  How  common  is  this  sin  I  2.  2%^  gave  his 
glory  to  another.  Altars  and  pillars  wern  multiplied  to  the  idols.  Baal  was  praised  and 
served  for  the  prosperity  which  came  from  Jehovah.  God  was  dishonoured  to  his  face. 
In  the  Lord's  own  land  his  glory  was  given  to  "  graven  images."  The  glory  which 
ought  to  be  given  to  God  is  often  retained  for  self,  or  distributed  out  to  the  powers 
which  we  secretly  idolize.  Hero  and  nature  worship,  Bacchus-worship^  idolatry  of 
wealth,  glorification  of  military  might,  etc.  3.  Z%ey  made  his  goodness  the  occasion  of 
greater  sin.  The  bent  being  evil,  sin  only  assumes  the  greater  proportions  the  larger 
the  powers  put  at  its  disposal.  With  plenty  in  the  land  the  people  had  more  to  sin 
with.  They  had  mure  time  and  means,  and  they  lavished  more  freely  on  their  idols. 
U'hey  built  more  altars,  and  made  their  pillars  higher  and  goodlier.  Man's  sin  thus 
keeps  pace  with  God's  goodness.  The  wealthy,  talented,  powerful,  robust,  exalted, 
are  able  to  sin  in  a  way  and  to  an  extent  not  possible  to  others.  The  facilities  for 
sin  are  greater.  More  extravagance,  pride,  worldly  display,  dissipation,  self-confi- 
dence, etc. 

III.  Worship,  bdt  with  a  divided  hea.bt.  (Ver.  2.)  Israel's  heart  was  "  smooth  " 
or  "divided."  It  was  deceitful  towards  God.  His  worship  was  ostensibly  maintained, 
but  the  worship  of  the  Baals  was  kept  up  alongside  of  it,  and  was  the  real  worship  of 
the  people.  Nay,  while  in  name  honouring  Jehovah,  the  people  had  "  changed  the 
truth  of  Gk)d  into  a  lie  "  (Bom.  i.  25),  by  setting  up  the  images  of  the  calves.  Their 
whole  worship  was  thus  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  and  he  would  avenge  his  insulted 
honour  by  a  judgment  which  would  lay  their  altars  in  the  dust.  1.  in  worship,  it  it 
the  heart  Ood  looks  to.  He  is  not  deceived  by  the  outward  appearance,  or  by  flattering 
words.  He  desires  truth  in  the  inward  parts  (Ps.  If.  6).  The  utmost  lavishing  on 
externals  will  not  condone  for  the  want  of  the  right  spirit.  2.  The  heart  is  insincere 
towards  Ood  when  it  is  divided  between  Ood  and  other  objects.  God  is  not  honoured  as 
God  when  the  whole  heart  is  not  given  up  to  him.  He  ought,  as  Ood,  to  receive  all. 
He  will  not  share  his  glory  with  another.  A  really  divided  state  of  the  affections 
cannot  last  (Matt,  vL  24^  The  division  of  the  heart  between  Gh)d  and  the  world  ends 
by  the  world  getting  all,  8.  Ood  tuill punish  the  divided  heart  by  taking  its  idohfrmn 
it.    He  may  do  so  in  this  world.    He  will  certainly  do  so  at  last. 

IV.  A  jasa,  tbt  no  eino.  (Ver,  3,)  When  the  judgment  fell  on  Israel,  the 
people  would  not  be  slow  to  realize  the  cause  of  their  misfortunes.  "  We  have  no  king, 
because  we  feared  not  the  Lord."  1,  They  had  a  king,  hut  not  a  king  from  Ood.  Since 
the  extinction  of  the  house  of  Jehu,  no  king  had  reigned  in  Israel  with  even  a  semblaQce 
of  Divine  right.  The  throne  had  been  held^y  a  succession  of  usurpers.  Hoshea  gained  it 
by  slftying  Pekah,  as  Pekah  had  raised  himself  to  power  by  killing  the  son  of  Menahem 
(2  Kings  XV.  26 — 30).  The  people  could  not  feel  to  an  anarchiotl  usurper  as  towards 
a  true  king.  Their  feeling  was  that  tbe  days  of  legitimate  kings  were  over.  They 
had,  at  least,  no  king  through  whom  they  eould  expect  God  to  send  them  deliverance. 
These  frequent  and  violent  usnrp«tions  were  a  proof  that  God  had  departed  from  them, 
2.  Reir  state  was  such  that  a  king  could  no  longer  do  them  omygood.  He  who  ought  to 
have  been  their  King,  Jehovah  himself,  had  cast  them  off.    They  had  provoked  him 


cu.  X.1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  H08EA.  327 

till  there  was  no  remedy.    They  felt  this  now  in  tha  Intterneu  of  their  despair. 
"  What  should  a  Idng  do  for  us  ?  "—J.  0. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  end  of  calf-vmrship.  The  people  were  preparing  the  way  for  their 
own  punishment  by  their  false  dealing  with  Assyiia.  Vengeance  would  overtake  them. 
The  calf  in  which  they  trusted  would  be  carried  away  captive.  The  kingdom  would  be 
overthrown.  Their  altars  would  grow  up  with  thoras  and  thistles.  They  would  he 
glad  of  death  to  relieve  them  of  their  misery.  "  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame,  and 
Israel  shall  be  ashamed  of  his  own  counsel." 

I.  A  SOWING  OF  JUDGMENT.  (Ver.  4.)  Israel's  overthrow  wag  connected  with : 
1.  Falnity  to  international  engagements.  "  Swearing;  falsely  in  making  a  covenant." 
The  allusion  is  probably  to  Hoshea's  false  dealing  with  Sbalmaneser  (2  Kings  xviL  3, 4 ; 
cf.  ch.  xii.  1),  which  was  the  immediate  occasion  of  the  overthrow  of  Samaria.  In  inter- 
national diplomacy  there  is  too  much  of  this  "  speaking  words  "  and  "  swearing  falsely." 
Engagements  are  catered  into  which  neither  side  intends  to  keep  longer  than  it  Bults. 
The  result  is  breach  of  faith,  and  sometimes  war.  2.  Perversion  of  right  at  hotne. 
This,  if  we  follow  the  analogy  of  Amos  v.  7,  vi.  12,  is  what  is  meant  by  judgment  or 
justice  "  s])ringing  up  as  hemlock  in  the  furrows  of  the  field."  Maladministered  justice 
is  the  most  deadly  and  poisonous  of  all  things.  Another  and,  taken  by  itself,  more 
natural  interpretation  of  the  words  is,  that  judgment  would  spring  up  for  woe  to  Israel 
ill  the  track  on  the  falsehoods  of  which  the  nation  had  been  guilty.  The  sinner's  own 
hands  make  the  furrows  in  which  retribution  springs  up  like  deadly  hemlock.  His 
treacheries  and  duplicities  recoil  upon  himself.  Speaking  false  words  is  the  sowing  of 
dragon's  teeth. 

II.  The  oaftivb  oalf.  (Vers.  6,  6.)  1.  Ephraim't  idol  in  danger.  "  The  inhabi- 
tants of  Samaria  shall  fear  because  of  the  calves  of  Beth-aven."  What  a  picture  of 
the  folly  of  idolatry  t  The  people  tremble  for  the  safety  of  the  idol-god  to  whom  they 
yet  look  to  protect  them.  Have  we  not  here  an  indication  of  the  lurking  consciousness 
there  is  in  the  idolater's  mind  that  after  all  his  god  is  no  god?  Trembling  for  them- 
selves, the  inhabitants  of  Samaria  are  yet  more  afraid  lest  anything  should  happen  to 
tlieir  deity.  We  read  of  idolaters  beating  tiieir  gods  when  they  do  not  please  them. 
Was  Samaria's  conduct  more  rational  in  trembling  for  its  god?  Their  tremliling  is  a 
proof  that  they  worship^ied  the  calves,  not  because  in  their  inmost  hearts  they  thought 
an  idol  could  help  them,  or  was  a  right  thing  to  have,  but  simply  because,  in  defiance 
of  God's  commandment  ("his  own  cuunsel,"  ver.  6),  it  pleased  them  better  to  have  an 
idol.  2.  Sphraim  mourning  for  his  idol.  "The  people' thereof  shall  mourn  over  it," 
etc.  Mark  in  this :  (1)  Huw  God  separates  himself  from  the  image  by  which  the  people 
represented  him  (the  calf),  and  also  separates  himself  from  the  people.  The  place  of 
tlie  calf-worship  is  no  longer  Beth-el  ("house  of  God"),  but  Betli-aven  ("house  of 
vanity  ").  The  people  are  not  his  people,  but  the  people  of  the  calf — its  votaries,  not 
his;  he  disowns  them.  (2)  How,  when  they  see  their  calf  ignominiously  shorn  of  its 
glory,  they  mourn  for  it,  both  priests  and  people.  The  sinner's  idols  will  be  taken  from 
him,  and  their  vanity  exposed.  This  fills  him  with  mourning.  It  is,  however,  his 
idols,  not  his  sins,  that  he  mourns  for.  3.  Fphraim  ashamed  nf  hit  idol.  "  It  shall 
be  also  carried  unto  Assyria  for  a  present  to  King  Jareb:  Ephraim  shall  receive  shame," 
etc.  What  a  burst  bnblile  the  worship  of  the  calf  now  appeared!  Unable  to  save 
itself,  not  to  speak  of  others,  it  is  now  ignominiously  carried  off  as  a  present  to  a 
heathen  king.  Yet  Ephraim  in  his  heart,  no  doubt,  grieved  for  Ids  calf,  and  would 
gladly,  had  he  been  permitted,  have  returned  to  its  ser.ice.  The  sinner's  idols  shall 
yet  cover  him  with  shame.  "  What  fruit  had  ye  then  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are 
now  ashamed  ?  for  the  end  of  those  things  is  death  "  (Bom.  vL  21). 

HI.  Final  oveethbow,  (Vers.  7,  8.)  1.  A  destroyed  kingdom.  "Samaria  is 
destroyed  ;  her  king  is  like  a  chip  on  the  face  of  the  water."  Light,  helpless,  borne 
away  by  the  impetuous  current,  snbnierged,  and  seen  no  more.  Such  would  be 
Samaria's  king  (of.  ver.  8) — the  same  flooii  which  swept  him  away  destroying  also  the 
kingdom.  2.  Desolate  altars.  "  The  high  places  also  of  Aven,  the  sin  of  Israel,  shall 
be  destroyed  :  the  thorn  and  the  thistle  shall  come  upon  their  altars."  The  judgment 
would  strike  very  specially  the  place  of  sin.  The  utter  end  of  the  false  system  of 
irorship  is  figured  in  the  thorn  and  thistle  covered  altan.    Broken  and  disused,  they 


328  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  t^H.  x.  1—15. 

are  to  stand  as  monuments  of  wrath.  3.  Prayer  far  annihUatiem.  "They  shall  say 
to  the  mountains,  Cover  us ;  and  to  the  hills,  Fall  on  us."  This  would  be  preferable  to 
the  awful  misery  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Assyrian  foe  (ver.  14 ;  ch.  xiii.  16). 
The  scene  of  judgment,  with  a  like  dreadful  prayer,  would  be  repeated  at  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  by  the  Eomans  (Luke  xxiii.  30).  Yet  these  are  but  feeble  prefigurations 
of  the  woe  and  consternation  that  shall  prevail  on  the  day  of  the  "  wrath  of  the  Lamb  " 
(Rev.  vi.  16).  Men  shall  pray  for  annihilation  ;  but,  it  is  noteworthy,  tki$  m  a  prayer 
which  ii  not  granted. — J.  O. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — Past  and  present.    We  have  here^ 

I.  A  PAST  OF  SIN — A  PRESENT  OF  BETEiBUTiON.    (VeiB.  9, 10.)    Israel's  sin  was : 

1.  Of  old  date.  "  Thou  hast  sinned  from  the  days  of  Gibeah  "  (of.  on«h.  ix.  9).  The 
sin  of  Gibeah  was  an  early  and  outstanding  instance  of  wickedness.  It  may  have 
taken  place  not  long  after  "  the  days  of  the  elders  which  overlived  Joshua  "  (Josh. 
xxiv.  31),  and  so  have  been  the  first  piblic  mark  of  the  new  departure  in  transgression. 

2.  Steadily  persisted  in.  "  There  they  stood."  From  that  day  on,  a  strain  of  deep 
corruption  had  run  through  the  history  of,  Israel  3.  As  yet  unavenged.  "  The  battle 
in  Gibeah  against  the  children  of  iniquity  did  not  overtake  them."  Pierce  as  was  the 
slaughter  on  both  sides  iu  that  day  of  Gibeah,  it  had  not  sufBced  to  eradicate  this  evil 
strain.  A  seed  by  corruption  survived  which  steadily  propagated  itself,  and  had  now 
increased  till  it  included  the  whole  nation.  The  punishment  of  this  sin  was  yet  to 
come.  4.  To  be  avenged  now.  "  It  is  in  my  desire  that  I  should  chastise  [or, '  bind '] 
them ;  and  the  people  shall  be  gathered  against  them,  in  the  binding  them  for  their  two 
transgressions."  The  double  sin  for  which  Israel  was  to  be  punished  was  their  departure 
from  God,  with  its  attendant  idolatry  and  resultant  moral  corruption ;  and  their  attitude 
of  antagonism  to  the  house  of  David,  to  which  they  ought  to  have  been  willing  to  return 
at  the  earliest  possible  moment.  This  long-accumulating  national  sin  God  was  now 
determined  to  pimish,  and  was  gathering  the  peoples  to  execute  his  decree,  as  before 
the  tribes  had  assembled  to  avenge  the  sin  of  Gib^h.  There  is  an  entail  of  sin  which 
tlie  descendants  of  the  wicked  can  only  cut  off  by  repentance  (Matt,  xxiii.  35,  36). 

II.  A  PAST  OF  EASE  AND  PLENTT — A  PRESENT  OF  HARD  SEBVICB.      (Ver.  11.)      1.  PoSt 

comfwt.  The  people  of  Israel  had  a  fat  portion,  and  had  grown  accustomed  to  the  life 
of  ease  and  luxury.  Like  the  trained  heifer,  which  treads  out  the  corn  as  a  matter  of 
habit,  and  feeds  at  its  ease  as  it  does  so,  they  loved  their  prosperity,  and  took  it  as  a 
thing  of  course.  It  is  easy  to  settle  in  prosperity.  We  take  our  good  things  as  though 
they  came  to  us  by  right.  We  form  habits  in  accordance  with  them.  We  survey  the 
situation  with  lazy  complacency,  and  conolnde  that  this  happy  fortune  must  be  what 
we  were  born  to.  2.  A  present  yoke.  "  I  (have)  passed  over  her  fair  neck."  Already 
God  had  taught  Israel  the  vanity  of  her  complacency  by  subjecting  her  to  the  tribute  of 
the  kings  of  Assyria.  This,  however,  had  failed  to  lead  to  repentance ;  so  worse  was 
now  in  store.  3.  Approaching  hard  service.  "  I  will  yoke  Bpbraim ;  Judah  shall 
plough ;  Jacob  shall  break  his  clods."  The  image  is  taken  from  severe  field  labour,  as 
contrasted  with  the  easy  work  of  the  threshing  heifer.  Sin  ends  in  bondage ;  in  hard 
service ;  in  the  yoke  and  goad.  The  way  of  the  transgressor  is  hard  (Prov.  xiii.  15). 
There  may  be  ease  and  luxury  at  first,  but  the  end  is  that  he  "  labours  and  is  heavy 
laden  "  (Matt.  xi.  28).— J.  0. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — MuraJ,  husbandry.     Israel's  duty  is  here  contrasted  with  their 

practice. 

I.  The  kind  of  husbandry  Israbl  odoht  to  have  followed.  (Ver.  12.)  1, 
Preparation  of  the  soil.  Israel  is  first  bid  to  sow ;  then,  going  a  step  further  back,  the 
people  are  commanded,  "Break  up  your  fallow  ground."  If  fruits  of  righteousness  are 
to  be  produced,  it  needs,  not  simply  a  weeding  and  recultivation  of  the  old  soil— the 
natural,  unrenewed  heart — but  the  preparation  of  a  soil  entirely  new.  "  That  which 
is  l»rii  of  the  flesh  is  flesh ;  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit "  (John  iii.  6). 
Ezekiel,  accordingly,  promises  that  God  will  take  away  the  hard  and  stony  heart  from 
Israel,  and  will  give  them  a  heart  of  flesh  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  26).  The  first  need  of  our 
souls  is  renewal.  Yet  we  have  the  duty  laid  on  us  of  seeking  this  renewal,  and  of 
co-operating  (by  prayer,  use  of  means  of  grace,  faith,  repentance)  in  bringing  it  about. 


CH.  XI.  1—12.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


m 


"  Mate  you  a  new  heart,  and  a  new  spirit "  (Ezek.  xviii.  31).  2.  Solving  in  the  soil. 
The  sowing  is  to  be  "in  righteousness,"  t.e.  in  the  practice  of  truth,  kindness,  justice, 
mercy,  godliness,  and  everything  else  which  the  Law  of  God  requires.  Each  must  sow 
for  himself.  The  sowing  cannot  be  done  by  proxy.  Sowing  in  righteousness  is  "  for 
ourselves"  in  the  sense  also  that  our  own  highest  well-being  is  involved  in  it  (Ps.  zix. 
11).  Bighteousness  in  the  long  run  profits  the  doer  himself  more  than  it  profits  any 
other.  It  is  his  "life"  (Deut.  xxxii.  47).  3.  Waiting  on  Ood.  " For  it  is  time  to 
seek  the  Lord,  till  he  come  and  rain  righteousness  upon  you,"  As  in  the  outer  world 
rain  is  indispensable  to  growth,  so  is  the  blessing  of  God,  given  in  rains  of  his  Spirit, 
essential  to  growth  in  grace.  In  raining  the  Spirit  upon  us,  God  rains  righteousness. 
Cause  is  put  for  effect.  It  is  the  Spirit's  influences  which  cause  ri.g;hteousness  to  spring 
up.  This  waiting  on  God  must  accompany  the  whole  process.  It  implies  an  earnest 
direction  of  the  heart,  sujiplication,  and  patient  looking  for  the  blessing.  It  is  always 
"  time  "  for  the  sinner  to  seek  the  Lord.  He  cannot  do  it  too  soon.  4.  The  gracious 
reaping,  "  Reap  in  mercy."  Not  according  to  desert,  but  according  to  God's  infinite 
grace  and  love.  The  reaping  is  (1)  a  reaping  of  righteousness  (Rom.  vi.  19,  22);  (2)  of 
other  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings  (Matt,  vi,  33 ;  Eph.  i.  3) ;  (3)  of  eternal  life 
(Rom.  vi.  1'2). 

11.  The  kind  or  husbandry  Israel  did  follow.  (Ver.  13.)  1.  Instead  of  "  sowing 
in  vv^ieoMsn&ss"  Israd ploughed  wickedness.  They  took  pains  to  do  evil, -bestowed 
labour  upon  it,  prepared  the  soil  in  which  it  might  grow,  and  seemed  to  delight  in 
multiplying  transgressions.  If  God's  people  were  as  diligent  in  cultivating  goodness 
as  sinners  are  in  cultivating  sin,  the  Church  would  soon  be  in  a  healthier  condition. 
2.  Instead  of  "  reaping  in  mercy,"  they  reaped  iniquity.  Sin  brought  forth  sin.  They 
served  "  iniquity  unto  iniquity  "  (Rom.  vi.  19).  As  weeds  multiply  quicker  than  good 
grain,  so  sin,  in  the  same  space  of  time,  yields  a  far  greater  harvest  (of  its  own  kind)  than 
righteousness.  3.  Instead  of  spiritual  and  temporal  bles-ings,  Israel  reaped  disappoint- 
ment and  ruin.  (1)  They  reaped  lies  (disappointment).  "  Ye  have  eaten  the  fruit  of 
lies."  Thfir  hopes,  built  chiefly  on  the  multitude  of  their  fighting  men  (ver.  15), 
deceived  them.  They  proved  utterly  vain.  They  had  sown  lies  in  "  speaking  words  " 
and  "  swearing  falsely  in  making  a  covenant "  (ver.  4) ;  they  now  reaped  the  fruit  of 
this,  in  seeing  their  hosts  utterly  routed,  their  fortresses  captured,  and  their  women  and 
cliildren  dashed  to  pieces  (ver.  14) — judgment  springing  up  in  the  furrows  they  had 
themselves  made  (ver.  4).  (2)  They  reaped  ruin.  When  war  arose,  the  sword  of  the 
Assyrian  swept  all  before  it.  Israel  could  read  in  recent  atrocities  of  Shalman  the 
doom  which  awaited  themselves  (ver.  14).  King  and  kingdom  would  be  cut  off  (ver. 
16)^ — "  in  a  morning,"  i,e,  early.  This  was  the  result  of  their  sowing.  This  was  what 
Bethel,  with  its  "evil  of.evU,"  had  done  for  them.  Ob  that  the  sinner  would  take 
warning  1 — J.  O. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  XL 

In  vers.  1 — 4  Jehovah  enumerates  the 
benefits  conferred  on  Israel  all  along  from 
the  time  of  their  departure  out  of  Egypt. 
But  parallel  with  this  enumeration  runs  the 
history  of  Israel's  ingratitude. 

Ver.  1. — When  Israel  was  a  child,  then  I 
loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt. 
Driver  uses  this  verse  to  exemplify  the 
principle  that  when  the  reference  is  to  what 
is  past  or  certain,  rather  than  to  what  is 
future  or  indefinite,  we  find  the  predicate  or 
the  apodosis  introduced  by  2,  though  not  with 
nearly  the  same  frequency  as  ^  perfect  and 
vav  causes  (1)  with  subject  at  object  pre- 


fixed; (2)  after  tlme-determinationi.  The 
life  of  a  nation  has  its  stages  of  rise,  progress, 
and  development,  like  the  life  of  an  in- 
dividual man.  The  prophet  goes  back  to 
that  early  period  when  the  national  life  of 
Israel  was  in  its  infancy ;  it  was  then  that  a 
few  patriarchs  who  had  gone  down  to  sojourn 
in  Egypt  were  becoming  a  people ;  the  pre- 
dicate precedes,  to  emphasize,  that  early  day 
when  Israel  became  God's  peculiar  people. 
The  vav  marks  the  apodosis  recording  God's 
love  in  choosing  that  people,  calling  them 
into  the  relation  of  sonship,  and  delivering 
them  out  of  Egypt.  Thus  Eimchi  says, 
"  When  Israel  was  yet  a  child, «'.«.  in  Egypt, 
then  I  loved  him,  therefore  I  am  more  angry 
with  them  than  with  the  net  of  the  nations : 


330 


THE  BOOK  OP  aoSEA. 


[oh.  XL  1—12. 


for  from  their  youth  onward  I  bttft  loved 
them,  ud  delivered  them  out  of  the  hands 
of  t^eir  enemies.  But  when  they  transgresi 
my  oommaudments  it  is  incumbent  on  me  to 
chastiae  them  as  •  man  chastises  his  son." 

(1)  The  people  of  Israel  is  called  Ood's  son 
in  consequence  of  God  choosing  them  and 
bringing  them  into  close  relationship  to 
himself,  such  as  that  of  a  son  to  a  father. 
The  commencement  was  the  message  to 
Pharaoh  by  Moses  in  the  words,  "  Israel  is 
my  son,  even  my  firstborn :  and  I  say  unto 
thee,  Let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  serve  me." 
This  sonship  was  solemnly  ratified  by.  the 
giving  of  the  Law  at  Sinai ;  and  the  condition 
clearly  stated  that,  in  the  event  of  their  pre- 
serving the  knowledge  of  God,  hdfiUing  his 
Law,  and  doing  his  will,  they  would  at  all 
times  enjoy  DiviDe  protection,  defence,  add 
blessing,  while  from  generation  to  generation 
they  were  addressed  by  that  honourable  title. 

(2)  As  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  is  always 
described  as  a  "  leading  "  or  "  bringing  out," 
and  never  elsewhere  as  a  "  calling  out,"  some 
expositors  maintain  that  the  words,  "  out  of 
Egypt,"  signify  from  the  time  Israel  was  in 
Egypt,  and  are  parallel  to  "when  Israel  was 
a  child,"  both  referring  to  time,  the  time  of 
national  infancy.  From  that  period  GU>d 
began  to  manifest  his  love,  and  in  its  maiu- 
festation  he  called  him  by  the  endearing 
name  of  "  son  " — my  son.  The  words  of  this 
verse  are  applied  by  St.  Matthew  to  the 
sojourn  of  Jesus  in  Egypt.  The  older  inter- 
preters refer  (a)  the  first  part  of  the  verse 
to  Israel  and  the  second  part  typically  to  the 
history  of  Messiah's  childhood,  in  whom  that 
of  Israel  reached  its  completeness.  Bather 
(&)  the  verse  was  applied  typically  to  Israel, 
and  to  Jesus  as  the  antitype ;  to  the  former 
primarily,  and  to  the  latter  secondarily. 
Thus  the  head  and  the  members  are  com- 
prehended in  one  common  prediction. 

Ver.  2. — ^As  they  called  them,  so  they  went 
from  them :  they  sacrificed  unto  Baaliio,  and 
burned  incense  to  graven  images.  (1)  Ad- 
verting to  his  own  call  mentioned  in  the  first 
verse,  G  od  here  refers  to  the  many  subsequent 
calls  which  he  addressed  to  them  through  his 
servants  the  propliets  and  other  messengers. 
(2)  The  subject  of  the  verb  is  erroneously 
understood  by  some,  as,  for  example,  Aben 
Ezra  and  Eiclihom,  to  be  the  idols,  or  their 
false  priests  or  prophets;  vrhile  (S)  Jerome  is 
also  mistaken  in  referring  the  words  to  the 
time  of  Israel's  rebelling  when  Moses  and 
A  aron  wished  to  lead  them  out  of  Egypt.  The 
correct  reference  is  that  first  stated',  and  the 
sense  is  that,  instead  of  appreciating  the 
invitations  and  monitions  of  the  prophets  of 
God,  they  showed  their  utter  insensibility 
and  thanklessness,  tiiming  away  from  them 
in  contempt  and  scorn.  Nay,  the  more  the 
messengers  of  God  called  them,  the  more 


they  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  those  who  were 
their  truest  friends  and  best  advisers.  Fur- 
suing  their  idolatrous  practices,  they  sacri- 
ficed to  Baal,  that  is  to  say,  the  various 
representations  of  that  idol,  and  burned 
incense  to  their  images,  whether  of  wood  or 
stone  or  precious  metal.  Thus  Kimchi  cor- 
rectly comments  as  follows :  "  The  prophets 
which  I  sent  to  them  called  to  them  morning 
and  evening  to  turn  to  Jehovah,  so  (much 
the  more)  did  they  go  away  from  them,  not 
hearkening  to  their  words  nor  desisting  from 
their  evil  works."    The  word  ]3,  even  so, 

denoting  the  measure  or  relation,  corre- 
sponds to  lertil  to  be  supplied  in  the  first 
clause.  The  imperfects  imply  continuance 
of  action  or  a  general  truth.  (4)  The  Sep- 
tuagint  rendering,  followed  by  the  Syriac,  is 
6K  TTpoirdirov  /iov  avrol,  "  from  my  presence : 
they;"  as  if  they  had  read  on  <]SB  instead  of 
the  present  text. 

Ver.  3. — ^I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  tak- 
ing them  by  theii  anus ;  hut  they  knew  not 
that  I  healed  them.  This  picture  of  God's 
guiding  and  guarding  care  of  Ephraim  is 
very  touching  and  tender.  It  ia  that  of  an 
affectionate  parent  or  tender  nurse  teaching 
a  child  to  walk  by  leading-strings ;  taking  it 
np  in  the  arms  when  stumbling  or  making 
a  false  step ;  and  in  case  it  fell  curing  the 
wound.  Thus,  nurse-like,  God  taught 
Ephraim,  his  wayward  perverse  child,  to  use 
his  feet  (so  the  original  word  imports),  all  the 
while  lending  considerate  help  and  season- 
able aid.  He  took  them  by  the  hand  to 
guide  them,  that  they  might  not  stray;  he 
took  them  in  his  arms  to  hold  them  up,  that 
they  might  not  stumble  and  to  help  them 
over  any  obstacle  that  might  lie  in  the  way ; 
and  when,  left  tg  themselves  during  a  short 
season,  and  in  order  to  test  their  strength, 
they  did  stumble  and  fall,  he  healed  their 
hurt.  And  yet  they  did  not  apprehend  nor 
appreciate  God's  gracious  design  and  deal- 
ings with  them  in  thus  guiding  and  guarding 
them,  and  in  healing  their  diseases  both 
temporal  and  spiritual.  There  is,  perhaps,  an 
allusion  to  Exod.  xv.  26,  "  I  will  put  none  of 
these  diseases  upon  thee  which  I  have 
brought  upon  the  Egyptians :  for  I  am  the 
Lord  that  healeth  thee."  This  promise,  it 
will  be  remembered,  was  vouchsafed  imme- 
diately after  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah  had 
been  sweetened  by  the  tree  which,  according 
to  Divine  direction,  had  been  cast  iiierein. 
Thus  Eimohi :  "And  they  have  not  acknow- 
ledged that  I  healed  them  of  every  sickness 
and  every  affiiction,  as  he. said,  *I  will  put 
none  of  these  diseases  upon  thee.'"  The 
reference  is  rather  to  all  those  evidences  of 
his  love  which  God  manifested  to  them 
during  their  forty  years'  wandering  in  the 
wilderness ;  or  perhaps  to  his  guidance  ol 


CH.  XI.  1—12.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA, 


831 


thera  by  his  Tjbw  throughout  their  entire 
history.    Bashi  remarks  that  "they  knew 


not  know."  The  word  'n^jin  is  properly 
taken  both  by  Kimchi  and  Gesenius  (1)  for 
Ti^inn;  the  former  says;  "The  tav  stands 
in  place  of  he:  this  is  the  opinion  of  the 
grammarians;"  the  latter-  regards  it  as  a 
solitary  example  of  Tiphel;  others  again 
consider  it  a  corrupt  reading  instead  of  the 
ordinary  form  of  Hiph.  (2)  Some  take  it 
for  a  noun,  as  J.  Eimchi,  who  says  it  is  "a 
noun  after  the  form  of  'mssn,  and  although 
the  word  is  Milel  (while  in  'mssn  it  iB 
Milra),  yet  it  is  the  same  form ;"  thus  the 
translation  is,  "  As  for  me,  my  guidance  was 
to  Ephraim ; "  so  Jerome,  "  I  have  been  as  if  a 
nurse  to  Ephraim ; "  likewise  also  CyriL  The 
former  explanation  is  simpler  and  also  other- 
wise preferable.  (3)  The  Septuagint  has  the 
incorrect  rendering  crvveTr6SL<ra, "  I  bound  the 
feet  of  Ephraim,"  which  Jerome  explains,  "  I 
bound  the  feet  of  Ephraim  that  they  might 
not  fly  further  from  me,"  though  his  own 
rendering  is  that  given  above.  The  word 
□np  has  also  occasioned  some  difSculty  and 
consequent  diversity  of  explanation.  (1) 
Some  explain  it  to  be  an  infinitive  construct 
equivalent  to  the  Latin  gerund  in  -do,  as  else- 
where. Thus  in  the  Authorized  Version  it 
is  "  taking  them  by  their  arms ; "  but  the 
common  form  of  the  infinitive  of  this  verb  is 
nnp;  besides,  the  suffixes  D-  and  V"  are  con. 
tradictory.  (2)  Olshausen  and  Ewald  read 
cn^M  in  the  first  person,  the  received  text 

having,  according  to  the  latter,  maintained 
its  place  only  through  vnvni;  but  this  is 
conjectural  and  wants  mannscript  authority. 
(3)  Still  worse  is  Abarbanel's  interpretation, 
who  understands  the  subject  of  the  verb 
and  the  sufSx  of  the  noun  as  referring  to 
Epiiraim ;  thus :  "  He  (Ephraim)  took  them 
(i.e.  the  idols)  on  his  arms."  (4)  The  correct 
explanation,  as  we  think,  is  that  of  Kimchi 
and  Gesenius,  who  take  the  verb  for  nnjjS  by 
a  not  unusual  aphseris  of  the  lamed :  "  He 
took  them  in  his  arms,"  the  transition  &om 
the  first  to  the  third  person  being  justified 
by  the  pictorialiy  descriptive  style  of  the 
passage.  The  followin  g  comment  of  Eimchi 
is  worthy  of  attention  :  "  The  prophet  only 
mentions  Ephraim  (instead  of  all  Israel), 
because  it  was  he  that  made  the  calves. 
He  says,  'And  how  does  Ephraim  reward  me 
for  this  that  I  bestowed  on  them  so  many 
beni^fits,  and  accustomed  them  to  go  on  their 
feet,  and  did  not  burthen  them  with  my 
commandments  and  my  service? '  And  be- 
caune  he  has  compared  Ephraim  to  a  boy, 
he  uses  the  word,   '  I  led  them  by  strings.' 


Just  as  one  leads  a  boy  that  he  may  accustom 
himself  to  go  little  by  little  without  trouble, 
80  I  led  them  from  station  to  station,  wlien 
I  brought  them  out  of  Egypt ;  I  led  them 
gradually  without  overexertion,  the  cloud 
going  before  them  by  day,  and  the  pillar  of 
fire  by  night." 

Ver.  4. — ^I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man, 
with  bands  of  love.  This  verse  contains  a 
further  representation  of  Jehovah's  fatherly 
guidance  of  Israel.  The  corda  of  a  man  are 
such  as  parents  use  in  leading  weak  or  young 
children.  Bands  of  love  qualify  more  closely 
the  preceding  expression,  "  cords  of  a  man," 
and  are  the  opposite  of  those  which  men 
employ  in  taming  or  breaking  wild  and 
unmanageable  animals.  The  explanation 
of  Bashi  is  similar:  "I  have  always  led 
them  with  tender  cords  such  as  those  with 
which  a  man  leads  his  child,  as  if  he  said 
with  loTiug  guidance."  Aben  Ezra  and 
Kimchi,  in  their  explanations,  carry  out 
more  fully  the  same  idea.  The  former  says, 
"  The  bands  of  love  are  not  like  the  bands 
which  are  fastened  on  the  neck  of  a  plough- 
ing heifer;"  the  latter, " Because  he  com- 
pared Ephraim  to  a  heifer,  and  people  lead 
a  heifer  with  cords,  he  says, '  I  have  led 
Israel  by  the  cords  of  a  man,  and  not  the 
cords  of  a  heifer  which  one  drags  along 
with  resistance,  but  as  a  man  draws  his 
fellow-man  without  compelling  him  to  go 
with  resistance:  even  so  I  have  led  them 
after  a  gentle  method;'  and  therefore  he 
afterward  calls  them  (cords  of  a  man)  bands 
of  love."  The  LXX.,  taking  h^n  from  ^an, 
in  the  sense  of  "injure,"  "destroy,"  have  the 
mistaken  rendering  iy  SiacpdopS,  avdpi^av  .  • . 
i^ireiva  cdTobs, "  When  men  were  destroyed  I 
drew  them."  The  other  Greek  versions  have 
the  correct  rendering.  And  I  was  to  them 
as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke.  The  word 
herim  does  not  mean  "  to  lift  up  on  "  and  so 
"  impose  a  yoke,"  as  some  think,  nor  "  to 
take  away  the  yoke,"  but  "to  lift  it  up." 
The  figurt  is  that  of  a  humane  and  com- 
passionate husbandman  raising  upwards  or 
pushing  backwards  the  yoke  over  the  cheeks 
or  dewlaps  of  the  ox,  that  it  may  not  press 
too_  heavily  upon  him  or  hinder  him  while 
eating.  The  reference  is,  according  to  Eim- 
chi, to '  taking  the  yoke  off  the  neck,  and 
letting  it  hang  on  the  jaw,  that  it  may  not 
pull  but  rest  from  labour  one  or  more  hours 
of  the  day."  The  fact  thus  figuratively 
expressed  is,  not  the  deliverance  from  the 
bondage  of  Egypt,  but  the  loving-kindness 
of  Jehovah  in  lightening  the  fulfilment  of 
the  Law  to  leiael.  (2)  The  LXX.  omit 
the  word  hy,  yoke,  and  strangely  translates 
the  clause,  "I  will  be  to  them  as  a  man 
smiting  (another)  on  the  cheeks."  And  I 
laid  meat  unto  thwn.    The  older  and  many 


332 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  XL  1 — ^12. 


modem  interpreters,  (1)  tafctng  DM]  a*  tbe 
first  person  future  apoo.,  Hipb.,  from  nc], 
translate, "  And  I  reached  them  food  to  eat," 
namely,  the  manna  in  the  wilderness.  This 
would  require  nsi,  which  some  substitute  for 
the  present  reading.  (2)  Ewald,  Keil,  and 
others  take  bk  as  an  adverb  in  the  sense  of  "gra- 
dually," "  gently,"  translating,  "And  gently 
towards  him  did  Igivehimfood,"  or  "Igently 
fed  him."  Some,  again,  as  Eimchi,  take 
(a)  h<s\«  as  a  noun,  after  the  form  of  Tbim; 
and  others  (b)  take  it  to  be  an  anomalous 
form  for  h^sm,  the  first  person  future  Hiph., 
like  TaHx  for  T3n»  (Jer.  xlvi.  8).  (3)  In 
this  clause  also  the  Septuagint,  probably 
reading  as  follows :  'h  S518  vhvi  BNi,  trans- 
lates, '£7rij3\/i(<o;uai  vpii  avThr  Swiiiro/iai 
aiiTif,  "I  will  have  respect  to  him;  I  will 
prevail  with  him."  Continuing  the  several 
olanses  of  this  verse,  we  may  express  the 
meaning  of  the  whole  as  follows :  "  Cords  of 
a  man"  denote  humane  methods  which 
Jehovah  employed  in  dealing  with  and 
drawing  his  people — not  such  cords  as  oxen 
or  other  animals  are  drawn  by;  while 
"  bands  of  love "  is  a  kindred  expression, 
explaining  and  empliasizing  the  former,  and 
signifying  such  leading-strings  as  those 
with  which  a  parent  lovingly  guides  his 
child.  The  means  employed  by  God  for  the 
he]p,  encouragement,  and  support  of  his 
people  were  kind  as  they  were  bountifuL 
His  benevolent  and  beneficent  modes  of 
procedure  are  further  exhibited  by  another 
figure  of  like  origin ;  for  just  as  a  consider- 
ate and  compassionate  man,  a  humane  hus- 
bandman, gives  respite  and  relief  to  the 
oxen  at  work  by  loosening  the  yoke  and 
lifting  it  up  off  the  neck  upon  the  cheeks ; 
and  thus  affords  not  only  temporary  rest 
and  ease,  but  also  allows  an  occasional 
mouthful  or  more  of  food,  or  even  abundant 
provender,  to  the  animal  which  toils  in  the 
yoke  while  ploughing  or  at  other  work ;  so 
Jehovah  extended  to  Israel,  notwithstanding 
their  frequent  acts  of  unfaithfalness,  his 
sparing  mercy  and  tender  compassions,  sup- 
plying them  in  abundant  measure  with  all 
that  they  needed  for  the  sustenance  and 
even  comforts  of  life.  Thus  their  sin  in 
turning  aside  to  other  gods,  which  were  no 
gods,  in  quest  of  larger  benefits  and  more 
liberal  support  and  succour,  was  all  the  more 
inexcusable. 

The  next  three  verses  (5 — ^7)  describe  the 
severe  chastisement  Israel  incurred  by  in- 
gratitude for,  and  contempt  of,  the  Divine 
love. 

Ver.  5. — He  shall  not  return  into  the  land 
of  Egypt,  but  the  Assyrian  shall  be  his  king, 
because  they  refused  to  return.  These  words 
sound  like  an  announcement  that  the  season 


of  Divine  grace,  so  long  extended  to  that 
sin-laden  people,  bad  at  length  expired ;  and 
that  on  acconnt  of  their  stubborn  and  un- 
grateful rebellion  against  Jehovah  they 
would  be  forced  to  go  into  exile  and  become 
subject  to  the  monarch  of  Assyria.  (1)  They 
had  been  threatened  with  a  return  to  Egypt 
and  its  bondage  in  oh.  viii.  13,  "  They  shall 
return  to  Egypt ; "  and  ch.  ix.  8, "  Ephraim 
shall  return  to  Egypt;"  yet  now  God, 
without  any  change  of  purpose,  changes  his 
mode  of  procedure,  not  allowing  them  to 
return  to  Egypt,  but  dooming  them  to  s 
worse  bondage  under  the  Assyrians.  (2) 
Having  been  tributary  to  Assyria  from  the 
time  of  Menahem,  they  had  revolted  and 
applied  to  Egypt  for  help;  now,  however, 
no  help  would  be  permitted  to  come  from 
Egypt  nor  even  an  opportunity  of  applying 
for  it  allowed.  The  power  of  Assyria  would 
be  paramount ;  instead,  therefore,  of  native 
kings  and  Egyptian  auxiliaries,  Israel  would 
have  to  submit  to  that  iron  yoke.  However 
desirous  of  returning  to  Egypt,  they  would 
have  neither  the  power  nor  the  privilege  of 
doing  so.  And  this  poor  privilege  of  a 
choice  of  masters  they  were  refused  as  a  just 
retribution,  because  they  had  not  repented 
of  their  sin  and  returned  to  God.  Various 
methods  have  been  resorted  to  to  harmonize 
the  apparent  contradiction  alluded  to,  that 
is,  between  the  affirmative  and  negative 
statements  about  Israel's  return  into  Egypt. 
(1)  Dathe,  Eichhom,  and  De  Wette  agree 
with  the  LXX.  in  reading  Sh  instead  of  Ah, 
and  connecting  it  with  the  preceding  verse ; 
but  the  other  versions,  as  well  as  the  manu- 
scripts, support  the  received  text.  (2)  Jerome 
and  Bosenmuller  explain  it  of  the  people's 
desire  to  conclude  an  alliance  with  Egypt  in 
order  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  Assyria,  being 
frustrated  by  the  superior  power  of  the 
latter;  thus  the  sense  is  that  they  shall 
not  return  any  more  to  Egypt,  as  they  had 
lately  done  by  their  ambassadors,  to  seek 
help  from  that  land  or  its  people.  Then 
he  assigns  the  reason  why  they  would  not 
again  send  ambassadors  to  Egypt  for  the 
purpose  indicated,  because  the  Assyrian 
alone  would  be  their  king.  The  objection 
to  this  is  tliat  lo  yashtibu  must  refer  to  the 
whole  people  rather  than  to  their  ambassador 
going  to  and  fro  between  the  countries. 
(3)  Ewald,  Maurer,  and  others  cut  the  knot 
by  taking  h  interrogatively,  as  if  it  were 
halo,  and  thus  equivalent  to  an  aifirmative, 
t'.e.  "  Shall  they  not  return  to  Egypt  and 
the  Assyrian  be  their  king?"  The  expected 
answer  would  be  in  the  affirmative.  Neither 
grammar  nor  context  sanctions  this  interro- 
gative sense.  (4)  According  to  Hitzig,  Eeil, 
Simson,  and  others,  we  are  to  nnderstnnd 
Egypt  in  the  previous  places,  viz.  ch.  viii. 
13  and  ch.  ix.  S,  as  typicc^  of  the  land  9' 


OH.  XX.  1—12.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


333 


bomlage,  where  in  the  pTSsent  passage  the 
typical  sense  is  inadmissible,  owing  to  the 
contrast  with  Assyria.  Into  Egypt  Israel 
should  not  return,  lest  the  object  of  the  Exo- 
dus might  seem  frustrated,  but  a  worse  lot 
lay  before  them — another  and  harder  bond- 
age awaited  them ;  the  King  of  Assyria 
would  be  their  king  and  reign  over  tliem, 
and  all  because  of  their  impenitence  and 
refusal  to  return  to  Jehovah.  The  following 
is  the  explanation  of  Kimchi:  "  They  should 
not  have  returned  to  the  land  of  Egypt  to 
seek  help ;  I  had  already  said  to  them, '  Ye 
shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way ; ' 
for  if  they  had  returned  to  me,  they  would 
not  bare  needed  help  from  Egypt.  And 
against  their  will  Assyria  rules  over  them, 
and  they  serve  him  and  send  him  a  present 
year  by  year.  And  why  is  all  this  ?  Be- 
cause they  refused,  etc.;  as  if  he  said  (they 
refused)  to  return  to  me;  for  if  they  had 
returned  to  me,  foreign  kings  (literally, 
*  kings  of  the  nations ')  would  not  have  ruled 
over  them,  but  they  would  have  ruled  over 
the  nations  as  they  had  done  in  the  days  of 
David  and  Solomon,  when  they  did  my 
will ;  and  so  have  I  assured  them, '  Thou 
Shalt  reign  over  many  nations,  but  they  shall 
not  reign  over  thee.'"  The  root  of  jnd  is 
cognate  with  yia,  to  hold  back,  refuse;  the 
{■  strengthens  the  connection  of  the  objec- 
tlval  infinitive  with  the  governing  verb;  the 
ellipsis  of  '^N  is  obvious. 

Ver.  6. — ^And  the  sword  shall  abide  on 
his  citieB,  and  shall  oonsnme  Ms  branches, 
and  devour  them,  A  more  accurate  render- 
ing would  be,  and  the  tword  ehaU  sweep 
round  in  its  eities,  and  destroy  its  bolts  a/nd 
deeour.  Nay,  they  could  not  free  them- 
selves from  invasion  and  attack.  The  sword 
of  war  would  whirl  down  upon  their  cities 
and  consume  the  branches,  that  is,  the 
villages,  or  the  city  bar^j,  or  the  strong 
warriors  set  for  defence.  Some  understand 
the  word  so  variously  interpreted  in  the 
sense  of  •'  liars,"  and  refer  it  to  the  prophets, 
priests,  and  politicians  who  spake  falsehood 
and  acted  deceitfully.  The  word  n^n  is 
rendered  (1)  "  the  sword,"  as  the  principal 
weapon  in  ancient  warfare  and  the  symbol 
of  war's  destructive  power  shall  sweep  round 
in,  circulate,  or  mikke  (he  round  of  the  cities  of 
Israel ;  but  (2)  others, "  whirl  down,"  "  light 
on;"  thus  both  Bashi  and  Kimchi.  Again, 
0<13  is,  as  already  intimated,  variously  ren- 
dered. The  most  appropriate  translation 
(o)  is  (literally,  "  poles  for  carrying  the  ark," 
Exod.  XXV.  13)  "  bolts  or  bars  "  for  securing 
gates,  tlie  root  being  113,  to  separate.  (6) 
Some  explain  it  as  a  figure  for  "  mighty 
men ; "  so  Jerome  and  the  Targum,  as  also 
Rashi:  "It  destroys  his  heroes  and  con- 
sumes thero."    This  is  the  meaning  of  the 


word  preferred  by  Oesenins.  (e)  Ewald 
understands  it  in  the  sense  of  "  fortresses," 
especially  on  the  frontier,  by  which  a  land 
is  shut  against  or  opened  to  the  enemy. 

(d)  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi  take  it  to  mean 
"  branches,"  i.e.  villages,  and  are  followed 
by  the  Authorized  Version.  "  The  explana- 
tion of  c,"  says  Kimchi,  "is  'branches,'  and 
it  is  a  figure  for  villages,  for  he  had  already 
mentioned  his  cities ;  and  villages  are  re- 
lated to  cities  as  branches  to  a  tree  ;  in  like 
manner  they  are  called  'daughters,'  being 
related  to  a  city  as  daughters  to  a  mother." 

(e)  The  LXX.  render  it  by  ev  rais  x^P'^^" 
auToS,  having  read  VT3,  as  also  the  Syriac. 
Because  of  their  own  counsels.  The  cause 
of  all  their  calamitous  invasions,  which  city 
gates  barred  and  bolted  could  not  shut  out, 
was  their  evil  counsels  in  departing  from 
the  Lord,  as  Kimchi  correctly  explains: 
"  All  this  comes  upon  them  in  consequence 
of  their  evil  counsel,  because  they  have  for- 
saken my  service  to  serve  other  gods." 
Bashi  draws  attention  to  the  peculiarity  of 
the  accentuation— tasha  and  sellug — to 
separate  it  from  the  preceding  word.  The 
Septuagint  here  again  blunders,  obviously 
reading  l^SKi,  and  translating,  "  And  shall 
eat  (the  fruit)  of  their  evil  counsel." 

"Ver.  7. — And  my  people  are  bout  to 
baoksUding  from  me.  This  first  clause  ot 
the  verse  is  very  expressive,  eveiy  word 
almost  having  an  emphasis  of  its  own. 
With  all  their  sinfulness  and  shortcomings, 
Israel  was  still  the  people  of  God — my 
people;  they  were  guilty  of  the  sin  of  back- 
sliding, and  of  backsliding  from  God,  the 
best  of  benefactors  and  their  chiet  good. 
Nor  was  it  occasionally  and  after  long 
intervals  uf  time  that  they  backslided;  it 
was  their  habit,  their  tendency.  They  were 
suspended  on,  or  rather  fastened  on,  back- 
sliding. Though  they  called  them  to  the 
Most  High,  none  at  all  would  exalt  him ; 
margin,  together  they  exalted  him  nol.  This 
second  clause  signifies  either  (1)  that  the 
prophets  called  Israel  from  their  idols  to 
the  Most  High,  yet  none  exalted  him  (lite- 
rally, "  together  they  did  not  or  would  not 
exalt  him ")  by  abandoning  their  idols  and 
abstaining  from  backsliding ;  or,  (2)  "  though 
they  call  him  (Israel)  upwards,  yet  not  one 
of  them  all  will  lift  himself  up,"  that  is, 
they  together — one  and  all — refused  or  neg- 
lected to  lift  themselves  upward  towards 
God  or  goodness.  The  word  vixhrt  is  equi- 
valent to  WN^li,  the  same  ns  ry-hn,  from  N7n, 
equivalent  to  rhn,  so  that  it  signifies,  ac- 
cording to  Keil,  (1)  "suspended,"  "hung 
up,"  "  hanging  fast  upon,"  "  impaled  on ;  " 
Hengstenberg,  (2)  "swaying  about  from 
inconstancy,"  and  "in  danger  of  falling 
away; "  but  Pusey  seems  to  combine  both  in 


334 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  XI.  1—12. 


the  original  Mnw  of  the  word,  mi  explsint 
it  aa  follows:  "Llteially,  hnng  to  it  I  m 
we  say,  <  a  man's  whole  being  hang$  on  • 
thing.  A  thing  hung  to  at  on  another 
sways  to  and  fro  within  certain  limits,  but 
its  relation  to  that  on  which  it  is  hung 
remains  immovable.  Its  power  of  motion 
is  restrained  within  these  limits.  So 
Israel,  so  the  sinner,  however  he  veer  to 
and  fit)  in  the  details  and  oircumstaDces  of 
his  dn,  is  fixed  and  immovable  in  his  ad- 
herence to  his  sin  itself."  Though  Bashi 
and  the  Targum  of  Jonathan  make  n2-\&n 
as  synonymous  with  nswn,  thus:  "When 
the  prophets  teach  them  to  return  to  me, 
they  are  in  suspense  whether  to  return  or 
not  to  return;  with  difficulty  do  they  re- 
turn to  me," — they  are,  however,  distin- 
guished as  turning  away  from  and  turning 
to  God — aversion  from  and  eonversmn  to 
him;  while  the  suffix  ^  is  objective,  that  is, 
"  My  people  are  hung  to  apostatizing  from 
me."  The  phrase  ^y~h^  is  variously  inter- 
preted, by  some  as  (1)  **  upwards,"  the  pro- 
phets being  the  subject;  thus  Bashi:  "To 
the  matter  that  is  above  him  (Israel)  the 
prophets  call  him  unitedly ;  but  my  people 
do  not  lift  themselves  up  nor  desire  to  do 
it."  Corruption  was  so  deeply  seated  in 
Israel,  that  the  idle  mass  gave  no  response 
to  the  voice  of  the  prophets  urging  them 
upwards.  (2)  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi  both 
take  bv  as  an  adjective,  and  synonymous 
with  p^K,  the  Most  High.    Kimchi  explains 

as  follows :  "  He  says.  My  people  oscillate 
between  distress  and  freedom;  sometimes 
distress  comes  upon  them,  and  again  they 
are  in  the  condition  of  freedom,  and  this 
takes  place  for  their  bachsliding  from  me,  as 
if  he  said,  because  of  the  backsliding  and 
rebellion  which  they  practise  against  me. 
.  .  .  The  prophets  call  them  constantly  to 
return  to  God  mott  high."  So  Aben  Ezra : 
"  The  interpretation  is,  the  callers  call  liim 
to  tht  Most  High,  and  they  are  the  prophets 
of  God;  but  they  all  in  one  way  raise 
not  the  head."  (3)  Jerome  takes  it  for  h]!, 
a  yoke,  and  renders  accordingly :  "  But 
a  yoke  shall  be  imposed  on  them  together, 
that  is  not  taken  away."  The  verb  oa^"^ 
signifies,  (1)  according  to  Gesenius  and  many 
others,  "to  celebrate  with  praises,"  or 
"  extol."  It  is  rather  (2)  "  to  lift  one's  self 
up,"  "rise  upwards;"  nor  is  it  necessary 
with  this  sense  to  supply  '■[{iliSn,  his  head, 
with  Orotius,  nor  yet  to  understand  it 
written  for  or  in  the  sense  of  opiY,  with 
Joseph  EimchL  Similarly  the  eyriao: 
"They  call  him  to  God,  but  they  think 
together,  conspire,  and  do  not  raise  them- 
selves." The  word  in'  is  "all  together," 
and  therefore  mh-m"  is  "no  one."  The  liXX. 


translate  (S)  the  second  clause  m  follows: 
"But  God  shall  be  angry  with  his  precious 
things,  and  shall  not  at  all  exalt  him," 
having  probably  read  it  v;g»  ^J-^«J. 

Ver.  8. — How  shall  I  give  thee  up, 
Xpbraim  f  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel  1 
how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admahl  how 
shtdl  I  set  thee  as  Zeboimi  This  verse 
paves  the  way  for  trarisition  to  promise. 
Although  the  Israelites  on  account  of  such 
conduct  had  merited  complete  annihilation, 
yet  Jehovah,  for  his  love  and  mercy's  sake, 
substitutes  grace  for  justice,  and  will  not 
destroy  them  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth. 
One  rendering  (1)  gives  the  clause  the  turn 
of  an  exclamation  rather  than  of  an  interro- 
gation; thus:  "How  readily  and  justly  could 
I  [or  should  I,  or  how  thoroughly  could  I  if  I 
pnnished  thy  rebellion  as  I  deserved]  give 
thee  up  to  destruction ! "  We  prefer  (2)  the 
ordinary  rendering,  by  which  it  is  treated  as  a 
question :  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up  to  the 
power  of  the  enemy,  and  not  only  that,  but 
destroy  thee  ?  "  C&lvin's  exposition  seems 
indeed  to  favour  the  former :  "  Here,"  he 
says,  "  God  consults  what  he  is  to  do  with 
the  people ;  and  first,  indeed,  he  shows  that 
it  was  bis  purpose  to  execute  vengeance 
such  as  the  Israelites  deserved,  even  wholly 
to  destroy  them;  but  yet  he  assumes  the 
character  of  one  deliberating,  that  none 
might  think  that  he  hastily  fell  into  anger, 
or  that,  being  soon  excited  by  excessive 
fury,  he  devoted  to  ruin  those  who  had 
lightly  sinned,  or  were  g^lty  of  no  great 
crimes.  ...  By  these  expressions  of  the 
text  God  shows  what  the  Israelites  deserved, 
and  that  he  was  now  inclined  to  inflict  the 
punishment  of  which  they  were  worthy,  and 
yet  not  without  repentance,  or  at  least  not 
without  hesitation.  He  afterwards  adds  in 
the  next  clause,  Thii  I  toill  not  do;  my  heart 
i$  within  me  changed."  Xine  heart  is 
turned  within  msj  my  repentings  are  kindled 
together.  The  hy,  literally,  "upon,"  "with," 
then,  "in,"  or  "within:"  "My  heart  is 
turned  or  changed  from  anger  to  pity  in  me." 
The  expression,  nD3]  irr,  signifies,  according 
to  Bashi,  "one  warmed"  as  in  Gen.  xliii.  30, 
where  tlus  same  word  is  rendered  in  the 
Authorized  Version,  "yearned : "  "  His  bowels 
did  yearn  upon  his  brother,"  or  "  warmed 
towards."  But  (2)  many  modem  interpreters 
understand  the  word  in  the  sense  of  "  gather- 
ing themselves  together:"  "The  feelings  ot 
compassion  gathered  themselves  together;" 
nushumim,  from  Fiel  ora,  a  noun  of  the  form 
-nan,  less  definite  than  raoA^mim,  bowels,  as 
the  seat  of  the  emotions,  "gathered  them- 
selves together,"  or  "were  excited  all  at  once." 
The  cities  of  the  plain  included  Admah  and 
Zeboim,  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  all  of  which, 
in  consequence  of  their  sins,  were  overthrown 


CH.  XI.  1—12.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


S35 


and  perished  in  one  common  calamity.  In 
Dent.  zxix.  23  these  cities  are  all  named, 
though  Admah  and  Zeboim  are  not  men- 
tioned by  name  in  the  narrative  of  the 
catastrophe  contained  in  Genesis.  Though 
Israel  had  been  as  guilty  and  deserving  of 
wrath  as  these,  God  expresses  strong  reluc- 
tance to  deliver  them  over  into  the  hands 
and  power  of  their  enemies,  or  to  give  them 
np  to  destruction.  His  heart  revolted  at 
the  thought,  and  turned  aside  from  the 
fierceness  of  his  anger,  though  so  fully  de- 
served, into  the  direction  of  mercy ;  a  new 
turn  was  given  to  his  feelings  in  the  direc- 
tion of  compassion.  All  his  relentings  or 
repentings  together — one  and  all — yearned 
or  were  at  once  aroused.  Bepenting  on  the 
part  of  God  is  an  expression  suited  to  human 
comprehension,  implying  no  change  of  pur- 
pose on  the  side  of  God,  but  only  a  change 
of  procedure  consistent  with  his  purpose  of 
everlasting  loTe.  "  The  Law  speaks  in  the 
language  of  the  sons  of  men." 

Ver.  9. — I  will  not  execute  the  fierce- 
ness of  mine  anger,  I  will  not  retnm  to 
'  destroy  Ephraim.  The  promise  of  this  verse 
is  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  compassion 
expressed  in  the  preceding. ,  It  is  at  once 
the  effect  and  evidence  of  that  feeling  of 
Divine  compassion.  God  would  neither 
execute  the  burning  heat  of  hia  wrath,  for 
so  the  words  literally  mean,  nor  destroy 
Ephraim  utterly,  or  again  any  more  as  for- 
merly. The  histovio  event  referred  to  may 
be  the  destruction  effected  by  Tiglath- 
pileser,  ally  of  Ahaz  King  of  Judah  against 
Fekidi  King  of  Israel  and  Bezin  King  of 
Syria,  when  he  carried  away  captive  the 
inhabitants  of  Gilead,  Galilee,  and  Naphtali, 
as  we  read  in  2  Kings  xv.  29,  "  In  the  days 
of  Pel<ah  King  of  Israel  came  Tiglath- 
pileser  King  of  Assyria,  and  took  Ijon, 
and  Abel-beth-maachah,  and  Janoah,  and 
Kedesh,  and  Hazor,  and  Gilead,  and  Galilee, 
all  the  land  of  Naphtali,  and  carried  them 
captive  to  Assyria."  But  while  this  is  pro- 
bably the  primary  allusion,  there  is  an 
ulterior  reference  to  tlie  future  restoration 
of  Israel.  For  I  am  Ood,  and  not  man; 
the  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee :  and  I 
will  not  enter  into  the  city  (or,  eoiiM  into 
burning  wrafh,  Keil).  A  reason  is  here 
assigned  for  the  exercise  of  the  Divine  com- 
miseration just  expressed;  this  reason  is 
God's  covenant  of  everlasting  lore.  He  is 
God,  and  mnst  be  measured  by  a  Divine 
standard — not  man,  implacable  and  re- 
vengeful; though  Ms  people's  provocation 
had  been  grievons,  God  was  in  the  midst  of 
them  as  their  God,  long-suffering  and  stead- 
fast to  his  covenant  of  love  and  purposes  of 
mercy.  He  would  not  enter  (o)  into  the 
city  as  an  enemy,  and  for  the  purpose  of 
utter  destruction,  as  he  had  entered  into 


the  cities  of  the  ^lain  for  their  entire  and 
final  ruin ;  or,  (V)  if  the  alternative  render- 
ing be  preferred,  he  would  not  eome  into 
burning  wrath.  The  fiery  heat  or  fierceness 
of  God's  wrath  tends  to  destruction,  not  the 
amendment  of  the  impenitent  The  ex- 
pression, "  I  will  not  return,"  may  also  be 
understood  as  equivalent  to  (1)  "I  will  not 
turn  from  my  pity  and  promises:"  or,  "I 
will  not  turn  away  from  Israel; "  but  (2)  it 
suits  the  context  better  to  translate  on  the 
pi'iuciple  of  two  verbs  expressing  one  idea  in 
a  modified  sense,  i.e.  "  I  will  not  return  to 
destroy,"  that  is,  "  I  will  not  again  destroy 
Ephraim."  Jerome's  explanation  favours 
the  first,  and' is,  "I  will  not  act  according  to 
the  fury  of  my  anger,  nor  change  from  my 
clemency  to  destroy  Ephraim;  for  I  do  not 
strike  to  destroy  for  ever,  but  to  amend  .  .  . 
for  I  am  God  and  not  man.  Man  punishes 
for  this  purpose  of  destroying ;  Ood  chas- 
tises for  the  purpose  of  amending."  As 
God,  his  purpose  of  mercy  was  changeless ; 
as  the  Holy  One  la  Israel,  he  was  infinitely 
pure  and  absolutely  perfect,  "the  Father  of 
lights,  with  whom  can  be  no  variation, 
neither  shadow  that  is  cast  by  taming." 
The  meaning  (1)  already  given  of  coming 
into  the  city  is  supported  by  ancient  ver- 
sions, Hebrew  expositors,  and  some  of  the 
ablest  Christian  commentators ;  yet  (2)  we 
prefer  that  which  understands  "Vjf  in  the 
sense  of  "the  heat  of  wrath,"  deriving 
it  from  -nj),  effervescence,  which  is  that 
given  in  Keil's  translation.  There  is  (3) 
an  explanation  strongly  advocated  by  Bishop 
Lowth  and  adopted  by  Bosenmiiller.  It  is 
as  follows  in  the  words  of  the  bishop : 
"  Jerome  is  almost  singular  in  his  explana- 
tion :  '  I  am  not  one  of  those  who  in- 
habit cities ;  who  live  according  to  human 
laws;  who  think  cruelty  Justice.'  Castalio 
follows  Jerome.  There  is,  in  fact,  in  the 
latter  member  of  the  sentence,  a  tivh,  a 
parallelism  and  synonym  to  'K  (^  in  the 
former.  The  future '»  has  a  frequentative 
power  (see  Fs.  xxii  3  and  8),  *I  am  not 
accustomed  to  enter  a  city:  I  am  not  an 
inhabitant  of  a  city.'  For  there  is  a  beau- 
tiful opposition  of  the  different  parts :  '  I 
am  God,  and  not  man.'  This  is  amplified 
in  the  next  line,  and  the  antithesis  a  little 
varied:  'I  am  thy  God,  inhabiting  with 
thee,  but  in  a  peculiar  and  extraordinary 
manner,  not  in  the  manner  of  men.'  No- 
thing, I  think,  can  be  plainer  or  more' 
elegant  than  this."  The  bishop's  rendering 
of  the  whole  verse  is — 
"  I  will  not  do  Mioording  to  the  ferronr  of 
my  wrath, 
I  will  not  return  •  to  destroy  Ephraim : 


■  A  beautiful  Hebraism  to  express  the 


336 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[CH.  XL  1—12. 


For  I  am  God,  and  not  man ; 

Holy  iu  the  midst  of  theo,  though  I  in- 
habit not  thy  cities." 
Yer.  10.— They  shall  walk  after  the 
Lord:  he  shall  loar  like  s  lion:  when  he 
shall  roar,  then  the  children  shall  tremble 
from  the  west.  Others  translate,  "After 
the  Lord  shall  they  go  as  after  a  lion  that 
roareth."  But  this  necessitates  a  double 
ellipsis  of  "after  which."  They  would  go 
after  the  Lord  in  obedience  to  his  summons. 
That  summons  is  represented  as  far-reach- 
ing  and  terrible.  Calling  his  people  to 
return,  the  Lord  roars  as  a  lion,  to  denote  at 
once  the  loudness  of  the  call,  and  the  awful 
majesty  of  the  Lord  when  thus  calling  his 
people  to  return.  "  As  a  lion,"  says  Kimchi, 
"  which  roars  that  the  animals  whose  king 
lie  is  may  assemble  to  him,  so  the  Israelites 
shall  assemble  on  hearing  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  when  he  roars."  The  roaring  of  the 
lion  may  signify  his  terrible  judgments  on 
Israel's  enemies,  when  he  calls  his  people 
home  from  the  lands  of  their  dispersion. 

repetition  of  fl  thing ;  in  this  place  it  has 
peculiar  forr«  and  pathos. 


The  result  would  be  a  speedy  return  ol 
his  children  from  the  lands  of  the  West — 
tbe  countries  round  or  beyond  the  Mediter- 
ranean. 

Ver.  11. — They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird 
out  of  Egypt.  The  trembling  here  is  eaf^er 
haste,  or  precipitate  agiLation,  in  wliicli 
they  would  hurry  home,  and  that  from  west 
and  east  and  south — from  west  as  we  infer 
from  ver.  10,  from  Assyria  in  the  east  and 
Egypt  in  the  south.  Tbey  would  thus 
huiTy  as  a  bird  home  to  its  nest  in  the  green- 
wood ;  as  a  dove  no  longer  a  silly  dove,  but 
flying  home  to  its  window.  This  chapter  is 
regarded  by  some  as  ending  here.  Others 
include  yer.  1 2. 

Yer.  12. — Ephraim  oompasseth  me  about 
with  lies,  and  the  honse  of  Israel  with 
deceit :  bnt  Jndah  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and 
is  faithful  with  the  saints.  The  first  clause 
sets  forth  the  faithlessness  and  insincerity 
of  Israel,  and  that  in  contrast  with  Judah. 
Thus  understood,  the  verse  properly  belongs 
to  tbe  present  chapter.  But  others  under- 
stand the  last  clause  differently,  and  deny 
the  contrast,  viz.  "  Judah  is  yet  defiant 
towards  God  and  towards  the  All-Holy  One, 
who  is  faitbfuL" 


HOMILBTICa 

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  rich  display  of  Ood's  mercy,  love,  and  long-suffering.  One  chief 
design  of  Scripture  is  to  recommend  to  sinners  the  goodness  and  grace  of  God  "  The 
whole  Scripture,"  says  Luther, "  aims  especially  at  this,  that  we  doubt  not,  but  certainly 
hope,  trust,  and  believe  that  God  is  gracious,  merciful,  and  long-suffering." 

L  God's  love  is  unmebited.  This  is  evident  from  the  condition  of  Israel  when  he 
became  the  object  of  this  love.  That  condition  was  one  of  childhood,  and  so  of  childish 
ignorance,  of  childish  impotence,  of  childish  folly ;  for  folly  is  bound  up  in  the  heart  of 
a  child.  Nay,  if  we  compare  Ezek.  xvi.  4 — 8,  we  find  the  natural  state  of  the  nation 
to  have  been  still  worse;  that  wretched  state  is  there  vividly  exhibited  under  the 
similitude  of  a  poor  perishing  infant  in  the  most  pitiable  condition.  So  with  persons 
individually  as  well  as  nationally.  When,  to  use  the  figure  of  the  prophet,  we  were 
polluted,  literally  trodden  down,  and  perishing  in  our  own  blood,  he  passed  by  us  and 
looked  upon  us,  and  his  tone  was  a  tone  of  love. 

n.  Qov'a  LOVE  IB  A  LOVE  OF  BENEVOLENCE.  He  calls  Israel  his  son.  Ihe  relation 
of  a  son  to  a  father  is  a  very  near  and  dear  one.  The  privilege  of  sonship  is  very  great. 
David  esteemed  it  no  light  thing  to  be  a  king's  son-in-law.  How  unspeakably  greater 
it  is  to  be  a  son  of  God  by  adoption  as  well  as  by  creation,  and  thus  to  be  an  heir  of 
glory  I  "Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son?  "  God  inquires;  and  again  he  says,  "  I  will  spare 
them,  as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth  him."  But  though  the  privilege  of 
being  a  son  of  God  is  great  and  the  dignity  high,  it  does  not  necessarily  exempt  us 
from  sore  trials  and  severe  snfferings ;  it  rather  secures  for  us  such  paternal  chastening 
as  for  the  present  is  not  joyous  but  grievous,  nevertheless  afterward  productive  of  the 
peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.  Though  Israel  was  God's  son,  yet  Israel  was  for 
years  in  Egypt. 

III.  God's  love  m  a  love  of  BBNBnoENOB.  God  not  only  wishes  well  but  does 
well  to  every  son  whom  he  receiveth  into  his  family.  Though  Israel  had  been  long  in 
Egypt,  he  was  not  allowed  to  remain  there.  God  in  due  time  called  his  son  out  cf 
Egypt.  It  was  a  night  much  to  be  remembered  when  that  call  reached  them.  God 
speaks  the  word  and  it  is  done ;  his  call  is  effectual  for  the  purpose  intended.  However 
great  our  distress,  it  only  requires  a  word  from  God  to  relieve  us ;  and  that  word  is  as 


OH.  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  837 

easily  spoken  as  the  call  which  one  man  addresses  to  another  when  he  would  invite 
him  from  some  distance  to  his  side.  Strange  indeed  it  may  appear  to  us  that  Gud's 
people  Israel  had  been  so  long  left  io  Egypt,  and  equally  strange  it  is  that  the  dearly 
beloved  of  his  soul  are  often  delivered  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies.  "  It  is  a  strange 
sight  indeed  to  see  a  child  of  God,  an  heir  of  heaven,  a  co-heir  with  Jesus  Christ,  one 
dearer  to  God  than  heaven  and  earth,  subject  to  the  power,  the  caprice,  and  lusts  of 
wicked,  base,  ungodly  men ;  yea,  it  may  be,  for  a  time  slaves  to  Satan." 

IV.  God's  love  ib  frequently  unrequited  love.  As  God  by  his  messengers 
called  Israel,  Israel  turned  his  back  upon  those  messengers  and  a  deaf  ear  to  their  call. 
Nay,  like  disobedient  children  or  stubborn  servants,  they  actually  turned  in  the  opposite 
direction.  As  God's  mercy  was  manifested  in  delivering  them  out  of  the  furnacje  of 
affliction  and  then  calling  to  obedience;  so  their  stubbornness  appeared  in,  and  their 
sin  was  aggravated  by,  their  refusal  to  hearken  to  that  call,  and  still  more  by  their 
running  in  a  direction  the  right  opposed.  Thug  we  lead  in  Jeremiah,  "  They  turned 
unto  me  the  back,  and  not  the  face." 

V.  God's  love  is  tender  love.  1.  It  combines  the  tenderness  of  a  parent  with  the 
carefulness  of  a  nurse.  When  the  way  was  dark  and  obscure,  he  guided  them  as  by  tlie 
pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night.  Thus  he  pointed  out  the  way  and 
showed  them  the  direction  in  which  they  were  to  walk.  Thus  he  taught  them  to  go. 
When  obstacles  lay  in  the  way  and  difficulties  blocked  it,  he  lifted  them  up  by  the 
arms  and  carried  them  over  all  hindrances.  Similarly  we  read  in  Deuteronomy,  "  In 
the  wilderness,  where  thou  hast  seen  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee,  as  a  man 
doth  bear  his  son,  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went."  Now  he  took  them  by  the  hand  and 
led  them  again ;  he  lifted  them  up  and  carried  them  in  the  arms,  ever  conducting  them 
in  the  right  way.  2.  So  with  us  all  more  or  less  the  path  in  life  is  untrodden ;  frequently 
we  are  at- a  standstill ;  often  we  are  sorely  perplexed  to  know  which  way  we  should  go ; 
often  and  often  we  go  astray  and  wander  from  the  way.  Again,  there  are  stumbling- 
blocks  in  the  way,  and  we  stumble  and  fall  over  them.  What  need  we  have  to  depend 
on  Divine  love  all  the  way,  ever  praying, "  Lord,  take  us  by  the  hand  and  lead  us  j 
Lord,  hold  up  our  goings  in  thy  paths  that  our  footsteps  slip  not;  L<'rd,  keep  our  feet 
from  falling,  our  eyes  from  tears,  and  our  soul  from  death "  I  3.  The  way  may  be 
strait,  as  when  Israel  was  hemmed  in  between  mountains,  the  sea  before  them  and 
Pharaoh'ij  host  beln'ud ;  or  it  may  be  difficult,  and  so  steep  as  well  as  strait ;  or  it  may 
be  dan<jerous,  for  in  the  way  through  the  wilderness  there  is  the  place  of  lions'  dens 
and  the  mountains  of  the  leopards;  but,  notwithstanding  all  such  drawbacks, -we  have 
reason  to  bless  God  for  leading  us  forth  by  the  right  way.  And  when  we  are  in  greatest 
straits  and  the  way  is  hardest,  we  have  only  to  cry  to  God  in  onr  trouble;  and  as  he 
leil  Israel  of  old,  so  will  he  lead  us  also  forth  by  the  right  way.  "They  shall  come 
with  weeping,  and  with  supplications  will  I  lead  them :  I  will  cause  them  to  walk  by 
the  rivers  of  waters  in  a  straight  way,  wherein  they  shall  not  stumble :  for  I  am  a  Father 
to  Israel,  and  Ephraim  is  my  irstborn."  1'hus  God  not  only  bears  his  people,  but  bears 
with  his  people;  and  commissions  his  ministering  servants  to  do  likewise,  as  he  com- 
manded Moses,  "  Carry  them  in  thy  bosom,  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  sucking 
child." 

VI.  God's  love  is  ebstoeatitb.  In  spite  of  all  God's  love  and  care,  we  run  into 
the  way  of  danger  through  our  own  frowardness  or  folly.  We  stumble  and  fall,  getting 
many  a  sore  bruise  and  severe  knock.  Yet  God  in  his  love  restores  us ;  he  heals  us. 
As  the  child,  when  hurt,  runs  to  the  parent  for  sympathy — to  the  mother  to  kiss  the 
wound  and  make  it  well ;  so,  when  unhappily  we  have  strayed  from  the  way,  and  got 
bruised  and  hurt  and  painfully  wounded  through  our  own  wilfulness,  we  are  encouraged 
to  return  to  God,  and  he  will  heal  us.     God  might,  indeed,  if  he  dealt  with  us  in  strict 

-  justice,  leave  us  to  ourselves  and  to  the  sad  consequences  of  our  own  sinful  waywardness, 
and  refuse  to  lead  us  any  more.  Not  so,  however.  As  he  says  by  the  Prophet  Isaiah, 
"I  have  seen  his  ways,  and  will  heal  him:  I  will  lead  him  also,  and  restore  comforts 
unto  him,  and  to  his  mourners." 

VII.  God's  lovb  is  persuasive  moballt.  not  meohanioallt.  He  deals  with  us  as 
a  rational  being,  treating  us  neither  as  machines  nor  yet  as  *•  dumb  driven  cattle." 
The  lower  animal  must  sometimes  be  drawn,  or  forced  with  a  degree  of  violence  ;  but 
God  does  not  draw  men  in  this  way.     In  drawing  them  he  uses  neither  bard  cords  nor 

HOSEA.  ■ 


338  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xi.  1—12. 

irsQ  bands.  He  draws  ns  by  rational  means,  addressing  himself  to  our  intelligence  and 
appealing  to  our  affections.  Thus  Paul  says,  "  I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what 
I  say."  He  draws  us  by  persuasion  and  argument.  He  draws  us  with  gentleness,  and 
not  by  forcQ.  He  employs  the  mildest  means  and  tiie  tenderest  motives.  He  draws  us 
in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  our  nature.  Made  in  the  image  of  Crod,  originally 
created  in  knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness,  and  still  possessed  of  great  suscepti- 
bilities, strong  affections,  warm  emotions,  and  tender  sensibilities,  we  are  treated  by  God 
with  a  considerate  regard  to  the  high  qualities  with  which  he  has  endowed  us. 
Accordingly  he  draws  us  with  human  cords  and  Divine  love.  The  instrumentality 
employed  is  human,  and  the  love  that  employs  it  is  Divine. 

YIII.  God's  lote  is  alletiatino  lovb.  As  the  humane  husbandman  lightens  the 
labour  of  the  weary  beasts,  and  lifts  up  the  yoke  on  its  jaws  in  order  to  ease  it  and  give 
it  some  respite,  so  God  lifts  up  the  weight  that  presses  on  the  back  of  poor  humanity. 
He  sustains  us  under  om:  burdens,  or  even  shares  with  us  the  load.  Sometimes  he 
removes  the  yoke  entirely  ;  oftener  he  gives  respite  and  refreshment ;  always  he  sanctifies 
the  load  of  laixiur,  or  care,  or  trouble,  or  suffering,  or  sorrow  of  whatever  kind  which 
his  own  hand  has  laid  on  the  back  of  his  people,  and  never  does  he  lay  more  on 
them  than  he  enables  them  by  his  grace  and  strength  to  bear. 

IX.  God's  love  is  satisfying  lovb.  The  figure  is  continued  in  the  words,  "  And  laid 
meat  unto  them."  The  same  kind  hand  that  lifts  up  the  yoke,  by  way  of  respite  and 
relief,  supplies  provender  for  the  purpose  of  refreshment.  God  laid  meat  before  his 
people  in  the  desert,  when  he  rained  down  manna  and  sent  them  quails.  The  same 
bountiful  Benefactor  spreads  a  table  before  us  daily,  and  makes  our  cup  run  over. 
Better  still,  and  surer  token  of  his  love,  is  the  abundant  spiritual  provision  he  has  made 
for  the  souls  of  his  people,  in  giving  them  the  bread  that  cometh  down  from  heaven. 
"  V/e  are  satisfied  with  the  goodness  of  his  house,  even  of  his  holy  temple." 

Vers.  6 — 12. —  The  ingratitude  of  Israel  and  its  punishment.  Both  are  remarkably 
manifest^ed  in  these  verses.     After  all  God's  loving-kindness  they  refuse  to  turn  to  God. 

I.  Their  febvebsenkss.  History  repeats  itself.  This  is  true  ecclesiastically  as  well 
as  civilly,  under  the  Jewish  economy  as  in  the  Christian  dispensation.  Once  before,  at 
an  early  period  in  Hebrew  history  and  on  a  remarkable  occasion,  the  Israelites,  dis- 
couraged by  the  teachings  of  the  spies,  debased  by  previous  servitude,  deficient  in  moral 
c»'iiage,  and,  worst  of  all,  distrustful  of  Divine  providence,  refused  to  march  into 
Canaan.  They  murmured  against  God  and  against  Moses.  "  Back  to  Egypt,"  was 
tlieir  cry.  And  back  they  went,  not  to  Egypt,  but  to  wander  in  the  wilderness  for 
eight  and  thirty  years  longer,  as  a  justly  merited  punishment  for  their  unthankfulness 
and  rebellion  against  God.  Similarly  on  the  occasion  to  which  the  prophet  here  refers. 
They  had  grievously  sinned  against  God,  yet  they  fancied  they  would  fiud  refuge  in 
Egypt ;  they  had  rebelled  and  resisted  all  the  means  employed  to  brin°;  them  back  to 
God,  but  they  would  not  return  to  him.  And  now  they  cry,  like  their  forefathers, 
"  To  Egypt,"  as  if  shelter  and  safety  could  be  obtained  there.  But  God  frustrates  their 
silly,  sinful  purpose.  A  worse  than  the  bondage  of  Egypt  awaits  them ;  they  were 
destined  to  go  into  captivity  to  Assyria.  2.  So  with  stubborn  and  stout-hearted  sinners 
still.  They  will  go  anywhere,  or  resort  to  any  expedient,  even  returning  to  Egypt, 
rather  than  return  to  God.  For  a  time  the  prodigal  would  rather  be  a  swineherd,  and 
share  the  husks  on  which  the  swine  fed,  than  return  to  the  abundance  of  his  fethei's 
house.  "  Some  stubborn  children  care  not  what  miseries  they  suffer  rather  than  return 
and  humble  themselves  to  their  parents ; "  so  some  stubborn  spirits  seem  disposed,  in 
their  folly  and  desperation,  to  return  to  their  former  state  of  bondage  and  misery  rather 
than  repent  and  submit  themselves  to  God.  Let  such  beware  lest,  owing  to  their 
impatience  and  impenitence,  a  worse  thing  befall  them. 

II.  Thxir  fukisbment.  The  three  chief  scourges  by  which  God  chastises  a  dis- 
obedient people  are  famine,  pestilence,  and  the  sword.  1.  Of  the  three,  the  sword  is, 
perhaps,  the  worst.  At  all  events  David  thought  it  so.  When  he  was  called  to  make 
choice  between  seven  years  of  famine,  three  days'  pestilence,  and  three  months'  flight 
Vefore  the  pursuing  sword  of  the  enemy,  he  preferred  falling  into  the  hand  of  God  rather 
than  into  the  hand  of  man,  choosing  the  pestilence  rather  than  the  sword.  2.  And  yet 
tlie  sword  also  has  its  commission  from  God,  as  we  learn  from  the  exclamation  of  the 


OH.  xx.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  839 

prophet,  "0  thou  sword  of  the  Lord,  how  long  will  it  bo  ere  thou  be  quiet?  put  np 
thyself  into  thy  scabbard,  rest,  and  be  still."  But  it  is  added,  in  answer  to  this  Inquiry, 
"How  can  it  be  quiet,  seeing  the  Lord  hath  given  it  a  charge  against  Ashfcelon,  and 
against  the sea-shoie ?  there  hath  he  appointed  it."  3.  The  Prophet  Hosea  pictures  the 
severity  of  the  stroke  either  by  the  wide  area  whichthe  sword  swept  over,  or  the  length 
of  time  it  continued  to  distress  them ;  also  by  the  fact  that  the  cities  which  were  looked 
upon  as  the  strong  fortresses,  at  all  events  the  strengm  of  the  land,  were  the  main  objects 
of  attack.  Elsewhere  in  the  fields  or  open  country  the  ravages  of  war  are  not  quite 
so  dreadful  as  in  the  city  with  its'  crowded  population,  where  human  beings,  densely 
massed  together,  are  literally  mowed  down.  Nor  yet  were  the  villages  sparid,  nor  did 
their  bars'shut  out  the  enemy.  4.  The  duty  of  prayer  is  incumbent  in  time  of  war. 
This  lesson  is  inculcated  by  the  example  of  the  psalmist.  After  speaking  in  the  fifty- 
fifth  psalm  of  having  seen  violence  and  strife  in  the  city,  while  men  hurried  to  and  fro 
upon  the  walls,  with  other  sad  accompaniments  of  troublous  times — ^mischief,  sorrow, 
wickedness,  deceit,  and  guile — ^he  announces  the  course  he  pursued :  "  As  for  me,  I  will 
call  upon  God ;  and  the  Lord  shall  save  me.  Evening,  and  morning,  and  at  noon,  will 
I  pray,  and  call  aloud :  and  he  shall  hear  my  voice ; "  while  peace  and  deliverance  were 
the  happy  outcome  of  his  prayers :  "  He  hath  delivered  my  soul  in  peace  from  the  battle 
that  was  against  me :  for  there  were  many  with  me." 

HL  Theib  fbokenesb  to  backslide.  Froneness  to  backsliding  was  not  peculiar  to 
the  people  or  the  period  of  Hosea's  prophesyings.  The  unregenerate  heart  is  invariably 
the  source  of  backsliding.  When  a  religious  profession  is  influenced  only  by  external 
motive  and  not  by  internal  power,  men  may  be  expected  to  backslide.  In  the  days  of 
our  Lord  it  was  sorrowfully  said  of  some  that  they  went  back  and  walked  no  more  with 
Jesus.  In  seasons  of  religious  revival,  of  many  who  make  a  profession  of  religion,  that 
profession,  in  the  case  of  some,  proceeds  from  an  outward  impulse,  certain  convictions, 
or  even  the  power  of  sympathy,  and  soon  as  the  time  of  excitement  is  over  they  back- 
slide ;  their  convictions  did  net  ripen  into  conversion ;  the  root  of  the  matter  was  never 
in  them.  The  same  is  occasionally  found  in  the  case  of  some  young  communicants.  At 
the  first  communion,  the  boy  in  the  freshness  of  his  youth,  the  g^rl  in  the  purity  of 
her  childhood,  feel  much  ardour  of  affection  and  manifest  much  fervour  of  devotion  ; 
but  what  from  unfavourable  surroundings,  or  evil  communications,  or  little  sins 
unchecked,  the  love  of  their  espousals  grows  cold,  and  backsliding  ensues.  Even  in  the 
case  of  persons  truly  converted,  a  degree  of  coldness  creeps  over  them ;  they  seem  to  grow 
weary  of  the  ways  of  God ;  they  become  apathetic,  and  backslide  for  a  time.  Beware 
of  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit ;  beware  of  resisting  the  strivings  and  stirrings  of  conscience ; 
beware  of  putting  the  hand  to  the  plough  and  then  turning  back  or  turning  aside  to 
folly ;  in  a  word,  beware  of  backsliding.  Be  warned  by  that  solemn  Scripture,  "  If 
any  man  draw  back,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasiue  in  him." 

lY.  The  febflexitt  caused  to  the  Aluiqhtt.  With  reverence  be  it  spoken,  the 
conduct  of  Israel  seems  to  have  puzzled  the  all-merciful  One  himself,  Judgment  was 
<lue,  but  love  holds  it  in  check ;  the  vials  of  wrath  were  ready  to  be  poured  out,  but 
the  voice  of  mercy  intercedes ;  punishment  was  well  deserved,  but  the  hand  of  pity 
pushes  it  aside.  They  had  been  called  to  the  Most  High,  to  acquaint  themselves  with 
him,  to  acknowledge  him,  and  to  accept  him  as  their  God  and  King ;  but  they  stopped 
their  ears  agiunst  those  calls.  They  refused  to  lift  themselves  np  from  their  low 
grovelling  course  of  conduct,  and  they  refused  to  exalt  the  Most  High,  or  to  bless  that 
glorious  Name  which  is  above  all  blessing  and  praise.  We  cannot  exalt  God,  or  make 
him  more  glorious  than  he  is,  "  yet  then  God  accounts  himself  to  be  exalted  when  he 
is  known  and  acknowledged  as  the  high,  supreme,  first  Being ;  when  we  fear  him  as 
God;  when  we  humble  ourselves  before  him  as  before  a  God ;  when  we  are  sensible  of 
the  infinite  distance  there  is  between  him  and  us ;  when  we  are  willing  to  consecrate 
what  we  are,  or  have,  or  can  do,  to  the  furtherance  of  his  praise ;  when  his  will  is  made 
the  rule  of  all  our  ways,  and  especially  of  his  worship ;  when  we  make  him  the  last  end 
of  all ;  when  it  la  the  great  care  of  our  souls  and  work  of  our  lives  to  do  what  possibly 
we  can,  that  he  may  1m  magnified  and  lifted  up  in  the  world ;  and  when  we  account 
the  least  sin  a  greater  evil  than  can  be  recompensed  by  all  the  good  which  heaven  and 
earth  can  afford  us ; — when  we  do  thus,  God  accounts  himself  exalted  by  us."  But 
Israel  had  acted  in  opposition  to  all  this;  hence  the  controversy,  the  perplexity,  the 


840  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xi.  1—12. 

puzzling  quwtiong  which  follow.  Four  questions  are  followed  by  four  answers.  (1) 
"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  "  to  which  the  answer  is,  "  Mine  heart  is  turned 
within  me."  f2)  "How  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel?"  to  which  the  reply  is,  "My 
ropentings  are  kindled  together."  (3)  "  How  shall  I  make  (hee  as  Adniah  ?  "  to  which 
the  response  is,  "  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger."  (4)  "  How 
shall  I  Bet  thee  ai  Zeboim?"  to  which  the  rejoinder  is,  "I  will  not  return  to  destroy 
Ephraim." 

y.  The  pubpose  DENonnoBD.  He  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  his  wrath,  nor 
return  to  destroy  Ephraim,  nor  enter  into  the  city.  Here  we  note  a  remarkable  contrast 
in  God's  dealings  with  us.  He  compares  himself  to  a  man  in  the  exercise  of  mercy.  It 
is  different  in  regard  to  the  execution  of  his  wrath ;  then  he  is  God  and  not'man.  In 
expressing  his  mercy  he  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men ;  in  the  yearnings  of  his  bowels, 
in  the  extent  of  his  mercifulness,  he  expresses  himself  as  man,  though  more,  infinitely 
more,  than  man.  But  when  he  speaks  of  wrath,  he  assures  us  he  is  Gnd  and  not  man. 
A  man  of  war  may,  with  the  soldiers  under  him,  come  upon  a  town  or  city,  capture  it, 
and  plunder  it;  months  or  years  elapse,  and  he  returns  to  the  same  place  again,  lays 
siege  to  it,  and  sacks  it,  leaving  it  in  a  much  worse  state  than  at  first.  But  God  will 
not  so  return  to  destroy.  He  is  God,  not  man.  Free  from  all  the  weakness  of  human 
passion,  from  all  vindictiveness  of  feeling,  from  all  fickleness  of  purpose,  from  all  the 
Uttlenesses  of  the  human  spirit,  he  dues  not  revoke  his  purposes  nor  recall  his  promises 
of  mercy,  neither  does  he  retain  his  anger  for  ever,  nor  renew  the  outpouring  of  the 
vials  of  bis  wrath.  2.  He  is,  besides,  the  Holy  One :  even  in  his  vindicatory  justice  he 
is  holy;  no  unholy  element  of  any  kind  mingles  with  his  wrath.  Holiness  is  at  once 
an  attribute  of  his  nature  and  a  characteristic  of  all  his  administrations.  Oh,  to  be 
holy  as  God  is  holy,  pure  as  Christ  is  pure,  perfect  as  our  heavenly  Father  is  perfect ! 
His  presence  is  with  his  people,  according  to  his  promise,  "  I  will  walk  among  you,  and 
will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  people ; "  nay,  more,  "  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and 
walk  in  them."  4.  When,  in  the  close  of  ver.  9,  God  says,  "I  will  not  enter  into 
the  city,"  it  is  "  to  be  taken  in  reference  to  the  manner  of  God's  proceedings  in  the 
destruction  of  Sodom ;  after  he  had  done  conferring  with  Abraham,  he  entered  into  the 
city,  and  destroyed  it  by  fire  and  brimstone.  Gud  maay  times  stands  at  the  gates  of  a 
city,  ready  to  enter  in  and  destroy  it,  but  humiliation  in  prayer  and  reformation  keep 
him  out.  ...  Oh  I  let  not  our  sins  cause  a  merciful  God  to  go  out,  and  a  provoked  God 
to  enter  in." 

YI.  The  fbediction  uttebed.  1.  The  walking  after  the  Lord  here  predicted  is  to 
follow  the  Lord  whithersoever  he  leadeth.  The  Saviour  is  given  for  a  Leader  to  his 
people ;  he  is  represented  as  the  Captain  of  salvation,  and  just  as  a  good  soldier  follows 
his  superior  officer  at  the  head  of  the  storming  party  or  in  the  perilous  breach,  in  the 
onward  inarch  and  in  the  unwelcome  but  necessary  retreat ;  so  the  Christian  soldier, 
loyal  to  his  Lord,  follows  him  fully,  faithfully,  fearlessly,  through  evil  report  as  well  as 
good  report,  closely,  carefully,  and  constantly.  "  These  are  they  which  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  he  goith."  The  path  may  appear  perilous,  the  way  may  be 
difBcult ;  we  may  have  to  turn  our  backs  on  our  dearest  delights,  on  our  sweetest 
comforts;  we  may  be  ignorant  of  the  immediate  goal  to  which  the  Lord  leads  us,  or 
the  use  be  intends  to  make  of  us,  or  what  he  means  to  do  with  us ;  yet  none  of  these 
things  shall  deter  us.  If  wc  only  make  sure  that  the  Lord  is  leading  us,  we  run  no 
risk  in  following  him ;  and  though  he  lead  us  by  a  way  ihat  we  know  not,  we  are  sure 
it  is  the  right  way,  the  safe  way,  and  in  every  respect  the  best  way  in  the  end.  The 
opposite  course  is  that  pursued  by  those  who  walk,  not  after  the  Lord,  but  after  the 
lusts  of  their  own  hearts,  or  their  own  inclinations,  or  their  own  inventions,  or  their 
own  counsels,  or  the  example  of  wicked  men.  2.  The  prediction  includes  a  hasty 
return  in  obeidience  to  the  Divine  summons.  God's  calling  people  to  return  to  him 
is  not  inaptly  compared  to  the  roaring  of  a  lion.  By  judgments  on  the  adversary,  or 
by  a  solemn  awe  on  the  spirits  of  his  people,  or  by  terrible  things  in  righteousness, 
God  summons  men  to  submission  and  obedience.  3.  When  God  speaks  the  word 
In  whatever  way,  his  children  hurry  home  out  of  many  lands  from  the  far  West, 
the  distant  East,  and  the  remote  South.  Thus  it  is  in  seasons  of  revival,  thug  it 
shall  be  more  literally  in  the  millennial  period,  and  in  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all 
things.    When  the  Spirit  shall  be  poureu  out  from  on  high  in  Pentecostal  power  and  in 


OH.  XI.  1—12,]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  341 


Pentecostal  plenty,  men  shall,  as  at  the  first  Pentecost,  when  they  were  assemhled  from 
many  lands,  join  themselves  to  God's  people.  They  shall  not  only  come  hastily,  hut 
swiftly.  Their  hasty  arrival  is  compared  to  a  flight  reaemhling  that  of  the  dove,  which 
flies  swiftly,  as  implied  in  the  psalmist's  words,  "  Oh  that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove  I  " 
They  shall,  moreover,  arrive  in  great  numbers,  as  doves  fly  in  flocks,  as  implied  in  the 
words  of  the  prophet,  "  Who  are  these  that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves  to  their 
windows  ?  "  4.  A  place  of  rest  is  promised  them.  When  men  walk  after  the  Lord  and 
unite  themselves  lovingly  with  his  people,  they  are  assured  both  of  rest  and  refreshment. 
Whether  this  may  have  had  a  literal  fulfilment,  in  the  return  of  members  of  the  ten 
tribes  from  Assyria  with  their  brethren  of  Judah  from  Babylon, and  others  of  the  same 
people  from  Egypt,  we  do  not  know  for  certain;  but  this  much  is  sure,  that  such  a 
return  of  Goil's  people  to  him  shall  actually  take  place  in  the  day  of  the  restitution  of 
all  things ;  while  its  figurative  application  repeats  itself  in  every  real  revival  of  religion, 
when  sinners,  truly  penitent  like  the  prodigal,  shall  return  from  many  a  far  country  of 
sin  and  shame  and  sorrow  to  their  Father's  house  and  home,  renouncing  the  swineherd's 
husks  for  that  rich  spiritual  abundance  of  bread  enough  and  to  spare. 

VII,  The  pretences  of  Israel.  The  people  of  Israel,  or  the  ten  tribes  with  Bphraim 
at  their  head,  that  is,  rulers  and  ruled,  are  here  charged  with  lies  and  deceit.  Their 
professions  of  worship  were  nothing  better  than  lying  pretences ;  their  political  schemes 
were  little  less  than  deceitful  manoeuvres.  Their  piety  and  their  policy  were  alike  hollow 
and  futile.  With  such  false  worship  and  carefully  devised  strokes  of  policy,  which  were 
but  deceitful  tricks,  they  compassed  God  as  though  they  conld  deceive  the  omniscieiit 
One  himself.  The  following  illustration  from  an  old  divine  seems  apt,  though  homely : 
"  I  am,  in  respect  of  their  sins,  as  a  man  beset  round,  who  would  have  egress,  but  when 
he  goes  one  way  there  he  is  stopped,  and  another  way  he  is  stopped  there  too.  God 
compares  himself  to  such  a  man,  as  if,  in  going  on  in  the  ways  of  mercy,  he  is  there 
stopped  by  some  course  of  sin,  and  entering  on  another  part  he  is  there  stopped  again." 
How  many  there  are  whoso  acts  of  worship  are  so  many  solemn  liesl  Their  pro- 
fessions of  piety  are  mere  pretences ;  their  prayers  may  be  eloquent  and  comprehensive, 
but  they  do  not  proceed  from  the  heart;  their  presence  in  the  sanctuary  is  only  bodily, 
their  thoughts  being  away  about  their  worldly  business,  or  roaming  over  mountains  of 
vanity.  Many  there  are  who  are  ready  to  acknowledge  God,  his  greatness  and  glory, 
his  glorious  majesty,  his  almighty  power,  his  infinite  wisdom,  and  his  sovereign  disposal 
of  all  human  affairs ;  but  they  do  not  realize  the  august  nature  of  the  Divine  attributes, 
nor  the  wondrous  workings  of  his  providence.  Many,  too,  confess  their  great  sinfulness, 
and  profess  deep  humiliation  on  account  of  it ;  but  their  confession  is  not  accompanied 
by  contrition,  nor  is  their  professed  humiliation  either  provable  by  facts  or  practical  in 
its  effects.  3.  Strange,  passing  strange,  it  is  that  men  thus  impose  on  themselves,  or 
attempt  to  deceive  God  1  "  They  did  flatter  him  with  their  mouth,"  says  the  psalmist, 
"  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues."  And  if  this  is  the  conduct  men  venture 
on  in  relation  to  Qoi,  how  much  more  likely  they  are  to  compass  their  fellow-men  with 
lies,  or  overreach  them  by  deceit  I  If  they  carry  their  deceit  into  the  sacred  exercises 
of  religion  and  the  solemn  services  of  the  sanctuary,  how  much  more  may  we  expect  to 
find  fraudulent  transactions  and  deceitful  dealings  in  their -intercourse  with  fellow-men  1 

VIII.  The  fbe-eminbnoe  of  Jitdab,  While  Israel  or  the  ten  tribes  were  besetting 
Gud  with  their  lies  and  provoking  him  by  deceit,  their  worship  being  idolatrous  and 
their  service  false,  Judah  for  so  far  continueti  in  the  true  worship.  With  not  a  few 
drawbacks  and  many  defects,  they  had  hitherto  adhered  to  the  ordinances  he  had 
prescribed,  the  place  he  had  chosen,  and  the  mode  and  ministers  of  religion  he  had 
appointed.  Such  is  the  drift  of  the  verse  according  to  the  Authorized  Version, 
Assuming  this  to  be  the  right  rendering,  we  find  Israel  left  without  excuse.  They 
could  not  plead  the  example  of  Judah,  If  an  evil  example  had  been  set  them  by 
Judah,  it  might  have  in  some  sort  extenuated,  but  could  not  have  excused,  sin  in  IsraeL 
The  absence  of  such  example  was  no  small  aggravation  of  their  guilt,  3,  It  redounded 
to  the  honour  of  Judah  that  in  the  day  of  Israel's  defection  they  persevered  in  the  way 
of  truth,  and  maintained  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah,  It  Is  recorded  to  the  credit  of 
those  Sardians  who  remained  faithful  in  »  corrupt  place  and  a  degenerate  age,  "  Thou 
hast  a  few  names  even  in  Sardis  which  have  nut  ilellled  their  garments;  and  they  shall 
walk  with  me  in  white :  for  they  are  worthy,"     4,  When  we  serve  UoJ  we  reii;n  with 


342  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  xi.  1—12. 

him.  It  is  righteousness  that  exalts  a  nation  and  elevates  an  individual.  To  serve 
God  is  our  highest  glory,  and  to  enjoy  him  our  greatest  happiness.  To  serve  God 
is  the  most  honourable  service ;  hence  our  blessed  Lord  has  made  us  kings  as  well 
as  priests  unto  God.  Luther,  commenting  on  this  verse,  speaks  of  certain  errurists  "  not 
venturing  to  embrace  the  true  doctrine  for  fear  their  rule  should  be  lost.  So  is  it  with 
many  people ;  they  are  afraid  of  the  loss  of  their  rule  if  they  should  entertain  the  true 
ways  of  God's  worship ;  they  think  that  the  true  ways  of  God's  worship  cannot  consist 
with  their  rule  and  power,  and  therefore  they  had  rather  retain  them  and  let  the  true 
worship  of  God  go," 


HOMILIES  BT  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — OaMed  out  of  Egypt.  These  words  refer  primarily,  of  course,  to  the  bktorical 
event  of  the  Exodus.  But  they  are  also  prophetic  words,  and  as  such  they  have  been 
already  verified,  and  still  await  further  verification.  Wlien  a  stone  is  thrown  into  a 
pond,  a  series  of  ever-enlarging  concentric  rings  is  formed,  which  extend  perhaps  to  the 
banks  of  the  water ;  so  in  like  manner,  although  the  first  fulfilment  of  a  prophecy  may 
he  near  at  hand,  the  prediction  may  also  receive  various  further  and  wider  fulfilments, 
until  at  last  it  is  completely  verified,  on  the  largest  scale,  at  the  end  of  the  world.  The 
words  before  us  have  several  applications.    They  apply — 

L  To  THB  Jewish  nation.  God  elected  Israel  as  his  "  firstborn  son  "  among  the 
nations  (Exod.  iv.  22),  thus  constituting  the  Hebrews  the  aristocracy  of  the  human 
race.  He  set  his  love  upon  them  when  they  were  a  community  of  slaves.  He  heard 
their  groaning  by  reason  of  their  bondage.  When  the  people  were  lying  like  toads 
under  the  harrows  of  their  taskmasters,  he  interposed  to  save  them.  He  raised  up  Moses 
to  be  their  emancipator.  Jeliovah  wrought  on  their  behalf  the  ten  plagues  of  Egypt. 
He  led  them,  by  a  mighty  miracle,  through  the  bed  of  the  Bed  Sea,  while  Pharaoh  and 
his  army  perished  in  the  waters.  Jehovah  protected  and  supported  and  guided  Israel 
in  the  wilderness.  He  rained  bread  from  heaven  upon  them,  and  brought  them  streams 
aliio  out  of  the  rock.  He  kept  their  clotlies  and  shoes  from  wearing  out.  He  led  them 
by  the  cloudy  pillar.  He  delivered  them  from  their  enemies.  He  entered  into  covenant 
with  them,  taught  them  his  Word  and  will,  and  brought  them  at  last  into  a  goodly 
inheritance  in  Canaan.  No  other  nation  ever  received  such  marks  of  honour.  To  Israel 
alone  "pertained  the  adoption"  (Bom.  ix.  4). 

II.  To  Jesus  Chbist.  Matthew  says  that  this  word  of  Hosea  was  fulfilled  when  the 
Child  Jesus  was  brought  up  out  of  Egypt  (Matt.  ii.  16).  If  Israel  was  "  God's  son,  even 
his  firstborn,"  Jesus  is  "  the  only-begotten  Son,  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father." 
The  history  of  Israel  typified  and  foreshadowed  his  career.  He  is  the  true  seed  of 
Abraham,  the  true  Representative  of  the  ancient  Hebrew  nation.  "  All  the  magnificence 
of  prophecy,  limited  to  Israel,  would  be  bombast ;  Christ  alone  fulfils  the  idea  which 
Israel  stood  for"(F.  W.  Robertson).  The  paternal  love  of  God  was  exhibited  more 
richly  in  the  protection  and  deliverance  of  his  holy  Child  Jesus  than  even  in  the  great 
blessing  of  the  Exodus.  It  was  to  avoid  the  danger  of  destruction  that  the  infant 
Saviour  and  his  mother  were  taken  down  into  Egypt.  The  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
just  now  a  wailing  infant,  must  hide  for  a  little  season  under  the  shadow  of  the 
Pyramids.  By-and-by  he  shall  be  "called  out  of  Egypt"  to  return  to  the  Holy  Land, 
and  to  become  at  length  what  Israel  ought  to  have  been — the  great  Witness  for  God,  and 
Teacher  of  his  will  to  all  the  nations  of  the  world. 

UI.  To  THE  Chbistian.  Believers  are  all  the  sons  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 
And  the  redemption  from  Egypt  was  a  type  of  deliverance  through  him  from  sin  and 
death.  Just  as  to  the  Hebrews  in  the  time  of  Hosea  "Egypt"  stood  for  Assyria,  or 
Babylon,  or  any  land  which  they  were  to  associate  with  a  state  of  bondage  (ch.  viii.  13 ; 
ix.  3,  6),  so  now  to  ua  Gentiles  "  Egypt "  is  the  symbol  of  our  unregenerate  state,  and 
the  Egyptian  bondage  is  a  type  of  the  bondage  of  sin.  All  men  are  by  nature  the 
slaves  of  sin,  and  Satan  is  a  much  harder  taskmaster  than  the  Egyptian  overseers.  The 
natural  man  labours  helplessly  under  the  burden  of  evil.  But  God  calls  his  people 
"  out  of  Egypt "  with  an  effectual  and  a  holy  calling.  He  redeems  the  believer  from 
the  bondage  of  guilt  (Gal.  iii.  13),  from  subjection  to  the  Law  (GaL  iv.  6),  and  from 


CH.  XL  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSE  A.  843 

the  riavery  of  sin  (Titus  li.  14).  The  very  word  "  Eedeemer,"  which  is  so  dear  to  the 
renewed  heart,  was  first  consecrated  as  a  sacred  name  at  the  time  when  God  "called  his 
Son  out  of  Egypt."  To  the  Christian  the  song  of  Moses  is  also  the  song  of  the  Lamb 
(Bev.  XT,  3) ;  and  the  preface  to  the  ten  commandments  (Exod.  xx.  2)  expresses  the 
most  forcible  and  yet  tender  of  all  inducements  to  lead  a  holy  life. 

IV.  To  THE  HOLT  CATHOLIC  Chuboh.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  the  true  Israel,  God's 
adopted  firstborn  son.  And  this  world,  in  which  the  Church  presently  sojourns,  may 
be  compared  to  the  land  of  bondage.  It  is  "  this  present  evil  world ; "  and  God's  people 
look  to  be  delivered  from  it,  just  as  ancient  Israel  expected  deliverance  from  Egypt. 
The  time  is  fast  coming  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  finally  redeem  his  people  from  all 
eviL  Often  in  the  New  Testament  the  word  "  redemption "  is  used  to  denote  the 
consummation  of  the  Church's  hope.  Jesos  told  his  disciples  that  the  occurrence  of  the 
signs  of  his  second  advent  would  announce  to  them  that  their  "  redemption  was  drawing 
nigh "  (Luke  xxi.  28).  The  whole  Church  is  waiting  for  "  the  redemption  of  our 
bc^y "  (Bom.  riii.  23).  Here,  though  believers  "  serve  the  Law  of  God  with  their 
mind,"  they  yet  groan  constantly  under  the  burden  of  indwelling  sin.  But  the  hope 
of  Israel — "  that  blessed  hope  " — ^is  that  Jehovah  shall  "  call  him  out  of  Egypt."  The 
Lord  Jesus  shall  one  day  translate  his  Church  to  heaven — ^the  land  of  perfect  spiritual 
freedom  and  eternal  joy.  There  bondage  shall  in  every  sense  be  gone  for  ever.  So  long 
as  Israel  is  in  this  world,  he  is  "  a  child ; "  but  in  glory  he  shall  become  a  man,  and 
"  put  away  childish  things."  God  loves  him  now  as  a  child ;  and  his  adopting  grace  is 
the  pledge  that  the  ransomed  Church  shall  one  day  stand  by  the  glassy  sea,  and  sing 
the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb, — C.  J. 

Vers.  1^-4. — Crowned  with  tender  mercie$.  This  is  an  extremely  beautiful  passage. 
It  recalls,  in  a  few  most  touching  expressions,  Jehovah's  love  and  condescension  and 
tenderness  towards  his  ancient  people.  But,  alas !  the  very  record  of  God's  kindness 
becomes  the  means  of  throwing  into  deeper  relief  the  blackness  of  Israel's  sin. 

I.  God's  eindlt  dealings  with  Israel.  These  had  been  manifested  continually — 
in  the  infancy  of  the  nation,  during  its  childhood,  and  throughout  its  youth  and 
manhood.  Jehovah  had  been  to  the  Hebrew  people :  1.  A  loving  Father.  (Ver.  1.) 
He  loved  them,  and  chose  them  to  be  his  own  inheritance.  He  spoke  of  Israel  as  his 
"  son,"  even  during  the  bondage  in  Egypt  (Exod.  iv.  22).  He  showed  his  fathi-rly 
love  by  accomplishing  for  his  people  the  grand  deliverance  of  the  Exodus.  And  the  Lord 
is  the  same  still  to  the  spiritual  Israel.  Those  blessings  which  were  shadowed  forth  in 
the  theocratic  adoption  belong  now  to  Christians.  We  are  "predestinated  unto  the 
adoption  of  children  by  Jesus  Christ  to  himself  (Eph.  i.  5).  The  believer  receives  the. 
nature  of  God.  He  bears  his  Name.  He  enjoys  free  access  to  him.  He  obtains  needed 
protection  and  provision.  He  is  subjected  to  suitable  training  and  discipline.  And  he 
has  an  eternal  inheritance  in  reversion  (1  John  iii.  1, 2).  2.  A  careful  Nurse.  (Ver.  3.) 
Jehovah  had  himself  tended  his  son  Israel  during  the  forty  years  of  childhood  in  the 
Arabian  desert.  He  "bare  him"  (Deut,  i.  31),  "took  him  by  the  hand"  (Jer.  xxxi. 
32),  and  tenderly  supported  him.  As  a  nursing  father,  he  had  used  soft  and  kindly 
leading-strings.  He  knew  his  people's  needs.  He  was  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
their  infirmities."  He  took  upon  himself  the  entire  charge  of  the  nation.  For  their 
schooling  he  gave  them  object-lessons — setting  up  the  tabernacle  and  its  ritual  as  a 
spiritual  "  kindergarten."  When  they  wandered  from  him  he  brought  them  back,  and 
patiently  "  healed  them  "  from  those  distresses  which  their  apostasy  had  entailed.  And 
God  is  the  same  careful  Nurse  to  his  spiritual  children.  He  bears  the  believer,  and 
bears  with  him.  The  Holy  Spirit  teaches  the  child  of  God  "  to  go,"  and  "  leads  him  in 
the  way  everlasting."  He  raises  him  when  he  falls,  heals  his  bruises,  and  is  "  a  very 
present  Help  in  trouble."  The  path  of  duty  may  lead  the  believer  into  slippery  places, 
but  "underneath  are  the  everlasting  arms  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27).  3.  A  kindly  Monitor. 
(Ver.  4,  first  part.)  If  ver.  1  refers  to  the  Exodus,  and  ver.  3  to  the  forty  years  in  the 
wilderness,  ver.  4  may  be  applied  to  Jehovah's  dealings  with  Israel  throughout  his 
eirtke  history  m  a  nation.  All  along  the  Lord  treated  his  people,  not  as  prisoners  or 
slaves,  but  as  sons.  He  "drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man;"  i.e.  his  methods  of  govern- 
ment were  humane,  and  had  their  seat  in  reason.  He  drew  them  "  with  bands  of  love;" 
i.e.  his  arguments  or  influences  were  tender  and  persuasive.    The  mercies  showered 


344  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xi.  1—12. 

upon  Israel  were  countless.  The  Divine  forbearance  with  the  people  was  wonderful. 
One  special  mark  of  God's  favour  was  his  raising  up  the  prophets,  one  after  another,  to 
"  call  them"  (ver.  2)  from  their  idols,  and  to  "  draw  them  "  back  to  himself.  And  does 
not  the  Lord  deal  just  thus  with  men  still  ?  His  methods  of  touching  the  heart  are 
humane  and  affectionate.  We  see  the  "gentleness"  of  God  in  his  kindly  providence, 
in  his  wonderful  redemption,  and  in  the  means  and  motives  towards  holiness  which  he 
employs.  He  calls  to  the  sinner,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  leason  together  "  (Isa.  i.  18). 
He  tells  the  believer  that  a  consecrated  life  is  "  your  reasonable  service  "  (Rom.  xii.  1) 
4.  A  considerate  Master.  (Ver.  4,  second  part.)  The  Lord  di  I  not  act  towards  Israel 
as  brute  beasts  are  often  treated  by  ungentle  drivers.  A  kind  farmer  treats  his  ox 
humanely,  both  when  it  is  treading  out  the  corn  and  when  it  is  feeding  in  the  stall ;  he 
withdraws  the  muzzle,  or  loosens  the  yoke-strap,  that  the  animal  may  cat  with  comfort. 
Now,  God  had  always  acted  so  towards  the  Hebrews.  In  the  innumerable  blessings 
which  he  sent  them,  in  the  means  of  grace  which  he  maintained  amongst  them,  and  in 
the  immunities  which  they  enjoyed  as  his  chosen  people,  God  said  to  them,  "  My  yoke 
is  easy."  So,  in  like  manner,  does  the  Lord  still  deal  with  his  redeemed  people.  He 
"  removes  their  shoulder  from  the  burden,"  taking  oflf  the  yoke  of  guilt,  the  yoke  of 
sin,  the  yoke  of  the  Law,  the  yoke  of  unrest,  the  yoke  of  fear.  And  he  "  lays  me«t 
unto  them  " — "  the  hidden  manna"  of  his  grace,  and  "  the  fatness  of  his  house," 

II.  Israel's  vile  teeatment  of  God.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  The  nation  had  proved  alto- 
gpther  im*orthy  of  its  sunny  and  glorious  past.  The  people  had  been :  1.  Ungrateful. 
They  persistently  forgot  both  the  fact  of  their  redemption  and  the  continued  presence 
of  their  Redeemer.  The  prophets  "  called  them,"  but  in  vain.  God  "  healed  them," 
but  they  ascribed  their  deliverances  to  others.  2.  Unfaithful.  Israel  requited  the 
tender  love  of  Jehovali  with  base  apostasy.  They  opposed  and  rejected  him,  "  They 
turned  their  back  unto  him,  and  not  their  face  "  (Jer.  ii.  27).  They  shamefully  denied 
him  by  their  sacrifices  to  Baal.  3.  Obstinate  in  their  wickedness.  The  career  of  the 
northern  kingdom  especially  had  been  one  of  universal  and  continuous  desertion.  People 
and  priests,  princes  and  kings,  had  alike  conspired  to  return  hatred  for  Jehovah's  love. 
And  now,  at  length,  Bphraim's  hour  of  gracious  opportunity  seemed  past.  Only  by  a 
miracle  could  the  avalanche  of  judgment  be  arrested.  What  a  lesson  to  ourselves  is 
unfolded  in  this  representation  of  the  outrageous  guilt  of  'Israel  I  We  must  beware  o( 
trusting  in  our  national  advantages  or  our  spiritual  privileges.  How  often  have  we, 
too,  acted  ungratefully  and  unfaithfully  I  God's  wonderful  tender  merdea  are  A  lore 
aggravation  of  our  sin. 

"  Lord,  with  what  care  hast  thou  begirt  ns  ronnd  I 
Parents  flrst  season  us.     Then  schoolmasten 
Deliver  us  to  laws.    They  send  us  bound 
To  rules  of  reason.    Holy  messengers ; 
Ful  pits  and  Sundays  ;  sorrow  dogging  gin ; 
Afflictions  sorted ;  anguish  of  all  sizes ; 
Fine  nets  and  stratagems  to  oatch  us  in  I 
Bibles  laid  open ;  millions  of  surprises ; 
Blessings  beforehand ;  ties  of  gratefulness; 
The  sounds  of  glory  ringing  in  our  ears ; 
Without,  our  shame ;  within,  our  consoienoei , 
Anguls  and  grace ;  eternal  hopes  and  fears  I 
Yet  all  these  fences,  and  their  whole  array. 
One  cunning  bosom  sin  blows  quite  away." 

(George  Herbert.) 

a  J. 

Ver.  4, — TJie  magnet  of  love.  "  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of 
love."  These  words  refer,  in  the  first  instance,  to  ancient  Israel,  and  remind  us  how 
kindly  and  tender  had  been  the  Lord's  dealings  with  them.  In  applying  the  text  to 
ourselves,  we  shall  consider  it  under  two  aspects.    We  have  here — 

I.   A  EBPEBSBNTATION  OF  God's  WAT  OP   DEALING   WITH   MEN.      The   SUpreiOS  pOWOr 

over  the  world  of  mankind  is  not  the  relentless  power  of  natural  law.  The  forces  oli 
nature  dominate  the  physical  universe ;  but  man  is  a  moral  being,  and  is  conscious  of 


OH.  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOS  OF  HOSEA.  846 

moral  freedom.  The  force  which  draws  his  mind  is  reason — "  cords  of  a  man ;"  and  th« 
power  which  iufluences  his  heart  is  tenderness — "  bands  of  love."  God  uses  these 
forces :  1.  In  his  common  providence.  His  love  for  his  creatures  is  analogous  to  parental 
affection  :  it  is  as  human,  and  more  tender  than  that  of  a  mother  for  her  child.  His 
mercy  is  long-suffering  and  indestructible.  It  leads  him  "daily  to  load  us  with 
benefits."  And  even  the  cords  of  afiSiction  with  which  he  sometimes  binds  us  are 
"  bands  of  love  "  cast  around  us  to  draw  us  to  himself.  2.  In  the  plan  of  redemption, 
"  The  Word  was  made  flesh  "  in  order  to  draw  men  by  cords  of  human  sympathy. 
What  blessing  the  Incarnation  has  brought  to  the  reason  of  manl  In  looking  upon  the 
Lord  Jesus  Clirist  we  see  truth  in  the  concrete.  He  is  himself  "the  Truth,  "the 
Word  of  Life." 

"  Though  truths  in  manhood  darkly,  join 
Deep-seated  in  our  mystic  frame, 
We  yield  all  blessing  to  the  Nama 
Of  him  that  made  them  current  ooint 

"  For  Wisdom  dealt  with  mortal  powers, 
AVhere  truth  in  closest  words  shall  fidl, 
When  truth  embodied  in  a  tale 
Bhall  enter  in  at  lowly  doors. 

'  And  so  tlie  Word  had  breath,  and  wiDueht 
With  human  hands  the  creed  of  creeds 
In  loveliness  of  perfect  deeds, 
More  strong  than  all  poetic  thought." 

(TennyaoB.) 

What  blessing,  also,  the  Incarnation  has  brought  to  the  heart  of  man  1  The  Lord  Jmus 
is  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  He  was  the  "  Son  of  Mary,"  and  he  "  shed 
the  human  tear."  So  he  is  qualified,  as  our  merciful  and  sympathizing  High  Priest,  to 
enter  into  all  our  feelino;8,  and  thereby  to  bind  us  to  himself  and  to  God.  3.  in  the 
invitations  of  the  gospel.  The  Lord,  in  these,  appeals  to  us  as  rational  and  moral 
beings.  The  invitation,  e.g.,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together  "  (Isa.  i,  18), 
suggests  that  the  most  rational  of  all  the  actions  of  the  human  mind  is  to  accept  of 
Christ  as  the  Saviour;  and  that  a  life  of  faith  in  him  is  the  only  reasonable  and  manly 
and  truly  successful  life.  The  gospel  voices,  moreover,  are  "  bands  of  love."  The 
prodigal  son,  so  soon  as  he  returned  to  reason,  was  led  by  the  remembrance  of  his 
father's  love  to  return  home  (Luke  xv.  17, 18).  And,  similarly,  the  love  of  God  is  the 
loadstar  which  leads  poor  sinners  to  himself.  4.  Jn  the  appointed  mean$  of  graoe. 
Take :  (1)  The  Word  of  God.  The  Bible  is  a  Divine  Book,  but  it  is  also  intensely  human. 
The  sacred  writers  display  everywhere  a  profound  knowledge  of  human  nature.  The 
spirit  of  the  Book  is  humane  and  tender ;  it  draws  "  with  bands  Of  love."  In  the  uni- 
versities of  Scotland,  the  Professor  of  Latin  is  usually  called  "  Professor  of  Humanity," 
from  the  supposed  beneficial  effects  of  the  study  of  Soman  literature ;  but  surely 
the  supreme  humanizing  influence  in  letters  is  the  Word  of  God.  (2)  The  locra- 
mentt.  As  "  signs,"  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  "  cords  of  •  man."  They 
appeal  to  the  physical  senses  as  well  as  to  mind  and  heart.  They  are  like  pictures  or 
illustrative  diagrams  of  the  great  truths  of  redemptioq.  The  sacraments  are  also 
"  seals ; "  and,  as  such,  "  bands  of  love."  Each  of  them  is,  as  it  were,  a  keepsake,  or 
love-token,  given  by  the  Redeemer  to  his  Church.  Once  more,  take  (3)  Prayer,  Prayer 
is  the  converse  with  God  of  his  human  children.  It  has  for  its  key-note  the  child's 
cry,  "  Our  Father."  It  is  the  voice  of  childlike  trust  in  the  humanity,  the  tenderness, 
the  fother-pity  of  our  Maker  and  Redeemer.  6.  A*  the  motive-poiaere  to  holines$  (^ 
life.  Our  text  expresses  the  master  consideration  which  impels  the  believer  to  %  career 
of  Christian  consecration.  The  Apostle  Paul  urges  the  same  in  Rom.  xii.  1 :  "  Your 
reasonable  service,"  t.e.  " cords  of  a  man ; "  "by  the  mercies  of  God,"  i.e.  " bands  of 
love."  The  meaning  is  that  in  a  life  of  devotion  to  Gud  all  the  rational  faculties  find 
their  chief  end,  and  that  to  such  a  life  "  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us." 

II.  A  LESSON  OF  CONDUCT  FOR  0UBSELTK8.  The  words  before  us  reveal  the  secret  of 
influence.  They  point  out  the  magnet  with  which  we  are  to  attract  our  fellow-men  in 
all  the  relations  of  life.  God  Almighty  draws  with  the  loadstone  of  love ;  and  in  this 
we  are  to  be  "  imitator*  of  God,  as  dear  children  "  (Eph.  v.  1).    Here  is  a  lesson  to :  L 


346  TUB  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  t<ffl.xi.  1— 12. 

PartnU.  The  family  bond  is  love.  We  must  throw  "  corda  of  a  man  "  around  our 
children,  if  we  would  train  them  to  live  to  the  Redeemer.  Our  training  must  be 
humane,  and  in  harmony  with  the  moral  nature  of  its  subjects.  A  father  ought,  as 
soon  as  possible,  to  enlist  his  child's  reason  on  tlie  side  of  obedience.  When  our 
children  do  well,  let  us  praise  them  without  stint.  When  they  do  wrong,  and  we  must 
show  displeasure,  let  ua  welcome  the  earliest  tokens  of  penitence,  and  be  rery  ready  to 
forgive.  Next  to  Divine  grace  itself,  the  bands  of  paternal  love  are  the  strongest  that 
can  attract  the  child-heart.  2.  Teachers.  Humaneness  of  spirit  is  the  mainspring  of 
an  educator's  influence.  The  most  effectual  stimulus  to  learn  is  not  that  which  is 
supplied  by  the  rod,  but  that  which  is  given  by  the  "  cords  of  a  man."  The  secret  of 
Dr.  Arnold's  influence  at  Rugby  was  his  intense  human  sympathy,  added  to  the  regal 
supremacy  of  his  spiritual  character.  In  sabbath  school  work,  espfcially,  we  must  use 
tliese  "  cords  "  and  "  bands ; "  we  must  come  to  our  classes  "  in  love,  and  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness."  3.  Pastor*.  The  preacher  is  to  be  himself  a  man,  every  inch  of  him. 
His  influence  in  the  community  ought  to  be  a  masculine  influence.  He  is  to  be  "a 
preacher  of  righteousness."  And  he  must  take  care  to  use  "  bands  of  love."  His  life- 
work  is  to  "  win  "  souls;  and  there  is  no  way  of  winning  without  love  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1).. 
Like  the  high  priest,  the  pastOT  ought  to  be  one  "  who  can  bear  gently  with  the  Ignorant 
and  erring  "  (Ueb.  v.  2).  No  Christian  teacher  has  ever  been  more  successful  than  the 
Apostle  Paul;  and  Paul  drew  "  with  cords  of  a  man"  (1  Cor.  ix.  19 — 23),  and  "with 
bands  of  love  "  (1  Thess.  iL  7,  8).  4.  Employers.  This  relationship,  alike  in  business 
and  domestic  life,  should  be  characterized  by  kindness.  Masters  ought  to  "  forbear 
threatening "  (E[)h.  vi.  9),  and  extend  sympathy  and  confidence  to  their  workmen. 
The  responsibilities  of  an  employer  do  not  end  with  the  punctual  payment  of  wages. 
He  is  not  to  think  of  his  workmen  merely  as  "  hands,"  t.e.  as  machines  by  using  which 
he  hopes  to  make  money ;  but  rather  as  his  own  flesh  and  blood,  in  whose  welfare  he 
ought  to  take  a  warm  interest.  And  so,  also,  in  the  sphere  of  domestic  service.  Mis- 
tresses ought  to  treat  their  servants  as  part  of  the  family,  and  see  to  their  comfort  as 
they  see  to  their  own.  Happiness  will  enter  our  households  through  the  door  which 
has  written  over  it  these  words :  "  I  drew  them  with  bands  of  love."  5.  Neighbours, 
in  their  mutual  intercourse.  We  who  profess  to  be  Christ's  people  ought  to  show  the 
grace  that  dwells  in  us  by  striving  to  be  eminent  in  courtesy  and  gentleness.  We 
ought  to  be  so  even  to  the  ungodly  and  profane,  and  to  those  who  treat  us  as  enemies. 
"  A  soft  answer  turneth  away  wrath."  And  if  love  is  the  fire  that  will  melt  an  enemy, 
is  it  not  also  the  tie  which  binds  believers  together  into  a  goodly  fellowship  ?  A  strong 
and  healthy  Church  is  one  the  members  of  which  "  increase  and  abound  in  lore  one 
toward  another,  and  toward  all  men  "  (1  Thess.  iii.  12). 

CoNCLCSioH.  To  draw  with  these  "cords"  and  "bands"  is  always,  at  \east,  self- 
rewarding.  It  is  true  that  love  will  sometimes  fail  with  its  object.  Jehovah  himself 
failed  with  Ephraim  during  long  centuries.  Similarly,  some  whom  we  attempt  to  draw 
may  say  persistently,  "Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder, and  cast  away  their  cords 
from  us."  In  such  circumstances  we  ought  to  remember  that  duty  is  ours,  and  that 
results  are  with  Qod.  "  Though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall  I  be  glorious  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  my  Qod  shall  be  my  Strength  "  (l^a,  xliz.  6). — C.  J. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — ITie  Divine  goodness  despised.  Ephraim  had  acted  as  if  the  mercy  of 
God  were  unconditional ;  and  he  persistently  contravened  the  one  condition,  viz. 
repentance,  upon  which  alone  that  favour  could  be  continued.  He  was  thus  guilty  of 
despising  the  Divine  loving-kindness ;  and  hence  these  words  of  grievous  denunciation. 
We  learn  from  them — 

I.  Thb  follt  of  oabnal  oonfidenoes.  (Yer.  6.)  The  ten  tribes  had  followed 
"their  own  counsels,"  but  these  were  the  result  of  wicked  infatuation.  The  calves 
which  the  men  of  Israel  kissed  led  to  the  national  ruin.  Egypt  would  afford  the  tribes 
no  asylum;  there  was  no  hope  of  relief  from  lier  as  kn  auxiliary  against  Assyria.  It 
was  indeed  strange  that  the  people  should  think  of  returning  to  E^ypt,  the  land  of 
their  ancient  bondage.  Now,  however,  they  are  to  endure  a  more  dreadful  tyranny  than 
their  fathers  bad  suffered  there.  The  devouring  sword  of  the  Assyrian  is  to  make  the 
round  of  the  cities  of  Israel.  The  northern  kingdom,  with  its  rich  territory  and  its  sacred 
places — Shiloh,  Shechem,  Ebal  and  Gerizim,  Sharon,  Carmel,  and  the  valley  of  Jezreel— 


XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  847 

is  to  paas  into  the  possession  of  the  heathen.  Such  was  only  the  natural  result  of  Israel's 
wickedness,  and  it  stands  in  history  as  an  affecting  warning  against  ungodly  counsels. 
"  Cursed  be  the  man  tbat  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart 
departeth  from  the  Lord"  (Jer.  xvii.  5 — 8).  "My  brethren,  it  is  a  great  mercy  of  God 
to  be  so  wholly  taken  from  all  carnal  props,  from  all  vain  shifts  and  hopes,  as  to  be 
thoroughly  convinced  that  there  is  no  help  in  any  thing,  or  in  any  creature,  in  heaven 
and  earth,  but  only  in  turning  to  God,  and  casting  the  soul  down  before  mercy;  if  that 
saves  me  not,  I  am  undone  for  ever  "  (Jeremiah  Burroughs,  in  loc). 

II.  The  poweb  of  sin  to  hold  fast  the  soiHi.  (Ver.  7.)  Israel  was  "bent  on 
backsliding  "  from  Jehovah.  They  were  "  fastened  to  defection  "  (Calvin) ;  or,  *•  impaled 
upon  apostasy  as  upon  a  stake  "  (Eeil).  The  prophets  "  called  "  and  exhorted  the 
people,  but  in  vain.  They  refused  to  raise  themselves,  in  order  to  return  to  the  Most 
High.  Such  is  the  effect  of  sin  when  long  persisted  in.  All  of  us  have  by  nature 
this  fixed  aversion  to  God  and  Divine  things,  unless  he  interpose  in  his  grace  to  wean 
us  from  our  idols.  Even  while  the  Word  is  calling  us  to  rise,  the  flesh  persistently 
drags  us  downwards,  and  with  a  dead  weight  which  only  the  might  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  can  overcome.  Many  professors  of  religion  suddenly  fall  away,  because,  the  "  good 
work  "  never  having  been  begun  in  them,  they  cannot  restrain  themselves  from  at  last 
following  visibly  the  "  bent "  of  nature.  And  how  hard  it  is,  even  for  the  Lord's  true 
people,  to  escape  from  the  entanglement  of  old  habits  of  sin  1  During  the  process  the 
soul  may  be  often  convulsed,  if  not  almost  torn  asunder.  A  good  man  will  sometimes 
continue  throughout  life  to  follow  a  trade  or  profession  about  the  moral  lawfulness  of 
which  his  conscience  is  continually  uneasy.  Only  by  steadfastly  looking  to  Christ, 
and  allowing  his  love  to  flow  into  the  heart,  can  we  be  set  free  from  the  dangers  of 
backsliding.  Clothed  with  his  strength,  the  believer,  instead  of  being  "impaled  upon 
apostasy,"  shall  daily  "  crucify  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts."  Once  more, 
this  passage  reminds  us  that — 

III.  To  "  BBFUSB  TO  BETURN  "  TO  Jehoyah  IS  THE  SIN  OF  BINB.  (Ver.  B.)  Ephraim 
had  done  more  and  worse  than  to  reject  the  Lord  as  the  chief  good.  He  had,  besides, 
scorned  the  Divine  grace  and  mercy  which  had  so  long  and  lovingly  "  called  "  him  to 
"  return,"  and  promised  to  "  heal  his  backsliding."  For  such  foul  and  shocking 
ingratitude  the  ruin  of  the  northern  kingdom  was  a  righteous  retribution.  And  so 
now,  in  these  gospel  times,  the  denial  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Saviour  is  the 
crowning  sin  of  man.  To  reject  him  is  to  "refuse  to  return"  to  Jehovah.  It  is  to 
oppose  the  clearest  light,  and  to  despise  the  dearest  love.  It  Is  to  elect  to  serve  Satan 
rather  than  God,  This  sin  of  sins  does  not  render  it  necessary  that  sentence  be  pro- 
nounced against  those  who  are  guilty  of  it :  the  sinner's  unbelief  is  of  itself  his 
sentence.  "He  that  helievcth  not  hath  been  judged  already"  (John  iii.  18).  If  we 
neglect  the  great  salvation,  there  can  be  no  escape  for  us  from  eternal  shame  and  ruin. 
Sins  against  law  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  the  exercise  of  mercy,  but  the 
persistent  rejection  of  mercy  must  close  the  door  of  hope  against  the  soul  for  ever 
(Prov.  i.  24— 33).— C.  J. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — "Mercy  teasont  justice^'  Jehovah's  love  for  Israel  had  been  con- 
spicuous during  the  infancy  of  the  nation  (vers.  1 — 4);  but  it  seems  even  more 
wonderful  now,  in  the  time  of  Ephraim's  moral  decrepitude  and  premature  decay. 
There  is  no  more  exquisitely  pathetic  passage  in  Holy  Scripture  than  the  one  before  us. 
It  is  of  a  piece  with  Jeremiah's  prophecy  respecting  the  restoration  of  the  ten  tribes 
(Jer.  xxxi.  20).  The  denunciation  of  pimishment  contained  in  vers.  6 — 7  suddenly 
dissolves  into  an  ecstasy  of  tenderness,  which  is  followed  by  a  promise  of  blessing. 

L  The  Lobd's  mehc?  to  Ephkaim.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  Moses  had  predicted  (Deut. 
xxix.  23)  that  the  lapse  of  the  nation  into  confirmed  idolatry  would  be  punished  with 
a  curse  upon  "  the  whole  land,"  like  that  which  overtook  the  cities  of  the  plain  (Gen.  xix.). 
But  just  when  we  might  expect  the  lawgiver's  words  to  be  at  once  fulfilled,  there  is  an 
outburst  of  Divine  compassion.  Here  the  Lord  is :  1.  Apparently  changeful.  It  oflen 
seems  as  if,  instead  of  there  being  one  centre  of  thought  in  this  book,  there  were  rather 
two  foci.  In  Hosea'a  message  threats  and  promises  alternate,  and  sometimes  commingle. 
In  ver.  8  the  Lord,  speaking  alter  the  manner  of  men,  appears  as  if  in  doubt  as  to  his 
course  of  action.    Is  justice  to  have  its  way  to  the  end,  or  is  any  place  to  be  found  for 


348  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [ca.xi.1— IS. 

mercy  f  JeTiovah's  attitude  Is  lile  fbat  of  the  tender-bearted  monarch  who  tremblei 
when  the  death-warrant  is  plnced  before  him,  and  hesitates  whether  he  will  sign  it. 
But  he  declares  at  length  that  he  cannot  sacrifice  his  brooding  yearning  love  for  Ephraira 
even  to  the  most  righteous  anger.  He  is  resolved  to  exercise  his  mercy;  he  will  display 
his  grace  more  conspicuously  than  his  justice.  In  all  this,  however,  the  Lord  is; 
2.  Eeally  unchangeable.  He  is  "  God,  and  not  man."  The  apparent  conflict  within  his 
heart  is  only  apparent.  All  the  time  that  he  has  been  threatening  vengeance,  his 
bowels  haye  been  melting  with  love.  He  cannot  forget  that  Ephraim  is  his  "son." 
Yet  the  Lord's  mercy  does  not  blind  the  eyes  of  his  justice.  He  says  here,  in  effect, 
that  Ephraim  fully  deserved  the  irreparable  doom  of  the  Cities  of  the  Plain.  And  hu 
must  inflict  judgment  upon  the  present  generation  of  Israelites.  But  the  three  years' 
siege  of  Samaria,  and  the  long  Assyrian  captivity,  with  the  total  oblivion  of  the  northern 
kingdom  as  such,  are  not  "  the  fierceness  of  his  anger."  On  the  other  side  of  these 
judgments  there  will  be  rich  mercy  for  Israel.  In  the  New  Testament  gospel,  in  like 
manner,  we  "  behold  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God."  Jehovah  fays  now,  more 
distinctly  than  ever,  "As  I  live,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked"  (Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11).  Calvary  shows  that  God  is  "just,  and  the  Justifier  of  him  which  believeth 
in  Jesus  "  (Rom.  iii.  26). 

II.  The  QRonND  of  this  mbbot.  (Ver.  9.)  It  has  a  twofold  basis.  1.  The  nature 
of  God.  Jehovah  speaks  after  the  manner  of  men  ;  but  he  is  "  God,  and  not  man." 
Were  be  not  God,  he  would  not  tolerate  the  wicked  world  for  a  single  day.  Because  he 
is  "  God,"  and  "  the  Holy  One,"  he  "  in  wrath  remembers  mercy."  The  Divine  com- 
passion is  self-originated;  it  wells  up  out  of  the  infinite  fountain  of  the  Divine  nature. 
God  has  the  heart  of  a  father;  but  he  is  without  the  infirmities  of  a  human  parent. 
His  mind  is  not  discomposed  by  frail  human  passions ;  and  he  never  in  his  thoughts — 
as  finite  men  do — straitens  the  abundance  of  his  grace.  2.  The  Divine  covenant  with 
Israel.  "  In  the  midst  of  thee "  (ver.  9).  "  I  will  dwell  among  them "  had  been 
Jehovah's  promise  to  the  Hebrew  nation.  Of  this  promised  presence  there  had  been 
many  symbols ;  as,  e.g.,  the  burning  bush,  the  tabernacle,  Jerusalem,  and  the  temple. 
"  And  what  was  the  purport  of  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  Israel  ?  Even  that 
God  would  punish  his  people;  yet  so  as  ever  to  leave  some  seed  remaining"  (Calvin \ 
In  the  New  Testament  gospel  we  see  God's  mercy  similarly  grounded.  Its  basis  is  tlie 
Divine  nature.  That  nature  is  love.  "  God  so  loved  the  world."  And  its  basis  is  also 
the  Divine  covenant;  for  we  live  under  a  new  and  better  disx>ensation  of  the  covenant 
of  grace  (Heb.  viii.  6 — 13). 

III.  Its  feuit  in  Ephraim's  restoration.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  These  verses  shall  be 
fulfilled  in  Messianic  times.  In  the  last  days,  the  "  Lion  "  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  shall 
roar,"  earnestly  calling  the  Hebrews  to  repentance.  1.  The  reatoration  loHl  consist  in 
heart-renewal.  "  They  shall  walk  after  the  Lord,"  i.e.  spiritually.  The  time  is  coming 
when  the  house  of  Israel  shall  accept  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah,  and  clothe  themselves 
with  his  righteousness.  "  The  children  "  of  the  exiles  "  shall  tremble  "  with  convictions 
of  guilt,  with  conscious  unworthiness,  and  yet  with  eagerness  to  accept  the  gospel  call. 
They  shall  return  to  a  relation  of  intimate  friendship  and  fellowship  with  God.  2.  It 
will  be  national  and  untversa?.  The  Jews  shall  at  last  return  from  all  the  various  lar^is 
to  which  they  have  been  banished.  The  Lord  shall  "gather  together  the  outcasts  of 
Israel."  Students  of  prophecy,  indeed,  are  not  agreed  whether  there  Is  to  be  a  literal 
restoration  to  Palestine;  but  all  expect  an  iufiuitely  more  blessed  consummation — the 
admission  of  Israel  as  a  people  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  as  the  result  of  their  repent- 
ance and  faith  in  him.  This  oracle  applies  also  to  all  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham. 
Jew  and  Gentile,  in  these  gospel  times,  are  adopted  into  God's  household  upon  precisely 
the  same  footing.  "The  west"  (ver.  10)  stands  mainly  for  Gentile  Europe;  "Egypt" 
represents  (ver.  11}  the  whole  continent  of  Africa  beyond  itself ;  and  "  Assyria  "  in  like 
manner  the  continent  of  Asia.  "  They  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west," 
etc.  (Luke  xiii.  29).  The  doom  denounced  in  Hosea  has  been  infiicted ;  and  in  that  fact 
have  we  not  a  pledge  that  the  promises  which  this  prophet  makes  shall  also  be  ful- 
filled? "  Two  rabbis  approaching  Jerusalem  saw  a  fox  runtiing  upon  the  hill  of  Zion  ; 
and  Eablii  Joshua  wept,  but  Rabbi  Eliezer  laughed.  '  Wherefore  dost  thou  laugh  V ' 
said  he  who  wept.  '  Nay,  wherefore  dost  thou  weep?'  demanded  Eliezer.  » I  weep,' 
replied  the  Rabbi  Joshua, '  because  I  see  what  is  written  in  the  Lamentations  fulfilled : 


CH.  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  819 

because  of  the  mountain  of  Zion,  which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk  upon  ii'  '  And, 
therefore,'  said  Rabbi  Eliezer,  'do  I  laugh ;  for  when  I  see  with  mine  own  eyes  that  God 
has  fulfilled  his  threafenings  to  the  very  letter,  I  have  thereby  a  pledge  that  not  one  of 
his  promises  shall  fail,  for  he  is  ever  more  ready  to  show  mercy  than  judgment.' " 

Lessoks.  1,  In  the  gospel  "  merci/  and  truth  are  met  together."  God  "  spared  not  his 
own  Son,"  that  he  might  not  have  to  "  give  up"  such  as  Epbraim.  2.  The  hindrance 
to  salvation  is  not  in  Qod,  but  in  the  sinner's  wicked  wilL  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jeni.^alem, 
how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  and  ye  would  not!"  (Malt. 
xxiii.  37).  3.  If  God  deals  so  tenderly  with  the  sinner,  how  complete  must  he  the  secwily 
of  the  Iflieverl  "  For  the  moimtains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  renewed;  but  my 
kindness  shall  not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be  removed, 
saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee  "  (Isa.  liv.  10). — 0.  J. 

Ver.  12. — (See  next  chapter.) — C.  J. 

Ver.  3  (first  clause). — The  tenderness  of  Divine  diseipUne.  Amidst  Hosea's  strong 
denunciaiions  of  sin,  such  a  description  as  this  of  Divine  tenderness  to  wayward  men  is 
sweet  as  a  soug  amidst  a  storm.  Both  sternness  and  sweetness  must  of  necessity  appear 
before  us  in  order  to  give  a  true  apprehension  of  the  method  of  God's  dealing  with 
human  aouls.  That  method  is  as  varied  as  are  the  works  of  the  same  God  in  nature, 
where  every  flower  and  leaf,  every  wind  and  stream,  has  its  own  place  and  its  own  use. 
We  cannot  expect  to  find  a  uniform  religious  experience  amongst  men.  We  have  no 
right  to  demand  of  others  the  agony  of  shame  or  the  rapture  of  pardon  we  ourselves 
know,  or  to  declare  that  their  experience  is  unreal  because  it  ii  different  from  our  ovvji. 
The  metaphors  of  ihe  Bible  might  teach  us  this.  One  series  represents  the  Word  as  the 
hammer,  that  breaks  the  rock  with  resistless  power;  as  the  sword,  which  pierces  the 
inmost  soul  and  kills  the  old  life ;  as  the  fire,  that  bums  out  the  dross  of  cliaracter  and 
fuses  the  whole  nature  in  a  glow  of  love  to  God.  But  there  are  metaphors  which  repre- 
sent the  same  Word  as  being  like  the  sun,  gradually  diffusing  light,  slowly  developing 
the  flowers  and  fruits ;  as  the  attractive  force,  so  subtle  that  it  can  only  be  known  by  its 
result ;  as  the  key  which  fits,  and  silently  turns  the  lock,  so  that  the  door  is  opened  and 
the  heavenly  guests  come  in  to  abide  there  in  holy  fellowship.  It  is  in  harmony  with 
all  we  know  of  the  variety  of  God's  dealings  with  men,  that  the  same  prophet  who 
speaks  of  the  unwilling  heifer  dragged  onward  by  ropes,  should  also  speak  of  the  little 
child  who  is  lovingly  upheld  by  his  father  when  he  takes  his  first  tottering  steps. 

I.  The  fiqube  that  sets  fobth  the  tbdth.  1.  Its  boldness.  None  but  an  inspired 
man,  who  was  conscious  of  inspiration,  would  have  dared  thus  to  describe  the  God  he 
humbly  reverenced.  Sometimes  a  painting  represents  the  glories  of  sunset,  or  the  swell 
of  the  sea  after  a  storm,  the  colours  of  which  are  so  vivid  that  the  onlooker  at  first  says, 
"  That  is  unnatural."  A  second-rate  ai  tist  nii^ht  have  shrunk  from  such  a  bold  repre- 
sentation, but  the  great  artist  revels  in  the  splendour  of  the  scene ;  he  feels  that  he  must 
represent  to  others  what  was  revealed  to  him ;  and  so  hands  down  to  the  future  what 
had  appeared  at  first  a  startling  revelation  of  glory,  even  to  himself.  A  people  accus- 
tomed, like  the  Jews,  to  the  signs  of  awful  reverence  with  whicli  Jehovah  was  approached 
would  have  been  more  surprised  than  we,  who  know  God  in  Christ,  to  hear  the  prophet 
speak  of  him  as  a  Father,  or  Mother,  or  Nurse,  holding  the  child  by  the  arms  as  he 
totters  and  trembles  over  his  first  footsteps.  2.  Its  beauty.  Any  natural  figure  drawn 
from  a  human  home  is  beautiful.  It  is  well  that  family  life  has  so  often  been  made  the 
basis  of  religious  teaching.  There  are  few  scenes  more  universally  familiar  than  this. 
When  we  exercise  care  and  forethought  for  our  children,  and  our  hearts  go  out  in 
tenderness  to  them  in  their  helplessness,  we  know  what  God  is  to  us.  When  we 
remember  the  sense  of  rest  and  sympathy  and  lielp  which  was  ours  in  chUdhood's 
home,  we  become  more  conscious  of  what  we  may  find,  yet  so  often  fail  to  find,  in  our 
heavenly  Father's  love.  3.  Its  truthfulness.  Israel  had  become  a  great  nation  because 
of  the  Divine  care  which  overshadowed  them  in  their  feeble  infancy.  In  Egypt  they  had 
no  national  life,  but  were  degraded  serfs  for  whom  revolt  was  useless.  Brought  out  by 
Divine  power,  they  became  conscious  of  new  powers  and  possibilities.  In  the  wilder- 
ness they  were  fed,  not  only  with  manna,  but  with  the  rudiments  of  piety,  which  were 
well  adapted  to  their  infancy.    By  penalties  which  immediately  and  risibly  followed 


350  THE  BOOK  OP  H08BA.  [cast  1—12. 

disobedience  to  Law,  they  learnt  that  God  was  King,  that  he  was  near,  that  he  was  wise ; 
and  imperfect  though  the  revelation  was,  it  was  the  most  they  could  receive.  God 
spake  as  they  were  able  to  hear  it.  He  dealt  with  them  as  we  deal  with  children.  Nor 
is  he  less  wise  or  less  tender  in  our  culture,  but  hears  with  us  while  we  are  feuhle  in 
thought  and  resolve,  and  blesses  us  in  the  first  trembling  steps  we  essay  in  the  way  of 
righteousness. 

II.  The  truth  bkt  fobth  bt  the  figure — ^namely,  that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful, 
and  of  tender  mercy.  1.  In  his  condescension  he  doe*  not  despise  «*.  Ezekiel  describes 
a  newly  bom  child,  taken  up  in  its  poverty  and  misery  by  tender  hands,  as  a  represen- 
tation of  what  Israel  had  been  to  God.  We  have  known  such  examples  of  human 
kindness :  the  foumiling  left  to  the  stranger,  whose  motherly  heart  went  out  in  pity,  as 
she  resolved  that,  in  spite  of  all  her  own  cares,  the  little  one  should  not  perish  for  want 
because  of  its  parent's  sin.  Much  more  unworthy  are  we  of  the  Divine  regard,  for  each 
may  say,  "  I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  Even  in  earthly  advantages 
we  never  won  nor  deserved,  how  many  of  us  have  been  blessed  I  The  home  where  no 
evil  words  are  heard,  where  those  who  love  us  are  daily  witnesses  for  Qtxl,  the  heritage 
of  a  good  name  and  wholesome  habits,  the  tears  and  entreaties  and  prayers  which  win 
us  to  the  love  of  righteousness,— all  these  are  signs  that  God  can  say  of  many  now  in 
wisdom's  way,  "  I  taught  you  to  walk,  taking  you  by  the  arms."  2.  In  his  wisdom  he 
does  not  force  us.  We  are  not  automatons.  They  may  do  wonderful  things  without 
noise,  or  disobedience,  or  wrangling ;  but  God  has  not  made  us  thus.  We  are,  as  the 
text  suggests,  children,  who  can  make  their  own  effort,  but  to  it  they  must  be  prompted, 
in  it  they  must  he  supported  and  helped.  When  the  stirrings  of  a  new  life  are  felt  in 
the  soul,  the  question  conies,  "  Who  then  is  willing  U>  consecrate  himself  to  the  Lord  ?" 
and  it  is  only  the  self-consecrated  servants  God  will  have.  It  is  a  poor  thing  to  employ 
the  forced  labour  of  those  whose  bodies  are  their  owner's,  but  whose  souls  loathe  him  ; 
but  a  blessed  thing  to  have  the  loyal  and  loving  service  of  the  child,  to  whom  a  glance 
or  a  whisper  means  a  command  which  it  is  his  joy  to  obey.  3.  In  his  gradousness  he 
does  not  curse  us.  Children  are  weak  and  wayward ;  they  forget  what  they  are  toM,  and 
do  what  is  amiss ;  but  their  father  says  to  himself,  "  They  are  hut  children,"  and  he 
cannot  be  bitter  or  unjust.  When  Peter  denied  his  Lord,  falling  through  moral  weak- 
ness, an  angry  curse  might  have  driven  him  to  despair ;  but  "  the  Lord  turned  and 
looked  on  him,"  and  as  he  went  out,  weeping  bitterly,  he  yet  could  say, "  The  Lord  loves 
me  still."  Christ  drew  him  back  with  curds  of  love.  4.  In  his  patience  he  does  not 
demand  of  us  instant  perfection.  Picture  the  scene  suggested  here.  A  child -is  about 
to  take  his  first  step.  The  mother  is  beside  him,  encouraging  every  step,  or  half-step, 
with  a  smile.  Her  eye  does  not  wander  from  him  for  a  moment ;  her  hands  are  out  to 
encourage,  to  support,  to  save,  as  she  says,  "  Try,  dear,  try."  When  at  last  the  effort 
is  made,  she  catches  him  up  in  her  arms  and  kisses  him ;  and  if  you  wondered  at  so  much 
gladness  and  love  being  shown  over  such  a  feeble  attempt,  she  would  be  annoyed  at 
your  dnlness,  because  she  sees  in  this  the  promise  of  the  future.  By  such  a  homely 
illustration  does  Hosea  set  forth  the  Divine  tenderness.  God's  "gentleness  makes  us 
great."  Christ  Jesus  expected  nothing  wonderful  from  his  disciples ;  but  patiently 
lived  with  them  and  taught  them,  forgiving,  encouraging,  and  upholding,  till  they 
became  brave  and  stalwart  heroes  of  the  cross.  Only  let  us  keep  near  him,  and  as  we 
recognize  the  difficulties  of  our  way  and  the  weakness  of  our  nature,  let  tiie  prayer  of 
the  psalmiatbe  ours,  "Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe." — ^A.  B. 

Ver.  4  (first  clause). — The  attractiveness  of  Ood.  These  words  are  true  for  all  ages 
and  peoples.  Human  laws  are  limited,  but  Divine  laws  are  universal.  Gravitation, 
for  example,  draws  material  things  to  each  other,  whether  they  be  the  ice-floes  that 
float  in  the  polar  seas,  or  the  creepers  which  hang  in  heavy  festoons  in  tropical  forests ; 
whether  in  the  land  where  liberty  loves  the  light,  or  in  the  kingdom  where  tyrants 
brood  and  conspirators  glower  in  the  darkness.  The  bold  use  of  the  second  verse  in 
this  chapter  by  Matthew  (ii.  16)  shows  how  in  the  special  historical  fact  may  be 
discerned  the  general  and  universal  principle.  The  Divine  care  of  Israel  was  but  » 
manifestalion  of  the  Divine  care  of  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  and  of  every  one  led  o'ti 
of  bondage  and  dnrkness  into  light  and  liberty.  The  soul's  exodus  and  pilgrimacre 
is  as  real  now  as  then,  and  of  those  rejoicing  in  nearness  to  God  he  can  say,  "  I  drew 


OH,  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  351 

them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love."    Let  u«  consider  the  cndence  and  the 
influence  of  the  Dirine  attractiveoess. 

L  Its  etidencb.  1.  Ai  exhibited  in  the  mission  of  Christ.  Instead  of  coming  in 
the  clouds  of  heaven  to  compel  the  homage  of  the  world,  he  came  in  the  likeiiess  of 
men,  and  won  the  love  of  those  round  him  in  Bethlehem  and  Nazareth  as  a  human 
child.  "He  grew  ...  in  favour  with  Gk)d  and  man."  During  his  ministry  the  same 
method  was  pursued ;  he  drew  disciples  around  him  "  with  the  cords  of  a  man,  even 
with  bands  of  love."  His  chosen  disciples  were  not  those  whose  enthusiasm  was 
aroused  by  works  of  superhuman  character ;  on  the  contrary,  such  as  these  had  to  be 
repressed,  as  they  were  when  they  would  take  Jesus  by  force  to  make  him  a  King. 
John  and  Peter  and  others  who  were  specially  his  own  were  won  by  his  love,  were 
drawn  with  the  cords  of  a  man.  It  was  those  who  were  thus  drawn  who  were  ready 
for  the  higher  blessing.  While  a  wicked  and  adulterous  generation  in  vain  sought 
after  a  sign,  despised  sinners  and  humble  children  were  enriched  beyond  all  expectation. 
Still  Christ  seeks  to  win  such  confidence,  and  to  win  it  by  the  same  means.  He  speaks 
not  from  the  throne  of  glory,  but  from  the  cross  of  Calvary.  Divine  love  is  pleading 
with  us  through  the  weakness  of  mortality.  "And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth, 
will  draw  all  men  unto  me."  2.  As  exhibited  in  the  experience  of  Ohristiane.  If 
we  would  know  the  laws  of  mental  life  we  do  not  seek  them  iti  the  phenomena  of 
phy.sical  life,  and  it  would  be  equally  absurd  to  expect  the  physiulogist  from  his  study 
of  brain-movements,  or  the  metaphysician  from  his  acquaintance  with  the  laws  of 
intellect,  to  unveil  to  us  the  secrets  of  spiritual  expejience.  The  subtle  movements 
of  religious  life  can  only  be  known  by  religious  men.  They,  without  one  discordant 
voice,  declare  that  they  have  been  and  are  sensible  of  Divine  drawings.  Listen  to 
such  utterances  as  these  :  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  1  am ; "  "  We  love  him, 
because  he  first  loved  us ; "  "  We  are  not  sufBcicnt  of  ourselves  to  think  anything  as 
of  ourselves;  but  our  sufBciency  is  of  God."  What  are  these  but  confirmations  of  the 
text,  and  of  our  Lord's  declaration,. "No  man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father 
which  hath  sent  me  draw  him  "  ?  Here  is  a  quotation  from  Augustine,  which  shows 
how  he  had  been  drawn  to  the  Saviour  he  haid  so  long  ignored:  '"How  sweet  did  it 
at  once  become  to  me  to  want  the  sweetnesses  of  those  toys  1  and  what  I  feared  to  be 
parted  from  was  now  a  joy  to  part  with.  For  thou  didst  cast  them  forth,  and  for  them 
enteredst  in  thyself  sweeter  than  all  pleasures,  though  not  to  flesh  and  blood ;  brighter 
than  all  light,  but  more  bidden  than  all  depths;  higher  than  all  honour,  but  not  to  the 
high  in  their  own  conceits."    Every  saint  on  earth  and  in  heaven  can  say— 

"  He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on. 
Glad  to  confess  the  voice  Divine." 

n.  Its  fubfose.  Why  does  God  thus  lovingly  affect  the  souls  of  men?  1.  Ee 
would  draw  us  to  his  feet  for  pardon.  The  prodigal  was  not  forced  home.  In  his 
abject  misery  thoughts  came  to  him  of  his  father's  love,  and  with  them  the  idea 
of  returning  stole  in.  So  the  thought  of  Cbd's  great  goodness  should  incite  the  worst 
sinner  to  return,  to  the  Lord,  who  will  abundantly  pardon.  "  Knowest  thou  not  that 
the  goodness  of  the  Lord  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?  "  2.  Se  would  draw  us  to  his 
arm*  for  protection.  To  feel  that  God  is  about  us  is  at  once  our  strength  and  defence, 
our  comfort  and  joy.  Refer  to  Joseph  in  Potiphar's  house,  to  Jacob  at  Bethel,  and 
to  Moses  before  the  burning  bush,  etc.,  for  illustrations  of  this.  Still  in  this  world, 
which  is  sobbing  with  sorrow,  dark  with  foreboding,  saddened  by  sin,  the  ark  of  safety 
may  be  found,  and  the  door  is  open.  3.  He  would  draw  us  to  his  home  for  rest. 
If  life  were  to  be  lived  out  here,  it  would  not  be  worth  living.  But  as  strangers  and 
pilgrims  we  are  passing  through  the  world,  sometimes  driven  onward  by  grief,  some- 
times allured  onward  by  joy,  but  ever  journeying  towards  "  the  rest  that  remains  for 
the  people  of  God."  Beside  us,  in  life,  in  death,  in  eternity,  is  One  who,  with  love 
greater  than  that  of  any  fathet  to  bis  child,  still  declare!, "  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a 
man,  with  bands  of  love."— A.  B. 

Ver.  8. — OocPi  yearning  over  rebels.  Our  text  tolls  the  old  story  of  man's  rebellion 
and  God's  love.     The  subject  has  its  human  and  its  Divine  aspect,  which  we  will 

consider  in  turn. 


362  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xl  1—12. 

I.  Man's  bebellion  is  implied  in  the  text  and  described  graphically  in  otlier  parts 
of  the  prophecy.  1.  Its  signs,  as  they  are  illustrated  ia  the  moral  condition  of  Israel. 
(1)  The  dethronement  of  Qod.  He  wag  no  longer  the  object  of  worship  or  the  source 
of  authority.  Baal  was  worshipped  in  the  high  places,  and  Astarte  ia  the  groves. 
In  other  words,  confidence  in  one's  own  power,  or  contentment  with  sensuous 
pleasures,  now  displaced  devotion  to  God.  This  is  not  brought  about  with  startling 
rapidity.  There  is  no  sensible  shock  felt  when  *  man  breaks  with  Ood.  There  is  a 
progresBiveness  in  evil  almost  imperceptible.  Israel  first  professed  to  worship  God  in 
the  calf,  but  at  last  worshipped  the  devil  in  Astarte.  Sin  is  generally  progressive  in 
the  hold  it  gets  upon  its  victims.  Judas  Iscariot  is  an  example  of  this,  (2)  The 
confidence  in  man.  Many  shrewd  men  in  Israel  held  aloof  from  idolatrous  worship 
as  degrading  superstition,  yet  were  equally  with  the  worshippers  in  rebellion  against 
QoA.  For  national  deliverance  they  would  not  trust  to  Baal,  but  they  would  trust 
in  Egypt,  which  was  equally  distruii  of  Jehovah.  Many  now  are  free  from  the  folly 
and  the  degradation  of  heathendom,  yet  are  in  God's  sight  rebels  against  his  authority. 
In  their  judgment  they  are  righteous  enough  to  do  without  his  pardon,  strong  enough 
to  do  without  his  aid,  wise  enough  to  do  without  his  revelation.  2.  Its  consequences, 
(1)  Disappointment.  (Bead  ver.  5.)  Hoshea  was  subject  to  Assyria,  but  joined  Egypt 
to  win  independence.  The  result  was  that  the  Assyrian  king  destroyed  Israel,  carrying 
the  people  away  into  an  exile  irom  which  there  was  no  return.  Similarly,  one  who 
from  a  spirit  of  sell-reliance  says  of  Christ,  "  We  will  not  have  this  man  to  rule  over 
us,"  becomes  the  slave  of  human  opinion,  of  popular  customs,  of  evil  passions,  etc. 
Others  who  live  in  forbidden  pleasure  find  in  old  age,  not  only  the  pleasure  gone,  but 
the  retribution  come,  physically  as  well  as  morally.  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money 
for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  "  Happy  is  it  if  the  prodigal  grows  sick  of  tho  husks 
the  swine  eat,  before  it  is  too  late  to  return  to  the  Father's  house,  where  there  is  bread 
enough  and  to  spare.  (2)  Punishment.  In  the  wilderness  days  the  people,  in  plagues 
and  defeats,  had  signs  of  this.  Here  it  was  foretold  that  the  sword  should  abide  on 
their  cities  (ver.  6).  And  in  our  text  reference  is  made  to  a  standing  example  of  Divine 
retribution — the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain.  Admah  and  Zeboim  are  selected, 
as  the  smallest  or  least  known,  to  indicate  that  the  most  insignificant  would  not  escape 
the  judgment  of  God.  In  rererence  to  the  coming  punishment  of  the  impenitent,  even 
our  loving  Saviour  speaks  awful  and  ominous  words.  It  is  in  the  New  Testament,  the 
special  revelation  of  Gud's  love,  that  we  read  of  "the  fire  that  cannot  bo  quenched;" 
of  "  the  second  death ; "  of  the  "  outer  darkness,  where  shall  be  weeping,  and  wailing, 
and  gnashing  of  teeth." 

II,  God's  compassion.  1.  It  is  described  by  the  prophet.  He  represents  God  as  saying, 
"  How  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?"  etc.  "  Thy  sin  merits  a  punishment  fearful  as 
was  that,  yet  my  heart  is  heavy  within  me  at  the  thought  of  its  cuming  to  thee,  my 
child  j  yea,  my  strong  compassions  are  kindled  by  my  love."  Such  language  is  in 
harmony  with  the  whole  teaching  of  Scripture.  "  God  is  not  willing  that  any  should 
perish,"  etc.  Note :  It  would  be  well  if  all  the  children  of  God  in  this  were  like  him. 
Some,  however,  are  iodifierent  to  the  sins  of  their  fellows,  as  if  sins  were  of  little  conse- 
quence, or  as  if  they  themselves  had  no  more  sense  of  responsibihty  than  Cain  acknow- 
ledged when  he  said,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  Others  are  indignant  and  angry 
with  the  fallen,  as  were  the  Pharisees  in  the  house  of  Simon.  But  in  the  eye  of  him 
who  abhors  evil,  the  sinner,  going  away  from  hope  and  light  and  heaven  is  too  pitiful 
for  resentment,  though  too  wilful  for  excuse.  Therefore  he  says,  "  How  shall  I  give 
thee  up  ?  "  etc.  2.  It  is  proclaimed  in  the  gospel.  The  coming  of  the  beloved  Son  is  wel  1 
described  by  the  Lord  himself,  in  his  parables  of  the  wicked  husbandmen,  of  the  good 
shepherd  seeking  the  one  sheep  that  was  lost,  etc.  See  in  these  the  unmerited  love, 
the  infinite  tenderness,  of  him  who  so  loved  us  as  to  give  his  only  Son  for  our  redemp- 
tion. In  the  ministry  of  him  who  was  the  express  Imnge  of  God's  Person  we  see  proofs 
of  the  truth  in  the  text ;  not  only  in  his  miracles,  but  in  his  invitations,  notably  in  the 
words,  "0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  ,  .  .  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children 
together  as  a  hen  doth  gather  her  brood  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not  I "  In  the 
commission  given  to  the  apostles  the  text  reappears.  What  pathetic  meaning  in  the 
words,  "beginning  at  Jerusalem  "I  In  the  experience  of  the  redeemed  this  assurance 
is  re-echoed.  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  chief  of  sinners^  obtained  njercy  as  a  pattern  for  t}ios^ 
^^ho  should  berpaf^er  believe. 


OH.  XL  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  853 

Conclusion.  Beware  of  presuming  on  Divine  long-suffering.  What  more  mad  and 
perilous  than  to  leap  into  the  angry  sea  because  the  lifeboat  is  there  I  What  more 
ungenerous  and  unmanly  than  the  conduct  of  him  who  says  in  his  heart,  "  I  will  be 
hard,  because  God  is  so  tender ;  I  will  withdraw  further  from  him,  because  I  know  he 
loves  me  "  I    "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  " — A.  B, 

Ver.  1.—"  When  Israel  torn  a  ehUd."  There  is  something  wonderfully  toucliing  in 
this  representation  of  God's  affection  and  compassion  towards  the  nation  of  his  choice. 
The  father,  distressed  in  heart  because  of  his  son's  waywardness  and  disaffection,  recalls 
the  period  of  that  son's  childhood,  when  parental  care  and  love  watched  over  and  upheld 
and  guided  him.  Now  that  Israel  has  done  wickedly  in  departing  from  God,  in  the 
midst  of  deserved  upbraiding  and  rebuke,  the  Lord  appeals  to  the  memory  of  early  and 
better  days.  Israel  symbolizes  humanity,  and  Jehovah's  watchful  care  and  tender  love 
to  Israel  is  representative  of  his  feelings  towards  and  bis  treatment  of  the  children  of 
men.     Three  stages  are  here  noticeable. 

I.  Love.  To  Abraham,  God  had  revealed  himself  as  an  attached  and  affectionate 
Friend ;  he  was  designated  "  the  friend  of  God."  Towards  the  second  father  of  the  nation, 
Moses,  Jehovah  had  manifested  liimself  in  a  manner  remarkable  for  intimacy.  The  love 
which  marked  the  call  of  Abraham  was  displayed  in  the  treatment  of  his  descendants. 
But  "God  is  love,"  and  mankind  is  the  object  of  his  fatherly  regard.  Love  revealed  in 
Clirist  appeals  to  our  hearts.     "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us." 

II.  Adoption.  Jehovah  is  represented  as  regarding  and  treating  Israel  as  his  son, 
as  thinking  with' a  fatherly  fondness  and  tenderness  oi' Israel's  early  days  :  "  When  Israel 
was  a  child."  It  is  the  glory  of  revelation  that  it  has  taught  us  to  look  up  and  to  say, 
"  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven."  The  effect  of  our  Saviour's  work  is  that  his  dis- 
ciples may  have  the  adoption  of  sons ;  the  Spirit  of  God  witliin  them  is  the  Spirit  of 
adoption. 

III.  Deliverance.  Jehovah  "  called  his  son  out  of  Egypt."  A  reminder  of  merciful 
intiTposition  and  mighty  deliverance  was  a  fit  summons  to  submission  and  reconcilia- 
tion. It  is,  indeed,  a  Divine  appeal.  By  the  memory  of  the  great  Eedemption,  the 
God  of  righteousness  calls  for  our  obedience  and  devotion.  He  has  redeemed  us  that 
we  may  be  a  holy,  filial,  and  devoted  people,  recognizing  his  fatherly  favour,  and 
evincing  our  gratitude  for  his  delivering  hand  which  has  interposed  on  our  behalf. — T. 

Ver.  8. — Healing  grace  unrecognized.  The  gentle,  considerate,  and  tender  manner  in 
which  Jehovah  had  treated  Ephraim  is  very  strikingly  portrayed  in  the  figurative 
language  of  the  first  part  of  this  verse.  Ephraim  is  depicted  as  a  little  ctiild  who  is 
just  learning  to  walk.  The  Lord  condescends  to  represent  himself  as  taking  Ephraim 
by  the  arms,  upholding  the  feeble,  tottering  form,  and  guiding  the  uncertain,  unsteady 
steps.  Such  treatment  augments  the  sin  of  insensibility  and  ingratitude  on  the  part  of 
those  who  have  been  dealt  with  so  compassionately,  and  yet  have  forgotten  their  Helper. 

I.  The  charactbb  in  which  God  kevealbd  himself  to  Iskael.  He  was  their 
"Healer,"  which  implies  that  they  had  been  wounded,  sick,  «nd  helpless.  When  Israel 
had  been  in  such  a  case,  their  covenant  God  had  again  and  again  interposed  upon  their 
behalf  to  succour,  to  heal,  to  save  them. 

II.  The  insensibility  which  Israel  had  displayed  to  sndH  gracious  treatuent. 
1.  This  insensibility  was  a  proof  that  the  spiritual  benefit  intended  bad  not  been  realized. 
Men  often  resemble  Israel  in  receiving  temporal  advantages  and  bounties  from  the  bftnd 
of  God,  without  learning  the  lesson  of  devout  acknowledgment  and  filial  affection.  2. 
This  insensibility  was  an  occasion  of  sorrow  to  the  Divine  Benefactor.  God  is  not 
indifferent  to  such  a  response  rendered  to  his  kindness  and  love ;  it  distresses  his  fatherly 
heart.  3.  This  insensibility  called  for  repentance  and  a  better  mind  j  or  must  needs 
involve,  if  persevered  in,  debasement  and  punishment. — T. 

Ver.  i, "  Cords  of  a  man."  ■  Language  is  lavished  to  impress  upon  Israel  the  gracious, 

the  undeserved,  but  generous  and  forbearing  treatment  received  from  the  Most  High, 
As  though  an  exhibition  of  the  justice  of  obedience  and  piety  were  insuflicient,  there  i» 
added  many  a  representation  of  the  mercy  which  has  marked  the  Lord's  treatment  of 
his  ungrateful  and  rebellious  people, 

HOSEA.  3  i. 


854  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xi.  1—12. 

I.  GsAOionB  ATTBAOTioK.  Instead  of  driving  men  with  authority,  God  draws  them 
with  a  truly  humane  and  tender  persuasion.  We  see  this  in  the  whole  Christian  scheme, 
in  the  gift  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  his  spiritual  dispensation,  in  which  he  is  "  drawing  all  men 
unto  himself."  No  violence,  hut  a  sweet  and  hallowed  constraint  is,  in  the  gospel, 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  heart.  We  feel  that  the  motives  addressed  to  us  are  very 
different  from  what  we  might  have  expected,  and  from  what  human  authority  would 
probahly  have  employed. 

II.  Mebciful. BELIEF.  God's  treatment  of  Israel  is  represented  as  resembling  that 
of  the  husbandman  who  suffers  the  labouring  ox  to  pause  in  his  toil,  and  who  lifts  the 
oppressive  and  galling  yoke  to  afford  the  beast  a  little  welcome  relief.  Similarly,  God 
has  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins.  In  the  midst  of  wrath  he  has  remembered  mercy. 
It  is  his  delight  to  unloose  the  heavy  burden,  and  to  let  the  oppressed  go  free.  Christ's 
prized  invitation  is  an  instance  in  point :  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  ihat  labour.  .  .  . 
My  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light." 

III.  Bountiful  provision.  The  Hebrew  was  forbidden  to  muzzle  the  ox  that 
treadeth  out  the  corn.  The  conduct  here  recorded  goes  beyond  a  mere  permission  to 
leed ;  for  the  generous  owner  is  depicted  as  setting  food  before  the  hungry  animal.  A 
homely  but  just  and  impressive  image  of  the  Divine  treatment  of  those  who  look  to 
liim.  "  He  openeth  his  hands,  and  satisfieth,"  etc.  He  gives  them  "  bread  from  heaven 
to  eat."  The  provisions  of  the  gospul  are  s^iread  before  the  hungering,  needy  soul, 
aud  the  invitation  is  addressed  to  all  who  are  in  want :  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth, 
come  ye  to  the  waters  I  " — T. 

Ver.  8. — "  How  shall  I  give  thee  tipf  It  was  an  idolatrous  and  rebellious  generft> 
tion  to  which  Hosea  prophesied.  Sundered  from  Jerusalem,  Israel  had  lapsed  from  the 
worship  and  service  of  Jehovah.  The  prophet  was  not  satisfied  merely  to  discover  in 
forcible  language  the  sin  of  the  people,  merely  to  threaten  with  deserved  punishment. 
Me  was  touched  with  the  spectacle  of  apostasy.  He  expressed  the  mind  of  the  Lord  in 
mingling  expostulations  and  promises  with  denunciations  and  threats.  The  most 
pathetic  language  of  the  text  implies — 

I.  Efforts  already  made  for  the  salvation  of  the  sinful.  Evidently  this 
was  not  a  first  appeal ;  many  and  urgent  counsels  and  entreaties  had  been  already 
addressed  to  Israel.  Looking  over  a  wider  field,  we  may  recognize  that  God  has  in 
mercy  visited  men,  in  the  messages  of  revelation,  in  the  Law  which  declares  his  will, 
by  the  prophets  who  have  presented  motives  and  appeals,  and  especially  by  his  own  Son, 
his  own  Spirit,  his  own  gospel.  His  aim  in  all  has  been  to  lead  men  to  repentance  and 
faith,  to  bring  them  to  eternal  life. 

II.  The  thwarting  of  such  efforts  vt  human  neglect  and  wilfulness.  The 
free  nature  with  which  God  the  Creator  has  endowed  man  is  capable  of  rebellion ;  and 
he  can  only  save  us  upon  our  repentance  and  renewal.  But  what  resistance  do  his 
gracious  designs  meet  from  sinful  meu  1  In  some  cases,  obstinate  love  of  sin,  deter- 
mined opposition  to  truth,  prolonged  insensibility  ;  in  other  cases,  transient  gleams  oi 
good,  followed  by  relapse;  in  yet  other  cases,  shameful  apostasy; — account  for  this 
alienation  of  the  heart  from  a  God  of  mercy.    Yet  observe — 

III.  God's  gracious  reluctance  to  abandon  even  rebels.  1.  This  arises  from  hii 
own  compassionate  nature.  Exhibited  e.g.  in  the  long-suffering  during  the  days  of  Noah ; 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  in  his  grief  over  Jerusalem.  2.  And  from  his  desire  that  the  gift  of 
his  Son  may  not  he  in  vain.  He  is  the  Saviour,  in  order  that  he  may  save.  The  Father 
delights  in  the  satisfaction  of  the  Son,  when  be  sees  of  the  travail  of  his  soul.  3.  And 
from  his  regard  for  men's  interests  and  happiness.  As  the  mechanic  wishes  the  en<rine 
he  has  made  to  work  well,  as  the  husbandman  wishes  to  reap  a  harvest  from  the  land 
upon  which  he  has  laboured,  as  the  statesman  hopes  for  the  success  of  the  measure  he 
has  devised,  as  the  parent  longs  for  the  realization  of  the  plans  he  has  formed  for  his 
child,  so  the  Lord  and  Father  of  us  all  desires  our  salvation.  He  knows  that  there  is 
110  happiness  for  men  except  in  their  subjection  and  devo'tion  to  him.  He  can  have  no 
motive  in  seeking  our  welfare  except  Divine,  unwearying,  and  unmerited  love ;  and  he 
isks,  "  How  can  I  give  thee  up?  " 

Application.  1.  If  God  so  bears  with  ns,  we  Christian!,  and  especially  Christian 
ministers,  must  not  be  ready  to  "  give  up  "  even  obstinate  sinners.  2.  God  pleads  again 
with  the  unbelieving  and  the  wavering,  saying,  "  Why  will  ye  die  ?  " — T. 


OH,  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  865 

Ver.  9, — Ood  and  not  num.  Well  is  it  for  us  that  there  are  respects  in  which  God 
is  as  man ;  that  he  is  sympathizing  and  (as  we  say)  humane.  But  better  U  it  for  ui 
that  in  other  respects  God  is  not  as  man ;  for,  had  he  been  subject  to  like  passion*  irith 
ourselves,  he  would  not  have  borne  with  ub,  and  we  should  have  been  utterly  con- 
sumed. 

I.  A  BETELATioN  OF  DiviKE  BUFERiOBiTT.  God,  In  his  treatment  of  mankind,  has 
shown  himself  to  be  altogether  superior:  1.  To  human  ignorance.  He  knows  ua  as 
we  cannot  know  one  another,  and  all  his  counsels  have  been  counsels  of  consummate 
wisdom.  2.  To  human  vacillation.  We  are  prone  to  be  swayed,  now  by  this  motive 
and  again  by  that ;  there  is  no  such  thing  as  perfect  consistency  and  steadfastness  in 
man.  But  God  is  above  all  such  human  weakness.  "lam  the  Lord  that  changeth  not, 
therefore  the  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."  "  God  is  faithful,"  and  we  may  trust 
him  with  an  implicit  confidence.  3.  To  human  impatience.  The  hasty  impatience  of 
man  with  his  fellow-man  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the  forbearance  of  the  supreme  Buler. 
Long-suffering  is  ever  represented  in  the  Scriptures  as  his  especial  attribute,  and  there 
is  none  for  which  we  have  more  reason  to  be  grateful.  Had  he  not  been  a  patient  God 
he  would  not  have  borne  with  any  one  of  us,  for  all  have  taxed  and  tried  his  patience. 

II.  An  bncoubagbment  to  huuah  confidence.  It  is  well  always  to  begin  with 
the  consideration  of  God's  character  and  attributes.  But  we  cannot  end  there.  We 
naturally  and  properly  turn  our  regard  towards  ourselves,  and  see  what  is  the  bearing 
of  the  Divine  attributes  upon  our  necessities.  This  we  may  learn  from  the  assurance 
that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  One  who  is  God  and  not  man — we  may  learn  to  cast  our- 
selves with  unhesitating  confidence  upon  the  Divine  faithfulness  and  grace.  No  human 
pettiness  shall  we  meet  with  from  him,  bat  large-hearted  forbearance,  sympathy,  bounty, 

'and  love, — T. 

Vers,  1 — 7, — A  typical  portrait  of  a  people,  "When  Israel  was  a  child,  then 
I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt.  As  they  called  them,  so  they  went 
from  them :  they  sacrificed  unto  Baalim,  and  burned  incense  to  graven  images.  I 
taught  Bphraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  aims ;  but  they  knew  not  that  I 
healed  them.  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love:  and  I  was  to 
them  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws,  and  I  laid  meat  unto  them.  He 
shall  not  return  into  the  land  of  Egypt,  but  the  Assyrian  shall  be  his  king,  because 
they  refused  to  return.  And  the  sword  shall  abide  on  his  cities,  and  shall  consume  his 
branches,  and  devour  them,  because  of  their  own  counsels.  And  my  people  are  bent 
to  backsliding  from  me ;  though  they  called  them  to  the  Most  High,  none  at  all  would 
exalt  him."    In  these  verses  we  have  three  things  worthy  of  note. 

I.  A  HIGHLY  FAVOURED  PEOPLE.  What  is  Said  here  concerning  the  people  of  Israel  ? 
1.  God  loved  them.  "When  Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him,"  "Thus  saith  the 
Lord,  Israel  is  my  son,  even  my  firstborn  "  (Bxod.  iv,  22).  The  early  period  of  the 
existence  of  the  Hebrew  people  is  frequently  represented  as  their  youth  (Isa,  liv.  15; 
Jer.  ii.  2).  Why  the  Almighty  should  have  manifested  a  special  interest  in  the  descend- 
ants of  Abraham  is  a  question  which  the  Infinite  only  can  answer.  We  know, 
however,  that  he  loves  all  men.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave,"  etc.  2,  Gk)d 
emancipated  them.  "And  called  my  son  out  of  Egypt."  He  broke  the  rod  of  their 
oppressor.  He  delivered  them  from  Egyptian  thraldom.  This  material  emancipation 
of  the  Jews  is  a  striking  emblem  of  the  great  moral  emancipation.  3,  God  educated 
them.  "I  taught  Bphraim  also  to  go."  Some  read  this  line, "  I  have  given  Ephraim  a 
leader" — ^referring  to  Moses.  Moses  was  only  the  instrument.  "  I  taught  Ephraim  also 
to  go  " — as  a  child  in  leading-strings  is  taught.  Wlien  they  were  in  the  wilderness  God 
led  them  by  a  pillar  of  cloud,  4.  God  healed  them.  "  I  healed  them."  "  I  am  the  Lord 
that  healeth  thee  "  CExod.  xv.  26).  5.  God  guided  them;  •'  I  drew  them  with  cords  of 
a  man,  with  bands  of  love."  With  human  cords  I  drew  them,  with  bands  of  love.  He 
did  not  draw  them  by  might ;  he  attracted  them  by  mercy.  6.  Gbd  relieved  them, 
"  I  was  to  them  as  they  tliat  tai^e  off  the  yoke,  on  their  jaws."  As  the  kind  farmer 
raises  from  the  neck  and  cheek  of  the  ox  the  heavy  yoke  so  as  to  leave  him  freedom 
to  eat  his  fi)od,  so  I  raised  from  your  neck  the  yoke  of  Egyptian  bondage.  7.  <}od 
fed  them.  "  I  laid  meat  unto  them."  He  rained  manna  about  their  camp.  He  gave 
them  bread  from  heaven,  and  water  from  the  rock.    What  a  kind  God  he  was  to  these 


5M  THE  BOOK  0&  flOSEA.  t<^xi.l— 12. 

people  I  And  has  he  not  been  even  more  kind  to  us,  the  favoured  men  of  this  land 
and  age? 

IL  A  SIGNALLY  UKQBATEFUL  PEOPLE.  1.  They  divAtytd  OocPt  teaching.  "A» 
they  called  them,  bo  they  went  from  them."  "  They  " — the  lawgivers,  judges,  priests, 
prophets,  whom  he  employed.  "  They  went  from  them."  That  is,  the  people  went 
from  their  Divine  teachers — ^went  from  them  in  heart.  2.  They  gave  themselves  to 
idolatry,  "They  sacrificed  unto  Baalim,  and  burned  incense  to  graven  images." 
Idolatry  was  their  besetting  sin.  It  marked  their  history  more  or  less  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end.  What  is  idolatry  but  giving  that  love  to  inferior  objects  that  is  duo 
to  God  and  Ood  alone  ?  3.  They  ignored  God's  kindness,  "  They  knew  not  that  I 
healed  them."  They  ascribed  their  restoration  either  to  themselves  or  others,  not  to  Grod. 
4.  They  persistently  hackslided.  "  And  my  people  are  bont  to  backsliding  from  me.* 
They  forsake  me  and  are  bent  on  doing  so.  Such  is  the  signally  ungrateful  conduct  of 
this  people. 

III.  A  BIGHTEOUSLT  PUNISHED  PEOPLE.  "  He  shall  Dot  fetum  into  the  land  of  Egypt, 
but  the  Assyrian  shall  be  his  king,  because  they  refused  to  return.  And  the  sword 
shall  abide  on  his  cities,  and  shall  consume  his  branches,  and  devour  them,  because 
of  their  own  counsels."  Whilst  they  would  not  be  driven  back  to  Egypt  again, 
judgment  should  overtake  them  even  in  the  promised  land,  and  the  judgment  would  be  : 
1.  Kxttntive.  "  On  the  cities,"  and  on  the  "  branches."  The  large  town  and  the  little 
hamlets.  2.  Continuous.  "  Abide  on  his  cities."  3.  Destructive,  "  Consume  his 
branches." 

CoNOLUBlON.  Is  not  the  history  of  this  people  typical  t  Do  not  they  represent 
especially  the  peoples  of  modern  Christendom,  highly  favoured  of  God,  signally  ungrate- 
ful to  God,  and  exposed  to  punishment  from  God  ? — D.  T. 

Vers.  8, 9,— Justice  and  mercy  in  tJu  heart  of  Ood.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up, 
Ephraim?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel?  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah?  how 
shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repoutings  are  kindled 
together.  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger,  I  will  not  return  to  destroy 
Ephraim :  for  I  am  God,  and  not  man  ;  the  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee :  and  I  will 
not  enter  into  the  city."  The  Bible  is  pre-eminently  an  anthropomorphitic  book,  that 
is,  a  book  revealing  God,  not  directly  in  his  absolute  glory,  nor  through  the  affections, 
thoughts,  and  conduct  of  angels,  but  through  man— through  man's  emotions,  m  des  of 
thought,  and  actions.  It  sometimes  brings  God  before  us  in  the  character  of  a  Husband, 
that  we  may  appreciate  his  fidelity  and  tenderness ;  sometimes  in  tlie  character  of  a 
Warrior,  that  we  may  appreciate  his  invincibility  and  the  victories  that  attend  his 
procedure ;  sometimes  as  a  Monarch,  that  we  may  appreciate  his  wealth,  splendour,  and 
authority ;  sometimes  as  a  Father,  that  we  may  appreciate  the  reality,  depth,  and 
solicitude  of  his  love.  It  is  in  this  last  character,  the  character  of  a  father,  that  these 
verses  present  him  to  our  notice.  No  human  character,  of  course,  can  give  a  full  or 
perfect  revelation  of  him — all  fall  infinitely  short.  The  brightest  human  representation 
of  him  is  to  his  glory  less  than  the  dimmest  glow-worm  to  the  central  fires  of  the 
universe.  And  yet  it  is  only  through  man  that  we  can  get  any  clear  or  impressive  idea 
of  him.  It  is  only  through  human  love,  human  faithfulness,  human  justice,  that  we 
can  gain  any  conception  of  the  love,  faithfulness,  and  justice  of  the  Eternal.  The  verses 
lead  us  to  consider  several  things. 

I.  Mercy  and  justice  as  co-existino  in  the  heart  of  the  great  Father.  "  How  shall 
I  give  thee  up,  E|>hraim?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel  ?  how  shall  I  make  thee  as 
Admah  ?  how  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  1"  To  give  up  to  ruin,  to  deliver  to  destruc- 
tion, bum  up,  as  Admah  and  Zeboim— cities  of  the  plain — were  burnt  up,  is  the  demand 
of  Justice,  "Mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled  together." 
This  is  the  voice  of  mercy.  Hire,  then,  in  the  heart  of  this  great  Father  is  justice  and 
mercy.  What  is  justice?  It  is  that  sentiment  that  demands  that  every  one  should  have 
his  due,  that  virtue  should  be  rewarded,  that  vice  should  be  punished.  What  is  mercy  ? 
A  disposition  to  overlook  injuries  and  to  treat  beings  better  than  they  deserve.  These 
two  must  never  be  regaided  as  elements  essentially  distinct ;  they  are  branches  from 
the  same  root,  streams  from  the  same  fountain.  Both  are  but  modifications  of  love. 
Justice  is  but  love  standing  up  sternly  against  the  wrong;  mercy  is  but  love  bending 


0H.xti— i2.i  tnte  BOOK  OJ?  ilOSEA.  867 

in  tenderness  over  .the  helpless  and  the  suffering.  Now,  In  the  heart  of  God  this  Iota 
assumes  these  two  phases  or  manifestations.  1.  Material  nature  shows  that  there  ii 
the  stern  and  the  mild  in  God.  Winter  reveals  his  sternness,  summer  his  amiahility 
and  kindness.  2.  Providence  shows  that  there  is  the  stern  and  the  mild  in  God.  The 
heavy  afflictions  that  befall  nations,  families,  and  individuals  reveal  his  sternness  ;  the 
health  and  the  joy  that  gladden  life  reveal  his  mercy.  3.  The  spiritual  constitution  of 
man  shows  that  there  is  the  stern  and  the  mild  in  God.  In  the  human  soul  there  is 
an  instinct  to  revenge  the  wrong,  often  stern,  inexorable,  and  heartless.  There  is  also 
an  instinct  of  tenderness  and  compassion.  Whence  came  these?  From  the  great 
Father.    In  God,  then,  there  is  justice  and  mercy. 

II.  Mercy  and  justice  as  excited  bt  man  in  the  heart  of  the  Father.  1.  The  morroi 
u/ickedness  of  Ephraira  evoked  his  Justice.  Ephraim,  unfaithful,  sensual,  false,  idola- 
trous, justly  deserved  punishment.  Justice  awoke,  demands  destruction;  it  says, 
"  Let  Ephraim  be  given  up,  make  no  more  efibrts  for  its  restoration  and  happiness ;  let 
it  be  delivered  into  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  let  it  he  torn  to  pieces.  Eain  fir«  from 
heaven  upon  it,  and  let  it  bum  to  ashes,  as  did  Admah  and  Zeboim."  Human  wick(  d- 
ness  is  always  stirring,  so  to  say,  the  justice  of  the  infinite  heart.  2.  Ihejilial  suffering 
of  Ephraim  evoked  his  mercy.  Elsewhere  (Jer.  xzxi.  20)  we  have  these  remarkable 
words :  "  Is  Ephraim  my  dear  son  ?  is  he  a  pleasant  child  ?  for  since  I  spake  against  him, 
I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still :  therefore  my  bowels  are  troubled  for  him  ;  I  will 
surely  have  mercy  upon  him,  saith  the  Lord."  Qoi  calls  Ephraim  his  son,  and  Ephraim 
was  in  suffering,  and  hence  his  compassion  was  turned.  Why  does  the  eternal  Father 
show  mercy  unto  mankind  ?  They  deserve  destruction  on  account  of  their  sins ;  but 
men  are  his  children,  and  his  children  in  suffering. 

III.  Mercy  STBUGGLiisa  aqainst  justice  in  the  heart  of  the  great  Father,  There  is 
a  father  who  has  a  son,  not  only  disobedient,  hut  unloving  and  malignantly  hostile ;  he 
spurns  his  father's  authority,  and  pursues  a  course  of  conduct  anta!>;oni3tic  to  hia 
father's  will  and  interests.  Often  has  the  father  reproved  him  with  love  and  entreated 
him  to  reform,  but  he  has  grown  worse  and  worse,  and  has  become  incorrigible.  The 
wickedness  of  the  son  rouses  the  sentiment  of  justice  in  the  heart  of  the  father,  and  the 
father  says,  "  I  will  give  you  up,  I  will  shut  my  door  against  you,  I  will  disown  you,, 
and  send  you  as  a  vagabond  on  the  world ;  never  more  shall  you  cross  the  threshold  of 
my  home,  never  more  will  I  speak  to  you,"  This  is  justice ;  but  then  the  thought 
that  he  is  his  son  rouses  the  other  sentiment,  love,  and  here  is  the  struggle :  "  How 
shall  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  Such  experience  as  this  is,  alas  I  too  common  in  human  life. 
Such  a  struggle  between  mercy  and  justice  is  going  on  now  in  the  heart  of  many  a 
father  in  London.  The  passage  gives  us  to  understand  there  is  something  like  this 
in  the  heart  of  the  infinite  Father.  Justice  crying  out,  "  Damn ! "  mercy  crying  out, 
"  Save  I "  This  is  wonderful.  I  cannot  understand  it ;  it  transcends  my  conception ; 
and  yet  this  passage  snggests  the  fact, 

IV.  Mercy  tbiumphino  ovbb  justice  in  the  heart  of  the  great  Father.  "  Mine  heart 
is  turned  within  me,  my  repentingg  are  kindled  together.  I  will  not  execute  the 
fierceness  of  mine  anger,  I  will  not  return  to  desteoy  Ephraim."  1.  Mercy  has 
triumphed  over  justice  in  the  perpetuation  of  the  race.  Justice  said,  "  In  the  day  thou 
eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die."  Adam  did  eat  of  the  fruit,  but  lived  and  became 
the  father  of  a  countless  and  ever-multiplying  race.  Why?  Mercy  triumphed. 
2.  Mercy  has  triumphed  over  justice  in  the  experience  of  every  living  man.  Every  man 
is  a  sinner,  and  his  sins  cry  out  for  destruction ;  and  he  lives  on  because  mercy  has 
triumphed.  3,  Mercy  has  triumphed  over  justice  in  the  redemptive  mission  of  Christ. 
In  relation  to  the  whole  family  tree,  justice  said,  "  Cut  it  down,  for  it  cumbereth  the 
ground ;"  but  mercy  interposed,  and  said,  "  Spare  it  a  little  longer."  How  comes  it  to 
pass  that  mercy  thus  triumphs  ?  Here  is  the  answer.  "  For  I  am  God,  and  not  man." 
Had  I  been  a  man  it  would  have  been  otherwise,  "  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts, 
neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith  the  Lord." — D.  T. 

Ver.  12. — The  lies  of  a  people,  "  Ephraim  compasseth  me  about  with  lieg,  and  the 
house  of  Israel  with  deceit."  The  Almighty  here  represents  himself  as  a  man  beset 
with  lies  on  every  hand,  as  if  be  could  not  move  either  one  way  or  the  other.  Let  us 
notice— 


358  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xi.  1—12. 

L  The  natuke  of  the  libs  of  a  nation.  Lies  are  as  abundant  in  England  to-day 
as  they  were  in  Ephraim  centuries  ago.  The  social  atmosphere  is  infested  with  false- 
hoods. 1.  There  are  commereial  lies.  From  the  largest  warehouse  to  the  pedlar's 
paltry  stall  lies  abound.  They  infest  the  commercial  world  more  densely  far  than 
insects  the  summer  air.  2.  There  are  theological  lies.  Doctrines  are  propounded  and 
enforced  from  the  press  and  theological  chairs  utterly  untrue  to  eternal  realities.  3. 
There  are  reliyious  lies.  Sentiments  and  aspirations  are  expressed  in  the  prayers, 
psalmodies,  and  liturgies  of  congregations,  untrue  to  facts,  untrue  to  the  experience  of 
those  who  give  them  utterance.  4.  Tliere  are  literary  lies.  The  journals  and  volumes 
that  stream  from  the  modern  press  teem  with  falsehood.  Surely,  if  the  Almighty  were 
to  speak  of  England  as  he  spoke  of  Ephraim  in  olden  times,  he  would  say  it "  compasseth 
me  about  with  lies." 

'How  false  are  men,  both  in  their  heads  and  hearts  I 
And  there  is  falsehood  in  all  trades  and  arts. 
Lawyers  deceive  their  clients  by  false  law ; 
Priests,  Uy  false  gods,  keep  all  the  world  in  awe. 
For  their  false  tongues  such  flatt'ring  knaves  are  raised. 
For  their  false  wit  scribbles  by  fools  are  praised." 

(John  Crown.) 

n.  Thk  cause  of  the  lies  of  a  hation.  All  lies  spring  from  at  least  three  sources. 
1.  Vanity.  A  desire  to  appear  before  our  compeers  in  the  world  greater  than  we 
are,  leads  to  the  exaggeration  of  our  virtues,  if  we  have  any,  and  to  the  denial  of  our 
infirmities  ami  faults.  2,  Oreed.  Greed  is  a  prolific  source  of  falsehood.  Greed  creates 
the  lies  that  crowd  our  markets.  3.  Fear.  Fear  creates  lies  as  shields  of  defence. 
Beligious  lies  spring  in  a  great  measure  from  fear.  Nearly  all  the  lies  that  fill  the 
world  are  the  children  either  of  vanity,  greed,  or  fear. 

III.  The  evil  of  the  lies  of  a  nation.  All  lies  are  bad  things.  1.  They  are  bad 
in  themsdvet.  They  are  repugnant  to  the  God  of  truth.  They  are  s  miasma  in  the 
moral  atmosphere,  essentially  offensive  as  well,  as  pernicious.  2,  They  are  bad  in  their 
influence.  Lies  deceive  and  I'uln.  Every  system  built  on  lies,  commercial,  scientific, 
political,  and  religious,  is  like  a  house  built  on  the  sand  that  must  tumble  down  before 
the  rushing  storms  of  reality. 

"  Let  falsehood  be  a  stranger  to  thy  lips : 
Bbame  on  the  policy  that  first  began 
To  tamper  with  the  heart  to  hide  its  thoughts  I 
And  doubly  shame  on  that  inglorious  tongue 
That  sold  its  honesty  and  told  a  lie  t " 

(William  Havard.) 

D.T. 
Vers.  1—4. — Ood^t  early  love  for  Israel.  The  mind,  pained  by  ingratitude,  naturally 
reverts  to  the  kindnesses  formerly  showered  on  the  unworthy  recipient.  God  here 
reminds  Israel  of  his  early  love  to  the  nation — how  he  had  adopted  it  as  his  son,  called 
it  out  of  Egypt,  taught  it  to  go  alone,  drawn  it  with  love,  and  bountifully  provided  for 
it.  No  sin  is  so  odious  as  filial  ingratitude  (Isa.  i.  3).  None  is  so  grieTous  to  the  heftrt 
of  a  parent.    It  is  this  sin  which  God  here  charges  on  Israel. 

I.  The  childhood  of  Israel.  "  When  Israel  was  a  child,  then  I  loved  him  "  (ver.  1). 
1.  Israel  had  a  childhood.  Every  nation  has.  There  is  a  time  when,  in  the  natural 
development  of  society,  the  patriarclial  stage  passes  over  into  the  political.  This  time 
came  to  Israel  in  Egypt.  The  patriarchal  lamily  had  grown  into  a  horde.  It  had  lost 
its  domestic  character,  yet  it  had  no  polity.  It  might  never  have  had  one  had  the 
people  remained  in  bondage.  God  gave  them  freedom,  and  with  it  nationality.  Thus 
the  nation  was  created.  2.  The  individual  hat  a  childhood.  He  is  cast  on  God's  care 
from  the  womb  (Fs.  xxii.  9,  10).  One  can  sometimes  almost  trace  a  special  provi- 
dence in  the  care  of  children.  Those  who  can  look  back  on  special  mercies  in  childhood 
and  early  life  are  in  the  position  of  Israel  here.  3.  The  spiritual  life  has  a  diildhood. 
It  has  its  feeble  beginnings.  There  are  those  who  are  but  "  babes  in  Christ "  (1  Cor. 
iii.  1).  They  are  as  "  new-born  babes,"  needing  "  the  elncere  milk  of  the  Word,"  that 
they  may  "grow  thereby  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).  God  is  tenderly  careful  of  with,  eonsiderate 
of  ^eir  weakness  and  watchful  in  their  nurture. 


on.  XI.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  859 

II.  Gk)D'8  LOTS  TO  ISRAGL  IN  HIS  CHILDHOOD.  "  I  loved  him,  and  called  my  son  out 
of  Egypt,"  etc.  (vers.  1,  3, 4).  God's  love  to  Israel  was  shown :  1.  In  hu  adoption. 
He  chose  the  nation,  and  called  it  "  My  son,  my  firstborn  "  (Exod.  iv.  22).  "  Israel 
was  a  type  of  Christ,  and  for  the  sake  oF  him  who  was  to  be  born  of  the  seed  of  Israel 
did  God  call  Israel '  My  Son.' "  In  Christ  the  honour  is  extended  to  each  individual 
believer  (1  John  iii.  1).  The  relation  expressed  is  one  of  peculiar  endearment  and  of 
pre-eminent  privilege.  It  is  connected,  in  the  case  of  believeis,  with  the  impartation 
of  a  new  principle  of  liTe  in  regeneration  (1  John  iii.  9).  The  children  of  believers  are 
"  holy  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  14).  God  claims  them  in  baptism  as  hi>  children.  The  name  "  sons 
of  God  "  shall  be  restored  to  Israel  on  their  conversion  (oh.  i.  10).  2.  In  calling  him 
tnt  of  Egypt.  Freedom  is  an  attribute  of  God's  children  (Rom.  viil.  21).  When  God 
made  Israel  his  son  he  bound  himself  to  deliver  him.  He  gives  freedom  to  all  his 
spiritual  children.  The  call  to  leave  Egypt  was,  moreover,  a  proof  of  God's  faithfulness 
and  love,  in  view  of  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers.  It  bore  also  a  prophetic  character 
(Matt.  i.  16).  Egypt  having,  by  express  Divine  selection,  been  chosen  a  second  time 
as  a  place  of  refuge  for  God's  Son — for  him  of  whom  Israel,  God's  firstborn,  was  but  a 
type — the  former  call  became  prophetically  a  pledge  that  in  this  case  also  the  Father's 
summons  would  in  due  time  arrive.  Arrive,  accordingly,  it  did.  The  word,  "Out  of 
Egypt  have  I  called  my  son,"  found  a  new  and  higher  fulfilment.  On  the  Divine  side, 
the  fulfilment  was  neither  unforeseen  nor  undesigned.  3,  In  training  Mm  to  go  alone, 
"  I  taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  the  arms."  God  gave  the  nation  freedom. 
He  further  taught  it  to  use  its  freedom.  Freedom,  without  power  to  use  it,  is  a  sorry 
gift.  In  the  training  of  Israel  we  observe :  (1)  Wisdom.  The  people,  as  they  came 
from  Kgypt,  were  unfit  for  independent  national  existence.  They  could  not  go  alone. 
The  bondage  they  had  experienced  had  broken  their  manliness.  They  were  servile, 
cowardly;  fickle,  petulant,  disuuited.  They  had  to  be  guided  at  every  step — treated 
like  children  who  cannot  walk  alone.  But  the  point  is,  that  God  sought  to  train 
tliem  to  walk.  It  is  not  his  wish  that  his  children  should  go  in  leading-strings. 
He  would  train  them  to  self-reliance.  He  therefore  put  the  people  in  situations 
fitted  to  develop  their  own  powers.  His  training  was  wise.  (2)  Care.  God  was 
kind  and  tender  with  Israel  while  yet  they  were  weak.  He  did  not  try  them  above 
what  they  were  able.  In  difficult  situations  he  brought  help  to  them  in  time.  He 
was  like  a  nurse  who  stands  near  while  the  child  is  walking,  ready  to  catch  it  if  it 
totters,  and  to  support  it  when  it  can  walk  no  further.  Thus  God  deals  with  all  his 
children  (cf.  1  Thess.  ii.  7).  Wisdom,  goodness,  and  care  are  manifest  in  his  leading 
of  them,  especially  in  the  beginning  of  their  way.  4.  In  drawing  the  people  with 
love,  "  I  drew  them  with  cords  of  a  man,  with  bands  of  love."  The  people  needed  to 
be  drawn.  They  were  often  recalcitrant  and  ill  to  manage.  God  emphasizes  here : 
(1)  The  humannest  of  ■  his  drawing  of  them.  "  Cords  of  a  man."  There  was  a 
humanness  in  the  manner  of  his  approach  to  them — speaking  to  them  in  human  words, 
through  human  servants,  and  with  the  persuasions  of  human  affection.  The  heart  of 
God  was  found  to  be  like  the  heart  of  man.  The  Almighty  tempered  his  glory,  and 
spake  to  Israel  as  Father  to  Son.  His  cords  were  those  of  a  man  in  another  sense. 
He  drew  them  by  rational  considerations.  He  treated  them  as  rational  beings,  and 
aiipealod  to  them  throughout  on  rational  grounds.  God  draws  men  in  this  way  stilL 
Tlie  Bible  is  the  most  human  book  in  the  world.  Christ  is  God  become  man.  The 
Spirit  acts  tlirough  rational  motives  on  the  will  (2)  The  gentleness  of  his  drawing  of 
them.  *'  Bands  of  love."  God  employed,  not  stern,  but  gentle  methods  to  overcome 
the  people's  refractoriness.  He  sought  to  draw  them  to  himself  by  kindness.  Especially 
in  the  earlier  stages  of  the  wilderness  discipline  do  we  find  him  making  large  and 
merciful  allowances  for  them.  The  people  are  constantly  rebelling,  but  seldom  do  we 
read  of  God  so  much  as  chiding  them ;  he  bore  with  them,  like  a  father  bearing  with 
his  children.  He  knew  how  ignorant  they  were ;  how  much  infirmity  there  was  about 
them ;  how  novel  and  trying  were  the  situations  in  which  he  was  placing  them ;  and 
he  mercifully  gave  them  time  to  improve.  This  was  the  drawing  of  love,  of  which 
every  one  who  knows  God  has  also  had  ample  experience.  6.  In  hountifvlly  providing 
for  them.  "  I  was  to  them  as  they  that  take  off  the  yoke  on  their  jaws,  and  I  laid 
meat  unto  them."  God  provided  for  Israel  all  that  was  necessary  for  their  sustenance, 
and  not  only  thus  supplied  their  creature  wants,  but  was  kind  in  hia  manner  of  doiu^ 
it.    He  was  also  the  Healer  of  their  diseases  (Exod.  xv.  26). 


360  THE  BOOK  Oi*  HOSfeA.  [oh.  xi.  1— 12. 

in.  Isbael's  requital  of  this  love.  (Vera.  2,  3.)  Israel  had  made  Glod  a  shameful 
return  for  all  his  goodness  to  them.  They:  1.  Be/used  obedience.  "As  they  [the 
l)rophets]  called  them,  so  they  went  from  them."  They  flatly  turned  their  back  on 
duty.  They  went  further  in  sin  the  more  they  were  warned.  2.  Dishonoured  Ood  in 
the  very  article  of  his  Oodhead.  "They  sacrificed  to  Baalim,  and  burned  incense  to 
graven  images,"  thus  breaking  the  first  and  second  commandments.  3.  Renounced 
Ood  as  a  Eedler.    "  They  knew  not  that  I  healed  them  "  (c£  ch.  v.  13). — J.  0. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — Fatal  courses.  So  the  wise  man  teaches,  "There  is  a  way  that  seemeth 
right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of  death"  (Prov.  xvi.  25).    We 

have  here — 

I.  Israel's  bake.  They  insisted  on  thinking  their  own  way  better  than  God's. 
This  is  brought  out  in  the  different  expressions:  "They  refused  to  return"  (ver.  5); 
"  Because  of  their  own  counsels  "  (ver.  6) ;  "  My  people  are  bent  on  backsliding  from 
me  "  (ver.  7) ;  "  None  at  all  would  exalt  him  "  (or  exalt  themselves,  raise  themselve§ 
up  to  God).  They  were  in  error,  hut  they  would  not  be  persuaded  of  it.  They  were 
hugging  a  delusion,  but  they  elung  to  it  as  wisdom.  They  thought  their  own  way 
right,  and  the  way  which  tl^e  prophets  pointed  out  to  them  silly,  stupid,  contemptible. 
This  is  the  folly  of  the  sinner.  He  sets  himself  up  as  wiser  than  God.  He  snaps  his 
fingers  at  those  who  call  him  to  the  Most  High  (ver.  7).  The  folly  of  Am  way  might 
seem  self-evident,  but,  nnwarnc  d  by  the  lessons  of  the  past,  he  sounds  its  praises  as  if 
reason  and  experience  were  entirely  on  his  side. 

IL  Israel's  punishment.  The  roads  of  sin,  unhappily,  lead  to  destruction,  whether 
those  who  walk  in  them  are  persuaded  of  the  fact  or  not.  So  Israel  Tound  it.  "Their  own 
counsels,  which  they  preferred  to  God's,  cost  them  :  1.  Relegation  to  bondage.  (Ver.  6.) 
The  freedom  God  had  bestowed  upon  them  (ver.  1)  he  would  again  deprive  them  of. 
Their  destination,  however,  would  not  be  the  liteial  Egypt,  but  Assyria.  The  principles 
of  God's  moral  administration  abide,  but  they  seldom  embody  themselves  in  precisely 
the  same  outward  forms.  2.  A  whirling  sword.  (Ver.  6.)  The  sword  would  whirl 
and  devour  till  it  had  devastated  the  whole  kingdom.  A  type  of  the  more  terribla 
wrath  that  will  consume  the  sinner. — J.  0. 

Vers.  8 — 11. — Divine  relentings.  God's  wrath,  had  it  burned  agidnst  Kphraim 
according  to  his  deserts,  would  have  utterly  consumed  him.  It  would  have  made  him 
like  Admah  and  Zeboini,  cities  of  the  plain,  "  which  the  Lord  overthrew  in  his  anger, 
and  in  his  wrath  "  (Deut.  xxix.  23).  But  Divine  compassion  sets  limits  to  Divine 
wrath.  God  would  punish,  but,  in  remembrance  of  the  covenant  made  with  the  fathers, 
would  yet  spare  a  part,  and  in  the  end  would  recover  and  restore.  For  "  city  "  (ver.  9), 
read  "  heat  (of  wrath)." 

I.  Compassionate,  yet  punishing.  (Ver.  8.)  1.  Ood^s  wrath  is  limited  by  his  com- 
passion. "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Israel  ? " 
In  the  threatenings,  God  speaks  as  if  he  would  destroy  Israel  altogether.  He  states 
what  their  sins  dest-rve,  and  what,  having  regard  to  his  wrath  only,  he  would  be  bound 
to  inflict.  Their  sins  kindled  an  indignation  which,  had  it  burned  unchecked,  would 
I  ave  consumed  them  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  now  shows  how  compassion  works 
to  limit  this.  God,  having  set  his  love  on  Ephraim,  cannot  give  him  up.  Wrath  is  not 
the  only  principle  in  the  Divine  breast,  and  wrath  having  uttered  itself  in  threatenings, 
pity  is  called  forth  by  tlie  thought  of  the  woe  with  which  the  threatenings  are  charged. 
So  God  says,  "  Mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled"  (cf.  Ps.  Iviii, 
38,  39).  Were  it  not  for  God's  compassions,  sinners  would  not  be  so  long  borne  with, 
nor  would  their  punishments  so  often  stop  short  of  destruction  (Lam.  lii.  22).  2.  Ood^s 
compassion  does  not  alter  the  determination  to  punish.  Though  God's  repentings  were 
kindled,  this  did  not  mean  that  Ephraim  was  to  escape  the  punishment  of  his  sins. 
Right  must  be  maintained.  If  God — the  "Holy  One" — ^is  not  sanctified  in  men,  he 
must  be  sanctified  upon  them.  God  declares  only  that  he  will  turn  from  the  "  fierce- 
ness  "  of  his  anger — that  he  will  not  utteily  destroy  Israel  (ver.  9).  The  sinner,  there- 
fore, need  not  build  hopes  on  the  Divine  mercy,  as  though  he  could  sin  and  yet  evade 
penalty.     His  sins  may  even  reach  a  point  at  which  mercy  can  do  no  more  for  him. 

II.  Repentino,  yet  immutable.    God's  repentings  are  kindled,  yet  the  guaiantet 


<ifi.  in.  1— 14J 


TUB  BOOfe  OJ"  flOSMA. 


361 


given  that  he  will  not  destroy  Kphiaim  is  that  he  is  "God,  and  not  man" — "the  Holy 
One,"  an  attribute  of  whose  character  is  faithfulness  (ver.  9).  The  apparent  contra- 
diction is  to  be  resolved,  not  by  turning  what  is  said  of  the  Divine  relentings  into  a 
mere  anthropomorphism,  but  by  remembering — what  immutability  involves — that  the 
same  principles  which  operate  in  tlie  Divine  breast  in  the  execution  of  his  purposes 
operated  also  in  the  forming  of  them.  God,  that  is,  in  the  forming  of  his  purposes  had 
in  view  Irath  what  justice  would  dictate  and  what  love  wouM  desire.  His  purpose  was 
framed  in  the  interest  of  both.  The  evolution  of  the  purpose  in  history  brings  God 
into  living  relations  with  men,  and  calls  the  forces  of  the  Divine  nature  into  active  and 
intensely  real  exercise.  1.  Qod  is  not  man  in  his  long-suffering.  Man  would  not  bear 
witli  man  as  God  bears  with  sinners.  He  would  not  forgive  as  God  forgives.  He  would 
not  show  the  same  patience  in  working  for  his  fellow-man's  recovery.  He  would  not  be 
so  easily  entreated.  He  would  not  stoop,  as  God  stoops,  to  love  the  worthless.  He 
would  not  make  the  sacrifice  which  God  has  made  for  the  salvation  of  enemies  (Rom.  r. 
6 — 8).  2.  Ood  it  not  man  in  his  vnchangeahility.  He  "is  not  a  man,  that  he  should 
lie ;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent"  (Kumb.  xxiii.  19).  He  is  not  swayed 
by  passing  feelings  to  change  his  intenti'>ns.  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not;  there- 
fore ye  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed  "  (Mai.  iii.  6).  God  had  in  view  the  promise 
to  the  fathers,  and  would  not  be  false  to  it.  God's  faithfulness  is  the  saint's  consolation 
and  the  repentant  sinner's  hope.  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins  "  (1  John  i.  9),  "  He  abideth  faithful :  he  cannot  deny  himself 
(2  Tim.  ii.  13). 

lU.  Bbjecting,  yet  pbouisinq  to  BG3T0RB.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  Israel  was  to  become 
a  "  No-people"  to  Jehovah  (ch.  i.  9),  but  not  absolutely.  They  would  ultimately  be 
restored.  A  day  of  grace  was  set  for  them.  The  return  would  be :  1.  In  response  to  a 
Divine  call.  "He  shall  roar  as  a  lion:  when  he  shall  roar,  then  the  children  shall 
tremble  from  the  west."  God's  call  would  be  loud,  far-reaching,  effectual.  God's  call 
precedes  the  sinner's  return.  Believers  are  designated  "  the  called."  This  call  came  in 
a  preliminary  way  to  Israel  at  the  time  of  the  return  from  captivity  under  Cyrus  (Ezra  i. 
1 — 3).  It  was  then  but  very  partially  answered.  It  comes  spiritually  in  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel.  The  complete  fulfilment  is  yet  in  the  future.  2.  Joyful  and  prompt. 
They  "  shall  tremble  from  the  west.  They  shall  tremble  as  a  bird  out  of  Egypt, 
and  as  a  dove  out  of  the  land  of  Assyria."  The  trembling  would  be  in  holy  joy  and 
fear.  The  return  would  be  in  haste,  as  a  bird  flies  to  its  nest,  and  a  dove  to  its  dove- 
cote. It  would  be  from  west  and  east,  i.e.  from  all  quarters  whither  God  had  scattered 
them.  3.  Permanent.  "  And  I  will  place  them  in  their  houses,  saith  the  Lord."  The 
])rediction  will  have  its  main  fulfilment  in  the  reception  of  Israel  back  into  the  kingdom 
of  God.  It  may  have  a  lower  temporal  fulfilment  in  the  restoration  of  the  nation  to 
their  own  land. — J.  0. 

Ver.  12.— (See  next  chapter.)— J.  0, 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 
In  vers.  1—6  Ood  continues  his  com- 
plaint against  Ephraim,  charging  them 
specially  with  the  pursuit  of  vain  and  futile 
courses  to  their  great  detriment.  Instead  of 
repaii'ing  to  the  true  and  everlasting  source 
of  safety  and  salvation,  they  had  recourse  to 
foreign  alliances  to  support  and  strengthen 
their  decaying  state  and  sinking  interests. 
And  yet  the  only  staying  power  was  Jehovali. 
The  controversy  now  embraces  Judah  also ; 
and  thus  Jaoob— Iwtb  Israel  and  Judab — ^is 


threatened  with  such  panlshment  as  their 
doings  deserved.  The  mention  of  their  great 
ancestor  Jacob  natiually  suggests  a  con- 
trast ;  while  liis  conduct  is  proposed  to  them 
for  an  example.  They  are  accordingly  in- 
vited to  follow  in  his  footsteps,  imitate  the 
piety  and  wisdom  of  bis  course,  and  so  enter- 
tain good  hope  of  similar  success  from  the 
unchanging  and  unchangeable  Ood  of  their 
pious  ancestor. 

Ver.  1. — Ephraim  feedeth  on  wind,  and 
follcweth  after  the  east  wind.  "  Wind  "  is 
employed  flj^aratively   to  denote   what   Is 


362 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[CH.  XII.  1 — U, 


empty  and  vain,  of  no  real  worth  or  practical 
bene£t.  1.  To  feed  on  wind  is  to  take 
pleasure  in  or  draw  anstenance  from  what 
can  really  afford  neither;  while  following 
after  the  east  wind  is  (1)  to  pursue  vain 
hopes  and  ideals  which  are  unattainable. 
According  to  this  view,  the  prominent  idea 
of  the  east  wind  is  its  fleetness,  which  passed 
into  a  proverb ;  thus  Horace  says, "  Agente 
nimbos  Ocior  Euro."  To  outrun  the  swift 
and  stormy  east  wind  would  represent  an 
undertaking  at  once  impracticable  and  hope- 
less. But  (2)  it  is  rather  the  blasting  influ- 
ence of  the  east  wind  that  is  referred  to,  so 
that  it  is  a  figurative  representation,  not  so 
much  of  what  is  Tain  and  hopeless,  as  of 
what  is  pernicious  and  destructive.  Thus 
their  course  was  not  only  idle,  but  injurious ; 
not  only  delusive,  but  destructive ;  not  only 
fruitless,  but  fatal.  Their  career,  which  is 
thus  represented,  included  their  idolutry  andi 
foreign  alliances.  Kimchi  explains  this 
clause  ae  follows :  "  In  his  service  of  the 
calves  he  is  like  him  who  opens  his  mouth 
to  the  wind  and  feeds  on  it,  though  he  can- 
not support  life  thereby.  'And  foUoweth 
after  the  east  wind ; '  he  repeats  the  sense  in 
different  words,  and  mentions  the  east  wind 
because  itia  the  strongest  and  most  injurioua 
of  winds  to  the  sons  of  men.  So  with  them : 
it  is  not  enough  that  the  idolatry  of  the 
calves  does  not  profit  them,  but  it  actually 
injures  them."  2.  The  Septuagint  render- 
ing is  'O  5e  'Etppal/j,  vovtiphv  TryevfiOf  eSia^t 
KavSiva,  equivalent  to  "  But  Ephraim  is  an 
evil  spirit;  he  has  chased  the  east  wind." 
He  daily  (rather,  all  the  day)  increaseth  lies 
and  desolation.  Some  nnderstood  these 
words  (1)  as  descriptive  of  Ephraim's  atti- 
tude towards  Jehovah ;  and  thus  what  is 
figuratively  set  forth  in  the  first  clause  is 
here  represented  literally.  Tlius  Kimchi 
says,  "He  does  not  turn  baok  from  his 
wickedness,  but  all  the  days  he  multiplies 
lying,  which  is  the  worship  of  the  calves, 
and  so  increases  the  desolation  and  destruc- 
tion tliat  sliall  come  as  a  punishment  for 
their  service.  And  with  all  this  he  does 
not  perceive  nor  return  from  the  worship  of 
the  calves  to  the  worship  of  the  blessed 
God."  But  (2)  we  prefer  understanding 
the  second  clause  of  Ephraim's  conduct  to- 
wards his  neighbour  or  fellow-man.  Thus, 
Ilitzig,  who  shows  that  -iiB  cannot  refer  to 
their  conduct  towards  Jehovah,  nor  could 
their  lies  and  desolation  continue  the  whole 
day  if  referred  to  his  service,  ^y1  Dpn, "  vio- 
lence and  robbery,"  or  "spoil,"  are  also  joined 
in  a  similar  manner  in  Amos  iii.  10  and  Jer. 
vi.  7,  to  characterize  men's  conduct  towards 
their  neighbours.  In  the  passage  before  us, 
if  we  refer  the  words,  "  lies  and  desolation," 
as  we  think  they  ought  to  be  referred,  to 
Ephraim's  conduct  towards  men,  the  3T3 


and  "w  may  be  distinguished  thus:  the 
former  designates  low  lying  and  fraudulent 
dealing;  while  the  latter  expresses  that 
brutal  violence  by  which  dishonest  men  un- 
scnipnlously  take  possession  of  their  neigh- 
bours' property.  And  they  do  make  a  cove- 
nant with  the  Assyrians,  and  oil  is  carried 
into  Egypt.  This  fondness  for  foreign 
alliances  is  specified  as  a  positive  proof  of 
their  apostasy  from,  and  want  of  confidence 
in,  Jehovah.  This  is  well  explained  by 
Kimchi  in  the  following  comment :  "  But 
what  doeth  Ephraim  ?  When  oppression  of 
the  enemy  comes  upon  him,  they  make  a 
covenant  with  Assyria  for  their  assistance, 
and  likewise  with  Egypt — one  time  with 
this,  another  time  with  that."  The  expres- 
sion vra  rTD, "  to  cut  a  covenant,"  has  its  pa- 
rallel in  the  Greek  hpxia  Ttiivetv  and  Latin 
foedua  ferire,  as  also  in  the  Arabic,  doubtless 
from  the  circumstance  of  slaying  the  victims 
in  its  ratification.  The  conduct  here  cen- 
sured is  Ephraim's  faithlessness  to  the  theo- 
eratio  covenant  rather  than  their  treacherous 
manoeuvring  in  "  playing  off"  Egypt  against 
Assyria,  and  Assyria  against  Egypt  alter- 
nately. The  land  of  Israel  abounded  in  oil- 
olive  and  honey,  as  we  read  in  Dent.  viii. 
8  and  elsewhere.  The  object  of  sending  it 
to  Egypt  was  as  a  present  to  the  Egyptians 
to  secure  their  interest  and  help  against 
Assyria.  It  is  thus  properly  explained  both 
by  Basbi  and  Kimchi.  The  former  says, 
"And  their  oil  they  biing  to  Egypt  to  give 
it  to  them  as  a  present  that  they  may  help 
them;"  the  latter  likewise,  "They  bring 
their  oil  to  the  Egyptians  for  a  present,  for 
oil  came  to  Egypt  and  to  other  lands  out  of 
the  land  of  Israel.  The  land  of  Israel  was 
rich  in  olive  oil." 

Ver.  2. — The  Lord  hath  also  a  controversy 
with  Judah,  and  will  punish  (margin,  visit 
upon)  Jacob  according  to  bis  ways.  God 
here  presents  himself  at  once  as  plointiff 
•nd  judge,  widening  the  ringe  of  his  plead- 
ings. The  controversy  with  Israel  takes  a 
wilier  sweep,  and  ccmpreliends  Judah  cul- 
pable, though  apparently  in  a  less  degree. 
But  though  Judiih  comes  in  for  a  sliare  of 
punishment,  that  punishment  shall  be  pro- 
portionate to  their  delinquencies — those  like 
Judah  that  sinned  lees  shall  suffer  less; 
while  the  more  heinous  transgressors,  sucli 
as  Israel  had  proved  to  be,  would  come  in 
for  severer  punishment.  To  Jacob,  here 
embracing  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  and  the 
two  of  Judah,  the  chastisement  would  tie 
meted  out  in  exact  accordance  with  his  ways. 
The  apparent  contradiction  between  ver.  12 
of  last  chapter,  where,  as  most  translate  it, 
Judah  is  represented  as  ruling  with  God 
and  being  iaitht'ul  with  the  saints,  and  the 
present  inclusion  of  Judah  in  controversy 
witn  Jehovah,  occasioned  (1)  •  rendering 


CH.  XII.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


863 


and  explanation  of  thit  Terse  which  Aben 
Ezra  declares  to  be  both  nngrammatical  and 
uiisoriptural.  "  He,"  says  Aben  Ezra,  "  who 
explains  that  Judah  is  faithful  and  he  shall 
be  reproving,  and  asserts  that  Scripture 
makes  no  mention  of  Jehovah  having  a  con- 
troversy against  Judah,  but  [employs]  ay,  the 
sense  being  that  Jehovah  and  Judah  have  a 
stiifo  against  Ephraim,  errs  from  the  way 
of  Scripture  and  grammar,  for  the  prophet 
has  written  above  (ver.  13), '  Judah  saw  his 
wound;'  'I  will  make  Ephraim  to  ride; 
Judah  shall  plough;'  and  in  reference  to  both 
of  them  he  says, '  Ye  shall  eat  the  &uit  of 
lies.'  He  also  forgets  'The  berdmen  of 
Oerar  did  strive  with  (dj;)  Isaac's  herdmen ; ' 
'  And  the  people  strove  with  Moses ; '  and 
many  other  places  [».e.  where  op  is  found 
with  the  sense  of '  contending '].  Therefore 
he  joins  Ephraim  with  Judah,  and  says, 
'  The  Lord  hath  also  a  controversy  with 
Judah,  and  will  punish  Jacob  according  to 
Ilia  ways,'  beoanse  this  name  (t.e.  Jacob) 
comprehends  them  both  (ICphraim  and 
Judah)."  (2)  The  meaning  is  given  con- 
cisely and  correctly  by  Kashi  thus:  "He 
(Jehovah)  announces  to  them  the  words  of 
his  controversy  which  their  brethren  of  the 
house  of  Israel  had  caused  him;  and  they 
should  not  wonder  if  he  would  punish  (lite- 
rally,* visit  on')  Jacobaocording  to  his  ways." 
The  change  in  the  cose  of  JuiUih,  Kimchi 
accounts  for  by  reference  to  their  subsequent 
apostasy,  especially  that  of  their  kings,  as 
follows :  "Although  he  said,  'And  Judah 
yel  reigneth  with  God,'  he  meant,  although 
he  holds  fast  by  the  service  of  God  in  the 
house  of  the  sanctuary ;  so  afterwards  they 
practised  evil  deeds  as  their  kings  were  evil ; 
therefore  he  said, '  Jehovah  has  a  controversy 
and  correction  with  Judah  and  Jacob  to  visit 
upon  them  according  to  their  doings,  as  their 
kings  were  evil,  for  they  did  not  remember 
my  mercy  with  them  and  with  their  father 
Jacob,  because  the  whole  was  for  sake  of  his 
posterity ;  and  I  showed  him  a  sign  which 
sliould  be  to  his  seed  after  him,  if  they  gave 
Iheir  heart  to  me.  .  .  .  And  the  sign  which 
I  uhowed  them  is  only  done  for  sake  of  his 
Sued.  But  they  have  not  acknowledged  this, 
fur  if  they  had  acknowledged  this,  they 
would  have  cleaved  to  me  and  my  service, 
and  I  would  have  ratified  to  them  the  bless- 
ing of  Jacob  their  father.'"  The  infinitive 
w  ith  2'  is  not  unfrequently  employed  in  the 
sunse  of  oar  future,  thus,  ip^h,  it  is  to  be 
visited,  equivalent  to  "he  shall  or  must 
visit  upon  it."  This  idiom  is  common  in 
Syriao,  but  always  witli  atid.  According  to 
his  doings  will  he  recompense  him.  The 
milder  expression  is  applied  to  Judah — he 
has  a  controversy  with  him,  but  will  punish 
Jacob,  rehtrioted  by  some  to  Ephraim  or  the 
ten  tribes.     Better  understand  Jacob  of  both 


Judah  and  Israel,  who  are  both  to  be  reoom> 
pensed,  eaoh  according  to  his  works. 

Ver.  8.— He  took  his  brother  by  the  heel 
in  the  womb,  and  by  his  strength  he  had 
power  (margin,  ukm  a  prince,  or,  beliaved 
himself  princely)  with  God.  In  this  verse  and 
the  following  the  prophet  looks  away  back 
into  the  far-distant  past;  and  this  retro- 
spect, which  is  suggested  by  the  names 
Jacob  and  Israel,  reminds  him  of  two  well- 
known  events  in  the  life  of  the  patriarch. 
The  meaning  and  intention  of  this  reminis- 
cence are  differently  interpreted.  The  two 
leading  views  are  the  following:  (1)  Some 
are  of  opinion  that  the  prophet  means  to 
give  an  example  by  way  of  warning,  and 
to  mention  a  trait  of  Jacob's  overreaching 
cunning,  and  likewise  of  his  violence,  and 
thereby  show  that  Jacob  had  incurred  guilt 
in  a  manner  resembling  tliat  of  the  then 
present  generation  ;  that  is  to  say,  his  con- 
duct had  been  like  to  theirs  in  deceit,  lying, 
and  violence.  But  (2)  according  to  others, 
and  we  agree  with  them,  the  object  of  the 
prophet  in  these  verses  is  to  admonish  them 
to  imitate  the  conduct  of  their  progenitor, 
and  to  remind  them  of  the  distinction  which 
he  had  obtained  thereby,  as  an  encourage- 
ment to  them  to  go  and  do  likewise.  (3) 
Another  interpretation,  somewhat  similar  to 
(2),  is  that  of  those  who  admit  that  Jacob's 
laying  hold  of  his  brother's  heel  in  the 
womb  is  proposed  to  his  posterity  by  the 
prophet  for  the  purpose  of  emulation  and 
encouragement,  at  the  same  time  to  exhibit 
God's  electing  grace  from  eternity.  Thus 
Jerome :  "  While  he  was  yet  in  the  womb  of 
Eebekah,  he  laid  hold  of  bis  brother's  heel, 
not  by  his  own  strength,  it  is  true,  who  was 
incapable  of  perception,  but  by  the  mercy  of 
God,  who  knows  and  loves  those  whom  he 
has  predestinated."  So  also  Baslii  :  "All 
this  I  have  done  to  him ;  he  took  his  brother 
by  the  heel  for  a  sign  that  he  would  prevail 
over  him."  Calvin  explains  more  fully 
thus :  "  Their  ingratitude  is  showed  in  this, 
that  they  did_  not  acknowledge  that  they 
had  been  anticipated,  in  the  person  of  their 
fatlier  Jacob,  by  the  gratuitous  meroy  of 
God.  The  first  history  is  indeed  referred 
to  for  this  end,  that  the  posterity  of  Jacob 
might  understand  that  they  had  been  elected 
by  God  before  tbey  were  bom.  For  Jacob 
did  not,  by  choice  or  design,  lay  hold  of  the 
heel  of  his  brother  in  his  mother's  womb ; 
but  it  was  an  extraordinary  thing.  It  was, 
then,  God  who  guided  the  hand  of  the  infant 
and  by  this  sign  testified  his  adoption  to  be 
gratuitous.  In  short,  by  saying  that  Jacob 
held  the  foot  of  his  brother  in  his  mother's 
womb,  the  same  thing,  is  intended  as  if 
God  had  reminded  the  Israelites  that  they 
did  not  excel  other  people  by  their  own 
virtue  or  that  of  their  parents,  but  that  God 


S64 


THE  BOOK  OP  nOSBA. 


[oh.  xn.  1— H» 


of  bis  own  good  pleasure  had  clioien  them." 
Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi  expUin  the  seizing 
of  Esau's  heel  by  Jacob  as  owing  to  the  im- 
paTtatiou  of  Divine  power,  but  as  a  sign  of 
victory  over  his  enemies.  We  must  reject 
(1)  for  the  following  reasons  :  (a)  The  refer- 
ence is  not  to  Gen.  xxvii.,  where  Jacob's 
overreaching  Esau  is  recorded,  but  to  Gen. 
xxT.  26,  where  it  is  written,  "After  that 
came  his  brother  out,  and  his  hand  took 
hold  on  Esau's  heel ; "  (b)  the  patriarchs  are 
always  exhibited  as  patterns  of  piety — 
besides,  Hosea  never  employs  the  name 
Israel  in  any  but  an  honourable  sense. 
We  must  elect  between  (2)  and  (3) ;  and  we 
incline  to  (2),  as  the  gist  of  the  passage  is 
to  exhibit  Jacob's  earnestness  in  seeking 
the  Divine  blessing  as  an  example  to  his 
posterity.  Already  in  his  mother's  womb, 
before  he  saw  the  light  of  the  world  even  in 
his  condition  of  unconsciousness,  he  had 
laid  hold  of  the  heel  of  his  elder  brother 
Esau,  in  order  to  anticipate  him  as  the  first- 
born, and  thereby  appropriate  the  Divine 
promises.  The  second  clause  describes  how 
with  zeal,  by  labour  and  effort,  he  had 
struggled  for  the  position  of  pre-eminence, 
sorely  struggling  for  the  Divine  blessing. 
In  the  maturity  of  his  manhood  he  wrestled 
with  God,  or  rather  with  the  angel  of  the 
covenant,  and  pievailed  so  that  his  name 
was  changed  to  Israel.  This  picture  the 
prophet  presents  to  Jacob's  posterity  for 
their  imitation,  i»ith  implied  promise  of  like 
happy  result.  Though  Abcn  Ezra  and 
Kimchi,  in  their  exposition  of  the  verse, 
rather  explain  in  their  own  way  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  original  event  as  recorded  in 
Genesis  than  the  application  which  the 
prophet  here  makes  of  it,  yet  it  may  not  be 
out  of  place  to  subjoin  their  comments, 
which  are  as  follows :  Aben  Ezra,  "  With 
respect  to  him  who  explains  '  in  the  womb ' 
in  the  sense  that  Jehovah  then  decreed  the 
matter  of  the  birthright  and  blessing,  I 
know  not  how  the  meaning  of '  in  the  worab ' 
bears  on  that,  as  the  Scripture  Bays, '  Before 
I  formed  thee  in  the  womb  I  knew  thee.' 
According  to  my  opinion  it  should  be  tnken 
accor.iing  to  its  lileral  sense,  thiit  'he  took 
his  brother  by  the  heel  in  the  womb ; '  and 
this  is  made  clear  by '  and  his  hand  took 
hold  on  E&au's  heel.'  Now  the  purport  is, 
'Why  do  the  sons  of  Jacob  not  remember 
thiit  I  chose  their  father,  and  efiected  pre- 
eminence for  him  over  all  that  are  born? 
For  when  he  was  in  the  womb  I  gave  him 
strength  to  lay  hold  of  the  heel,  and  this 
was  as  the  working  of  a  miracle,  for  tlie 
foetus  has,  in  the  womb  and  at  the  time  of 
the  opening  of  the  matrix,  no  strength  to 
lay  hold  of  anytliing  until  it  comes  forth 
from  the  womb  into  the  air  of  the  world. 
And  lo  I  when  he  was  in  the  womb  I  gave 


Mm  strength ;  and  afterwards  he  wrestled 
with  the  angel,  and  he  (the  angel)  did  not 
prevail  over  liim,  although  one  angel  slew 
the  whole  host  of  Assyria,  and  from  hia 
sight  the  childri'n  of  men  flee  in  terror  as 
David  who  was  frightened  ;  how  much  was 
it  to  wrestle  with  him.'  The  meaning  is 
that  all  the  children  of  the  world  should 
know  that  his  (Jacob's)  seed  shall  endure 
for  ever,  and  in  the  end  conquer  his  enemiis. 
But  Ephraim  thinks  that  Ephraim  himself 
has  found  the  power."  The  comment  of 
Kimchi  on  the  first  part  of  the  verse  is  much 
the  same  with  that  of  Aben  Ezra  just  cited  ; 
while  on  the  concluding  clause  he  remarks, 
"  And  yet  another  sign  I  have  shown  him 
to  be  a  sign  to  his  children  after  him,  for  I 
gave  him  strength  to  wrestle  with  the  angel 
and  to  be  a  prince  in  relation  to  him  as  if 
he  was  in  the  same  rank  with  him.  And 
this  sign  I  showed  him  that  his  sons  would 
be  the  portion  of  Jehovali  alone,  that  star 
and  angel  should  not  prevail  over  them  all 
the  time  they  would  do  my  pleasure,  and  by 
the  signs  of  the  heavens  they  should  not  be 
terrified,  for  they  have  no  strength  (physical) 
nor  power  (moral)  over  them,  because  the 
providence  of  God  most  blessed  cleaves  to 
them  during  all  the  period  they  would  do 
my  will,  nor  shall  they  succumb  to  any 
accident  of  time." 

Ver.  4. — ^Yea,  he  had  power  oTer  the 
angel,  and  prevailed:  he  wept,  and  made 
supplication  unto  him.  As  Jac9b's  position 
at  birth  symbolized  the  pre  eminence  which 
God's  electing  love  had  in  store  for  him, 
and  as  in  his  manhood's  prime  he  put  forth 
such  earnestness  and  energy  to  obtain  the 
blessing,  so  Israel,  by  the  example  (if  their 
forefather,  are  encouraged  to  like  strenuous 
exertion  with  like  certainty  of  success.  The 
example  is  more  fully  described  and  dwelt 
on  in  this  verse  for  the  purpose  of  more 
powerfully  stimulating  the  Israelites  of  the 
prophet's  day  to  imitate  it.  From  tliis  verso 
we  learn  the  following  facts :  (1)  the  na- 
ture of  the  coniliet  as  of  a  spiritual  kind  ; 
(2)  the  visible  embodiment  of  the  invisible 
deity,  so  that  the  angel  is  not  an  entire 
identification  with  God  in  the  preceding 
verse,  but  the  organ  of  Divine  mauifeatation ; 
and  (3)  the  weapons  used,  or  the  means 
employed,  namely,  weeping  and  supplica- 
tion, in  a  word,  the  instrumentality  of 
prayer ;  and  (4)  the  true  way  of  prevailing 
witli  God,  which  is  real  humility  and  sin- 
cere  supplication,  not  stiffnecked  and  de- 
fiant resistance  to  the  Divine  will  and  word, 
like  that  of  Israel  at  the  period  in  question. 
This  verse  "is,"  according  to  Abeu  Ezra, 
"an  explanation  how  he  put  foith  prowess 
with  God."  Kimchi  regards  it  as  "the 
repetition  of  the  same  thought  for  the  pur- 
pose of  intensifying,  lor   it  was  a  great 


oa.  zii.  1—14,] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


365 


wonder  for  a  man  to  wrestle  with  an  angel." 
n33  (1)  commences  a  new  clause ;  while  (2) 
the  punctuation  of  it  as  a  participle,  nsb, 
and  the  connection  of  it  with  "  prevailed," 
leaves  the  following;  clause  isolated  without 
any  improvement  of  the  sense.  The  render- 
ing in  this  latter  case  would  be  '*  prevailed 
weepins,"  a  somewhat  awkward  expression. 
But  (3)  there  is  an  exposition  adopted  by 
the  Hebrew  expositors  and  advocated  by 
Hitzig,  which  appears  to  us  to  do  violence 
to  the  true  signification  of  the  passage. 
Thus  Bashi:  "And  the  angel  besought 
him,  *  Let  me  now  go.  The  end  of  the  Holy 
and  Blessed  One  is  that  he  may  reveal  him- 
self to  thee  in  Bethel,  and  tliere  shalt  thou 
find  him.'"  Similarly  Aben  Ezra:  "He 
(the  angel)  almost  wept  and  supplicated 
him  to  let  him  go.  And  the  signification  of 
^n  'V,  Gen.  xxxii.  26,  is :  '  before  the  light 
strengthened,  that  Jacob  might  not  be 
alarmed.'"  Also  Kimohi:  "'rhis  is  not 
mentioned  in  the  Thorah;  and  the  expla- 
nation is  as  if  the  angel  wept  and  suppli- 
cated Jacob  to  let  him  go,  as  he  said,  'Let 
me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh.'"  Such  ex- 
position introduces  into  the  text  an  in- 
tolerable anthropopathism.  Jerome  long 
before  had  given  the  correct  explanation 
thus :  "  He  wept  and  asked  him,  when  he 
said,  'I  will  not  let  thee  go,  unless  tliou 
slialt  have  blessed  me  I '  For  the  wrestling 
was  that  which  he  engaged  in  with  the 
angel,  holding  him  by  prayers  that  he  might 
bless  him,  not  by  the  strength  of  work.  If 
any  one  weeps  and  exercises  penitence,  and 
supplicates  the  Lord,  he  shall  find  him  in 
the  grief  of  his  heart,  and  when  he  has 
invoked  him,  he  shall  hear  him  answering." 
He  found  him  in  Bethel,  and  there  he 
spake  with  ns.  The  prophet  here  records 
the  result  of  Jacob's  faithful  wrestling. 
There  in  Bethel,  the  very  place  where 
years  after  idolatry  and  immorality  found  a 
home,  God  had  manifested  himself  to  the 
patriarch.  The  fruit  of  Jacob's  victory  was 
that  (1)  he  found  God  at  Bethel ;  not  that 
(2)  God  found  him,  as  some  explain  it.  The 
historical  basis  of  the  prophet's  statement 
is  not  Gen.  xxviii.  11,  which  n^irrates  the 
appearance  of  God  to  the  patriarch  as  he 
fled  into  Mesopotamia,  but  Gen.  xxxv.  9, 
when  the  new  name  of  Israel,  "prince  with 
God,"  was  confirmed  to  him,  and  the  promise 
of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  being  blessed 
through  his  seed  renewed.  Of  the  two 
visions  at  Bethel  the  second  is  the  one  here 
referred  to,  as  it  comes  after  that  at  Fennel, 
the  scene  of  the  patriarch's  wrestling  with 
the  angel ;  while  the  accompanying  circum- 
stances keep  us  to  the  right  understanding 
of  the  expression,  "He  found  him  in 
Bethel,"  which  we  are  considering.  Jacob 
pn  th^t  meinorable  ocp£|,fiiou  prepared  hint- 


self  and  hiiusehold  for  seeking  God  by 
putting  away  the  gtran:;o  gods  that  were 
among  tliem,  by  ceremonial  purifications, 
and  putting  on  change  of  garments.  Thus, 
seeking  with  holy  purpose  and  prepared 
heart,  he  found  the  Lord  at  Bethel,  and 
enjoyed  heavenly  fellowship  with  him  there. 
Aben  Ezra  favours  (2)  making  Jehovah, 
not  Jacob,  the  subject;  thus:  "As  he  was 
returning  to  his  father,  the  angel  found 
him  there  ;  and  because  the  angel  appeared 
to  him  twice  in  Bethel,  behold  the  place  is 
the  gate  of  heaven ;  therefore  I  and  Amos 
have  prophesied  about  Jeroboam  at  Bethel, 
which  is  the  place  of  liis  kingdom."  Kimchi 
approves  of  the  exposition  of  the  angel 
finding  Jacob,  but  mentions  a  modification 
of  that  of  Jacob  finding  the  angel ;  thus : 
"  The  angel  found  him  in  Bethel  and  also 
blessed  him  there;  and  the  word 'O',  equi- 
valent to  '  found  him,'  is  the  future  instead 
of  the  past.  But  my  lord  my  father,  of 
blessed  memory,  explains  it  acoonling  to  its 
literal  import,  that  the  angel  said  to  him 
(when  wrestling  with  him)  that  he  would 
find  him  in  Bethel.  The  blessed  God  an- 
nounced to  him  the  good  tidings  that  ho 
would  there  manifest  himself  to  him  and 
call  his  name  Israel."  The  last  clause  of 
tliis  verse  states  the  additional  fact  that 
God  spoke  (1)  throi]o;h  the  patriarch  to  his 
posterity.  "Let  it  ba  observed,"  says 
Lackemacher,  as  quoted  by  Keil,  "  that  God 
is  said  to  have  talked  at  Bethel,  not  with 
Jacob  only,  but  with  all  his  posterity.  That 
is  to  say,  the  things  which  are  here  said  to 
have  been  done  by  Jacob,  and  to  have  hap- 
pened to  him,  had  not  regard  to  himself 
only,  but  to  all  the  race  that  sprang  from 
him,  and  were  signs  of  the  good  fortune 
which  they  either  would  or  certainly  might 
enjoy."  Though  the  suffix  of  'O'  in  the 
Massoretic  text  is  well  attested,  yet,  instead 
of  (o)  the  third  person,  Ewald  reads  it  (6) 
as  the  first  plural,  and  consequently  so 
renders  the  word  that  the  clause  implies, 
not  a  narrative  of  the  past,  but  a  prophecy 
of  the  future;  thus:  (2)  «  He  will  find  us 
at  Bethel,  and  there  he  will  speak  with  us." 
The  Septuagint,  again,  with  other  Greek 
versions,  as  also  the  Syriac  and  Arabic,  read 
in  the  last  part  of  the  clause  vsTl,  equiva- 
lent "  to  him,"  instead  of  UBf,  equivalent  to 
*•  us,"  which  identifies  the  patriarch  with  his 
posterity.  The  translation  by  which  a  rela- 
tive is  understood  before  'immanu,  equiva- 
lent to  "There  he  spoke  to  Jacob  the 
things  that  are  with  us,"  or  "happened  us," 
or  "  pertained  to  us,"  is  neither  necessary 
nor  in  accordance  with  good  taste.  Kimchi 
understands  the  verb  in  the  present  tense, 
that  is,  God  speaks  (a)  with  ua — Hosea  and 
the  other  prophets,  to  reprove  the  idolatry 
rampant  in  Bethel ;  (6)  rather  with  the  pro- 


366 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[CU.  XII.  1—11. 


phet  and  the  people  descended  ftom  the 
patriarch.  On  the  words,  "  there  he  spake 
with  us,"  Kimchi  comments  as  followB : 
"  These  are  the  words  of  the  prophet.  He 
says,  •  There  in  Bethel  he  (Jehovah)  speaks 
with  me  and  with  Amos  to  reprove  Israel 
for  the  worship  of  the  calf  in  Bethel,'  as 
Amos  (t.  4)  says,  *  Seek  ye  me,  and  ye 
shall  live:  but  seek  not  Bethel.'  But  my 
lord  my  father,  of  blessed  memory,  ex- 
plained '  And  there  he  will  speak  with  us ' 
as  the  words  of  the  angel.  He  (the  angel) 
says  to  him  (Jacob), '  The  blessed  God  will 
find  us  in  Bethel,  and  there'  he  will  speak 
(c)  with  us,  with  me  and  with  thee,  in  order 
to  confirm  to  thee  my  blessing,  and  to  call 
thy  name  Israel,  saying.  For  as  a  prince 
hast  thou  power  with  God  and  with  men, 
and  hast  prevailed.' "  But  others,  as  Saadia 
Gaon,  explain  the  word,  not  in  the  sense  of 
"  with  us,"  but  (<J)  "  on  account  of  m,"  or 
"  about  us." 

Yer.  5. — ^Even  the  Lord  Ood  of  hosts ;  the 
Lord  is  his  memorial.  Here  we  have  at 
once  a  confirmation  and  a  pledge  of  previous 
promises.  Ja4M>b  had  wronged  Esau,  and 
thereby  incurred  his  displeasure;  he  had 
offended  God  by  the  injury  inflicted  on  his 
brother.  He  is  consequently  in  a  position 
of  peril  with  respect  to  both  God  and  man ; 
he  repented  of  his  sin,  and  with  many  and 
bitter  tears  supplicated  safety — salvation 
in  the  highest  sense.  Jacob,  or  Israel,  in 
Hosea's  time  were  involved  in  greater  guilt 
and  exposed  to  greater  danger;  the  same 
unfailing  remedy  is  recommended  to  them, 
and  the  same  way  of  safety  is  laid  open 
before  them;  let  tiiem  only  repent,  turn  to 
the  Lord,  and  with  tears  of  genuine  sorrow 
seek  his  face  and  favour  free ;  and  the  pro- 
spect would  soon  brighten  before  them. 
Tlie  Name  of  God  was  a  suiBeient  guarantee : 
he  is  Jehovah  the  Everlasting,  and  there- 
fore Unchanging  One — the  same  to  Jacob's 
posterity  as  he  had  been  to  the  patriarch 
himself,  equally  ready  to  accept  their  re- 
pentance and  equally  willing  to  bless  them 
with  safety  and  salvation.  He  is  God  of 
hosts,  and  thus  the  Almighty  One,  governing 
all  creatures,  guiding  all  events,  command- 
ing all  powers  both  heavenly  and  earthly, 
and  ruling  the  whole  history  of  humanity. 
His  name  is  a  remembrancer  of  all  this, 
and  thus  his  people  were  assured  that  he 
neither  lacks  the  will  nor  the  power  to  bless 
them  with  all  needful  blessings,  and  do 
them  greatest  good.  The  name  of  an  in- 
dividual is  that  whereby  he  is  known ;  on 
mention  of  his  name  the  memory  of  him  is 
recalled.  The  mentioi  of  the  Divine  Name 
not  only  reminds  us  of  his  beiug  and  Gh>d- 
head,  but  recalls  to  our  memory  his 
attributes.  Rashi  has  the  following  brief 
comment  on  this  verse:  "As  I  have  been 


from  the  beginning,  so  am  I  now ;  and  if  ye 
had  walked  with  me  in  uprightness  as  Jacob 

Jonr  father,  I  would  have  dealt  with  yon  as 
dealt  with  him."  Thus  to  Abram  in  a 
land  of  strangers,  imperilled  and  defence- 
less, God  revealed  himself  as  God  Almighty; 
to  Moses,  after  centuries  of  unfulfilled  pro- 
mise, he  made  himself  known  as  the 
Unchanging  One,  still  challenging  the  con- 
fidence of  his  people ;  to  Hosea  he  brings  to 
mind  his  unchanging  counsel  in  regard  to 
•11  the  events  of  time  and  his  nidimited 
eontrol  over  all  the  realms  of  space  and 
their  inhabitanfei,  and  so  the  suitability  of 
his  attributes  to  the  multiplied  necessities 
and  varying  circumstances  of  his  people. 

Ter.  6; — Therefore  torn  thou  to  thy  God : 
keep  meroy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on  thy 
God  continually.  God's  character  in  Itself, 
and  his  conduct  towards  the  great  fore- 
&ther  of  the  Hebrew  race,  call  at  once  for 
confidence  and  contrition.  The  evidence  of 
their  repentance  is  twofold :,  one  aspect  is 
manward,  consisting  of  mercy  and  judg- 
ment; the  other  is  Godward,  being  a  constant  - 
waiting  upon  God.  The  literal  rendering 
brings  out  the  meaning  more  clearly ;  it  is, 
"And  thou,  <n  [or,  'by']  thy  God  thou 
shalt  return."  If  we  render  the  preposition 
by  "in,"  we  may  understand  it  to  imply 
entire  dependence  on  God,  or  close  and 
cordial  fellowship  with  God ;  if  we  take  it 
to  mean  "  by,"  it  signifies  the  power  or  help 
of  God ;  while  the  return  is  moral  and 
spiritual,  with  perhaps  material  and  literal 
restoration  implied.  A  parallel  for  &•  in 
the  signification  of  "by  "  occurs  in  the  first 
chapter  of  this  book  at  the  seventh  verse : 
"  I  will  save  them  by  ((•)  the  Lord  their 
God ; "  also  in  Deut.  zxxiii.  29,  ■*  O  people 
saved  by  (6")  the  Lord."  We  prefer  the 
former  sense  as  more  simple  and  suitable ; 
it  is  concisely  and  correctly  explained  by 
Eeil  as  follows :  "  zvif  with  3  is  a  pregnant 
expression,  as  in  Isa.  z.  22,  *  So  turn  as  to 
enter  into  vital  fellowship  with  G«d ; '  that 
is,  to  he  truly  converted.  .  .  .  The  next  two 
clauses  are  to  be  taken  as  explanatory  of 
3ii!'n.  The  conversion  is  to  show  itself  in 
the  perception  of  lOve  and  right  towards 
their  brethren,  and  in  constaut  trust  in 
God."  The  difference  between  g  av;  and 
^  3it7  is  that  the  latter  signifies  "to  re- 
turn to,"  and  the  former  "  to  return  into," 
and  thus  expresses  inward  union  with 
him.  The.  general  sense  of  the  clause  is 
thus  expressed  by  A  ben  Ezra:  "If  thou 
wouldst  return  to  God,  he  would  be  thy 
help  to  bring  thee  back  to  him;"  and  by 
Eimchi  as  foUows :  "  But  thou,  who  axt  the 
seed  of  Jacob,  if  thou  art  willing,  canst 
return  unto  thy  God,  t'.<.  thou  canst  rest  in 
him,  as  '  In  returning  and  rest  shall  ye  be 


OH.  zu.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


867 


saved '  (ls&.  xxx.  T5)."  The  gticond  point  of 
the  v^se  hm  au  ioBtrticti've  parallel  iti 
Micah  Vi.  8,  *  What  doth  this  Lord  requifie 
of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy, 
and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God?"  Iii 
regard  to  the  waiting  upon  God,  Of  whiah 
the  last  clanse  Speaks,  Aben  Ezra  has  the 
pithy  remark,  "  Depend  not  upon  thy  riches 
nor  thy  strength,  for  the  strength  thou 
hadst  firoin  him,  also  the  riches."  Eimohl 
comments  on  the  same  more  fully,  as  follows: 
"  On  this  condition  thou  canst  rest  and  not 
be  afraid  of  the  enemy,  if  thou  wilt  Observe 
to  do  taeicy  and  judgment;  for  hU  con- 
ditions are  as  he  said,  'I  am  the  Lord 
whioli  exercise  lovia^-kindnesS,  judgriient, 
and  righteousness  iti  the  earth :  for  in  these 
tilings  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord.'  And 
although  he  does  not  mention  righteousness 
here,  yet  he  has  said  iii  another  place, 
•Keep  ye  judgHient,  and  do  justice  [literally, 
•  righteoushess '].'  And  he  snys  here, '  Aid 
wait  upon  thy  God  continually";'  now  it  is 
righteousness  and  equity  that  thou  waitest 
on  thy  God  continually.  And  eVen  when 
tboii  sUalt  have  great  possession  and  riches 
and  wealth,  thou  shalt  say  tO  thyself, '  It  is 
all  from  him ;  thou  shall  remember  him  con- 
tinually and  wait  on  liim,  as  he  says  in  the 
Law  (Deut.  viii.  18), '  Thou  shalt  remember 
the  Lord  thy  God,  for  it  is  he  that  giveth 
thee  powerto  get  wealth ;  not  like  Ephraiiii, 
who  says,  'I  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance.'"  The  Septuagint  has 
eyyife,  equivalent  to  "  draw  near  to,"  having 
probably  read  anf)  instead  of  nifj. 

Vers;  7 — 14  coiitaiil  a  fresh  description  of 
Israel's'  apostasy.  To  this  the  prophet  is 
led  by  the  preceding  train  of  thought. 
When  He  called  to  mind  the  earnestness  of 
the  patriairch  to  obtain  the  blessing,  the 
sincerity  of  his  repentance,  and  the  evi- 
dences of  oOnv'erMOn,  consisting  in  mercy 
and  judgment  and  constaiit  waiting  on  God, 
he  looks  around  on  Israel,  and  finding  those 
virtues  conspicuous  by  their  absence,  he 
repeats  the  story  of  their  degeneracy. 

Yer.  7. — He  is  a  merchant  (Utlrgin,  Ca- 
naan), the  balanoes  of  deceit  are  in  his 
hand :  he  loveth  to  oppress.-  This  verse  is 
more  exactly  rendered,  Canaan  w  he,  in  his 
hand  are  the  balaneet  of  deceit:  hi  loveth  to 
oppress.  How  the  sons  have  degenerated 
fromi  the  sire  t  No  longer  do  we  see  Jacob 
i<irestliDg  in  prayer  with  the  angel  of  the 
eotenant,  mm  knighted  in  the  field  with 
the  name  of  Israel,  or  "  prince  with  God  ■ " 
but  a  fraudulent  merchant  K'naan,  seeking 
to  aggrandize  himself  by  cheating  and  op- 
pression. His  conduct  is  the  opposite  of 
what  God  requires ;  instead  of  the  mercy  and 
jud^ent  aind  trust  in  God  eJnjoined  in  the 
preceding  verse,  w6  havO  the  Canaanitish 
(PhoBuiciau)  trader,  with  his  false  scales  in 


his  hand  and  the  love  of  oppresefon  in  hia 
heart.  The  word  K'naan  sometimes  de- 
notes Canaan,  the  son  of  Ham,  and  ancestor 
of  the  Canaanitish  nation;  sometimes  the 
land  of  Canaan,  or  lowlands  (fhim  yja,  bow 
the  knee,  ^ow,  ym,  yvimeritv,  genu,  knee; 
then  "  to  be  low  "  or  "depressed  ") as  opposed 
to  Dis,  or" highlands"  (from Dn,tobehigh) ; 
sometimes  Phcenicia,  the  norihem  part  of 
Canaan ;  also,  from  the  Canaanites  or  Phceni- 
cians  having  been  famous  as  merchants,  a 
man  of  Canaan,  or  any  merehant,  so  Job  zl. 
80  and  Prov.  xxxi.  24,  just  as  Kaedi  ChaU 
diean  is  applied  to  an  astrologer.  At  the 
time  of  Hbsea,  the  Phoenicians  were  tlie 
great  iherchaUts  who  had  the  commerce  of 
the  world  iu  their  hand.  Canaan  is  thus  a 
figurative  designation  of  Ephraim  in  their 
degenerate  condition  aa  indicated  by  the 
false  balances  and  lOve  of  oppression.  The 
verse  is  well  explained  by  Theodoret :  "And 
thou,  Ephraim,  imitating  (1)  the  wickednesa 
of  Canaan,  hast  an  unjust  balance  of  mind : 
thou  despisest  justice,  thou  greedily  de- 
sirest  unjust  power,  thou  art  high-minded  in 
riches,  and  dost  arrogate  to  thyself  very 
much  in  prescribing  and  determining  the 
conditions  thereof."  Bashi  more  briefly 
remarks,  "Ye  depend  upon  your  wealth 
because  ye  are  merchants  and  defraud ;  and 
of  your  riches  ye  say,  '  Yet  I  have  become 
rich,  and  shall  not  serve  the  Holy  One ; ' " 
while  Eimchi  marks  the  contrast  between 
Israel  as  he  ought  to  be  and  Israel  as  he 
actually  is,  thus:  "But  thou  art  not  so 
(i.e.  practising  love  and  righteousness),  but 
thou  art  like  the  Canaanite,  t.e.  as  (2)  the 
merehant,  in  whose  band  is  the  deceitful 
balance."  The  character  of  the  Phcsnician 
trader  is  thus  given  in  the  *  Odyssey ' — 
"  A  false  Phoenician  of  insidious  mind, 
Vers'd  in  vile  arts,  and  foe  to  humankind." 

But,  in  addition  to  (eoiet  fraud,  open  vio- 
lence is  here  charged  against  IsraeL 

Ver.  8.— And  Ephrum  said,  Tet  I  am 
beoome  rich,  I  have  found  me  out  substance. 
Ephraim  in  this  veise  boasts  of  his  riches, 
though  procured  by  fraud  and  violence, 
while  he  maintains  at  the  same  time  that 
he  lias  not  sinned  thereby  to  as  to  expose 
himself  to  punishment  or  deserve  severe 
reprehension.  The  particle  -]tk  has  two 
principal  meanings :  (a)  "  surely  "  and  (6) 
"  only."  In  the  former  sense  the  clause  (1) 
may  allude  to  the  injunction  contained  in 
ver.  6  to  wait  on  God,  and  may  signify,  "  No 
doubt  I  have  become  rich,  yet  not  through 
Divine  help,  but  by  my  own  exertions ; "  in 
the  latter  sense  it  may  signify,  (2)  "  I  have 
only  become  rich ;  I  have  done  nothing  else ; 
I  have  done  nothing  amiss."  Aben  Ezra 
regards  -|i«  as  introducing  the  apodosis,  and 
explains  it  nearly  in  the  sense  of  (1),  thus ; 


368 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oa.  xn.  1—14. 


"  The  leoM  of  ^k  b, '  Gk)d  has  not  given  me 
the  wealth,  but  I  by  myself  [t'.e,  my  own 
unaided  efforts]  have  become  rich,  for  I  am 
not  as  the  Cunaanite,'  that  is,  the  merchant, 
as  '  There  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite ' 
(Zech.  xIt.  21) ; "  he  then  proceeds  to  show 
the  connection,  "  And  the  meaning  [accord- 
ing to  the  context]  is, '  Why  does  ne  eay. 
Keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  be  not  an 
oppressor  like  the  Canaanite  [nor  am  I]  7 
yet  all  is  my  own  honest  earning ;  none  of 
the  sons  of  men  shall  find  that  I  have 
sinned.' "  The  interpretatiun  of  Kimohl  is 
similar,  but  somewhat  simpler,  thug :  "  Tlie 
words, '  I  am  become  rich,'  are  the  opposite 
of  'Wait  on  thy  God  continually.'  But  he 
(Epbraim)  does  not  wait  on  God  the  blessed, 
and  he  does  not  acknowledge  that  he  gave 
him  strength  to  acquire  wealth,  but  says, 
*My  own  power  and  the  strength  of  my 
hands  have  made  for  me  this  wealth,*  and 
he  forgetteth  God  the  blessed,  who  gave 
him  power  to  work,  as  it  is  written  in  the 
Law  (Deut.  viii.  14), '  And  thou  forget  the 
Lord  thy  God.'  This  is  what  he  (the  pro- 
phet) means  by  'I  have  become  rich;'  he 
means  to  say,  'I  have  become  rich  from 
myself,' "  i.e.  by  my  own  labour.  The  word 
I'w  denotes  both  physical  or  bodily  strength, 
and  also,  like  ^;n,  riches,  Latin  ope$,  prob- 
ably as  procured  thereby.  The  flourishing 
state  of  the  kingdom  during  the  reigns  of 
Joash  and  Jeroboam  II.  may  have  induced' 
their  overweening  gelf-confidenoe  and  their 
amazing  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  at  the 
same  time  this  surprising  ignorance  of  their 
real  condition.  (2)  The  Septuagint  render- 
ing is  eSfyriKa  avaij'vxV  f/iavr^,  "I  have 
found  refreshment  for  myself,"  and  Jerome, 
"Inveni  mihi  idolum,"  as  if  jin  had  been  read 

instead  of  jiK,  In  all  my  labours  they  shall 
find  none  iniquity  in  me  that  were  sin; 
margin,  all  my  hboars  tufflee  me  not :  he 
shall  have  punishmerU  of  iniquity  in  whom 
is  sin.  Here  two  modes  of  construction  are 
possible,  and  each  has  had  its  advuontes; 
thuS;  <];<y.  may  be  (a)  the  subject  of  the 
verb,  as  in  the  LXX.,  which  is,  "  None  of 
his  labours  shall  be  found  available  for  him 
on  account  of  the  sins  he  has  committed." 
This  is  the  rendering  followed  and  inter- 
preted by  Cyril  and  Theodoret  (6)  The 
words  in  question,  instead  of  being  taken  as 
the  subject  to  the  verb,  may  be  employed 
absoluiely  or  with  the  ellipsis  of  a  preposi- 
tion, as  in  the  Authorized  Version  ;  thus : 
"As  to  my  labours,  or  the  fruits  of  my 
labours,"  for  ']'  is  used  in  both  senses.  The 
meaning  of  the  passage  then  is  (1)  that, 
besides  the  sins  of  fraud  and  oppression, 
Ephraim  did  not  shrink  through  shame 
to  vindicate  his  conduct  and  to  maintain 
tliat,  in  all  the  riches  lie  had  acquired  with 


such  labour,  no  one  oonld  show  that  those 
riches  had  been  unjustly  acquired  by  him, 
or  that  there  was  sin  contracted  iu  their 
acquisition.  ThusKimchi:  "He  (the  pro- 
phet)  mentions  another  vice,  saying  that  he 
(Ephraim)  oppresses,  and  asserts  that,  iq 
all  he  has  laboured  for  and  gathered  to- 
gether, they  shall  not  be  able  to  find  (a) 
any  riches  of  iniquity  and  sin.  'n'K  is  the 
same  as  iniquity  and  sin,  and  thus  (Eccles, 
T.  18)  '  it  is  good  and  comely '  (asher  here 
also  for  vav).  Or  the  explanation  of  it  is : 
(&)  They  shall  not  find  with  me  iniquity, 
nor  any  matter  iu  Which  there  is  sin  per- 
taining to  me.  And  'n  is  less  than  ly,  ini^ 
quity,  for  sin  comes  sometimes  by  reason  of 
error.  Or  the  explanation  of  'iniquity 
which  were  sin '  is :  (c)  Iniquity  in  which 
there  was  sin  to  me;  as  if  he  said,  with 
regard  to  which  I  had  sinned ;  for  if  riches 
came  into  my  hand  through  iniquity  and 
robbery,  it  was  not  with  my  knowledge ;  he 
means:  so  that  I  sinned  in  relation  to  it, 
and  took  it  by  iniquity  with  my  knowledge ; 
and  in  this  way  (Lev.  zxii.  16)  *they  lade 
themselves  with  the  iniquity  of  trespass,' 
y  being  in  construct  state,  that  is  to  say, 
iiiiquity  with  regard  to  which  they  tres- 
passed."  7  signifies  "belonging  to  me;" 
wliile  Hon  is  read,  not  as  a  noun,  but  aa  a 
verb  in  the  Septuagint,  fts  d/iaprtv.  (2)  The 
Chaldee,  which  is  explained  by  Rashi,  gives 
en  explanation  identical,  though  only  par- 
tially so,  with  the  marginal  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version,  namely,  "It  were  goofl 
for  thee  if  thou  consideredst  with  thyself: 
all  my  riches  do  not  sufSce  me,  in  order  to 
expiate  the  iniquity  which  I  have  com- 
mitted." This,  and  the  marginal  reading — 
both  where  they  coincide  and  where  they 
diverge— we  must  unhesitatingly  reject  as 
far-fetched,  artificial,  and  having  no  real 
basis  in  the  text.  To  their  other  sins  Israel 
added  this  protestation  of  innocence,  which, 
was  the  solemn  protestation  of  a  falsehood. 
The  clause  (3)  may  ailmit  another  sense; 
thus:  If  in  my  gains  by  labour  iniquity 
should  be  found,  that  indeed  would  be  sin ; 
but  such  is  not  the  case.  Thus,  like  the 
Pharisees  of  a^  later  age,  did  they  justify 
themselves  before  men ;  but  God  knew  their 
hollow-hearted  hyprocrisy. 

Ver.  9. — ^And  I  that  am  the  Lord  thy  Ood 
from  the  land  of  Egypt  will  yet  make  thee 
to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  as  in  the  days  of  the 
solemn  feast,  This  verse  consists  of  two. 
parts  which  in  the  original  are  co-ordinated ; 
but  in  the  Authorized  Version  the  one  is 
subordinated  to  the  other  by  supplying  an 
awkward  and  unnecessary  ellipsis.  It  is 
better,  tlierefore,  to  translate  thus:  And  I 
am  the  Lord  thy  God,  from  the  land  of 
Egypt!  I  mil  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in 
labemadet,  a>   in   the  days  of  the  solemn 


OB.  XII.  1—14.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


869 


ftad.  Some  nndeTBtand  thia  vene  m  • 
threatening;  not  a  few  as  a  piomise;  while 
others  combine  both.  (1)  Theodoret,  who 
may  be  taken  as  representing  the  first  class 
of  interpreters,  oomuients  thus :  "  That  thon 
mayest  understand  this  and  learn  wisdom 
by  thy  calamity,  I  will  bring  thee  back 
again  to  that  point  that  thou  must  again 
dwell  in  tents  and  wander  as  an  exile  in  a 
foreign  land,"  (2)  Kimohi  may  represent 
those  who  understand  it  as  a  pnjmise,  or 
rather  a  promise  with  an  implied  threaten- 
ing, and  thus  combine  both.  His  exposition 
is  as  follows :  "  Even  so  am  I  ready  to  bring 
you  forth  out  of  the  captivity  where  ye 
shall  be,  as  I  did  when  I  brought  you  forth 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  sustained  you 
In  the  wilderness  and  mode  you  dwell  in 
tents;  so  am  I  ready  yet  again,  when  I 
shall  have  brought  you  forth  out  of  the 
lands  of  the  Gentiles,  to  cause  you  to  dwell 
in  tents  in  the  wilderness  by  the  way,  and 
to  show  you  wonders  until  ye  shall  return 
to  your  land  in  peace."  (3)  Wiinsche  re- 
jects both  the  preceding,  and  refers  the 
statement  to  the  other  present  time,  taking 
•fiy,  not  in  the  sense  of  "  yet  again,"  but  in 
the  equally  allowable  meaning  of  "further," 
or  "still  further;"  thus  his  rendering  of 
the  verse  is,  "And  yet  I  am  thy  God  from 
Egypt,  stUI  I  let  thee  dwell  in  tents,  as  in 
the  days  of  the  solemn  feast."  Thus  we 
have  a  remembrance  of  God's  goodness  to 
Israel  all  along  from  the  Exodus  to  the 
time  then  present,  including  the  celebration 
of  their  feasts,  especially  that  of  Taber- 
nacles, the  most  joyful  of  them  all.  Thia 
is  favoured  by  me  interpretation  of  Aben 
Ezra,  wliichis  the  following:  "The  sense 
is,  '  Shouldst  thou  not  remember  that  I 
brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  in 
great  riches  for  which  thou  didst  not  labour, 
and  nourished  thee  in  the  wilderness  wlieu 
thou  wast  in  tents?'  In  like  manner  he 
shall  be  able  to  do  unto  thee  as  in  the  days 
of  the  solemn  feast  of  thy  coming  out  of 
Egypt."  We  prefer,  riotwithstending,  the 
exposition  number  (2),  which  includes,  or 
rather  implies,  a  threatening  of  being  driven 
out  of  their  good  land  into  a  wilderness 
state,  because  of  their  forgetfulness  of,  and 
ingratitude  to,  God,  as  also  because  of  their 
proud  self-confidence ;  while,  with  this  im- 
plied threat  of  punishment,  God  holds  out 
to  them  the  promise  and  prospect  of  like 
guiding  eare  and  sheltering  guardianship, 
as  in  that  early  period  of  their  history,  the 
remembrance  of  which  was  still  kept  up  by 
the  mo'ed,  or  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  during 
the  seven  days  of  which  the  people  dwelt  in 
booths,  in  commemoratiun  of  their  having 
dwelt  in  booths  in  the  wilderness  after  they 
had  been  delivered  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt. 
Thus,  as  Uengstenberg  has  well  observed, 

HOBEA. 


"the  preterite  li  ehanged' Into  •  Aitnre 
through  the  ingratitude  of  the  nation." 

Vers.  10  and  11  prove  God's  continual  care 
for  the  spiritual  welfare  and  best  interests  of 
-  Israel  all  along,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
inexcusableness  of  Israel  in  forgetting  Gorl 
and  in  arrogating  to  themselves  the  power  of 
controlling  their  own  destinies  in  the  matter 
of  wealth  and  prosperity ;  while  multiplied 
prophecies  and  visions  testified  to  both,  viz. 
to  God's  care  and  Israel's  recklessness  of 
warnings.  Moreover,  their  persibtenoe  in 
sin  prepared  them  for  and  precipitated  the 
punishment. 

Yer.  10. — I  have  also  spoken  by  the  pro- 
phets, and  I  have  multiplied  visions,  and 
used  similitudes,  by  the  ministry  of  the 
prophets.  The  «ae  before  the  verb  in  the 
beginning  of  the  verse  is  copulative,  and 
the  verb  is  in  the  preterite  as  the  accent  is 
on  the  penult;  if  the  vav  were  conversive 
of  the  preterite  into  the  future,  the  verh 
would  have  the  accent  on  the  ultimate. 
The  preterite  denotes  what  has  been  taking 
place  up  to  the  present,  bj;  is  explained  (1) 
by  Knobel  to  denote  that  the  Divine  reve- 
lation or  inspiration  descended  on  the  prn. 
phets  from  heaven ;  but  (2)  Eimchi  explains 
it  aa  equivalent  to  dk,  with ;  thus  :  "'Upon 
(^j;)  the  prophets '  is  the  same  as  •  with  (dn) 
the  prophets,'  aa  (in  Exod.  xxxv.  32),  •  Anil 
they  came  both  men  and  women  [lite- 
rally,'men,  hji  with,  or  rather  in  addition  to, 
women '].  He  (Jehovah)  says, '  What  coulil 
I  do  to  you  and  I  did  not  do  it,  bo  that  ye 
should  not  forget  me?  And  what  did  I  d<i 
with  your  fathers  7  I  spoke  constantly  with 
the  prophets  to  admonish  you  from  me,  ami 
I  multiplied  visions  to  you  many  days.' " 
The  Authorized  Version  (3)  employs  "by"  as 
the  equivalent  of  ^£  here.  The  pronoun 
vanoTii  is  emphatic,  viz.  "I  even  I,"  as 
though  he  said,  "  I  and  not  another ; " 
while  the  preterite  proves  Jehovah  to  have 
continued  his  visions  to  the  very  moment  at 
which  the  prophet  speaks.  To  the  word 
n^n»,  (a)  use  similitudes,  some  supply  a 
Terbal  noun  of  corporate  sense,  nimD7  or 
lyjvpn.  This,  however,  is  unnecessary,  as  a 
verb  often  includes  its  cognate  noun,  of 
which  we  have  several  similar  e'-i'pses,  e.g. 
Gen.  vi.  4,  "  They  bare  children  [nnj"^  un- 
derstood] to  them ; "  also  Jer.  L  9,  "  They 
shall  set  themselves  in  array  [najJJri  under- 
stood] against  her."  The  LXX.  (6)  has 
iilxoiiiBriv,  "  I  was  represented ; "  and  Jerome 
renders  it  msimilatui  sum.  The  three  modes 
of  Divine  communication  here  referred  to 
are  prediction,  vision,  and  similitude.  The 
word  fur  vinon,  \\v\,  is  used  here  as  a  collec- 
tive; it  differs  from  the  dream  in  being  ■ 

2  B 


370 


THE  BOOK  OP  ROSEA. 


[oh.  xii.  1—14. 


higher  degree  of  Divine  revelation,  also  the 
senses  of  the  receiver  are  avtake  and  active, 
wiiile  in  the  dream  they  are  inoperative  and 
passive.  Of  the  similUude,  again,  we  have 
examples  in  Isaiah's  parable  of  a  vineyard 
(Isa.  v.),  and  in  EzeMel's  similitude  of  a 
wretched  infant,  to  represent  the  natural 
state  of  Jerusalem.  Aben  Ezra  remarks, 
"  I  have  establislied  emblems  and  compari- 
sons that  ye  might  under^tand  me;"  and 
Kimchi,  "I  have  given  emblems  and 
parables  by  means  of  the  prnphets,  as  Isaiah 
says,  'My  well-beloved  hath  a  vineyard;' 
and  Ezekiel, '  Thy  birth  and  thy  nativity 
is  of  the  land  of  Canaan.'  And  the  expla- 
nation of  T3  is  that  by  their  hand  he  sends 
them  emblems  and  similitudes  as  (Lev.  x. 
11),  'which  the  Lord  hath  spoken  unto 
them  by  the  hand  of  Moses.' "  Thus  God, 
iiB  Bosenmfiller  observes,  "  left  no  means  of 
admonishing  them  untried." 

Ver.  11,— Is  tliere  iniquity  in  Oileadt 
surely  they  are  vanity.  In  reference  to 
hypotheticals.  Driver  remarks,  "  With  an 
imperfect  in  protasis.  The  apodosis  may  then 
begin  (o)  hath  vav  con.  and  the  perfect ;  (6) 
with  the  infinitive  (without  vav) ;  (c)  with 
perfect  alone  (expressing  the  certainty 
and  suddenness  with  which  the  result  im- 
mediately accomplishes  the  occurrence  of 
the  promise.  Hos.  xii.  12  (vn  in  apodosis, 
'  of  the  certain  future ')."  The  first  part  of 
this  clause  has  been  variously  rendered. 
Some  take  dk  (a)  afBrmatively,  in  the  sense 
of  certainly,  assuredly ;  others  translate  it 
(6)  interrogatively,  as  in  the  Authorized 
Version,  though  even  thus  it  would  be  more 
accurately  rendered :  Is  Gilead  iniquity  t 
Pusey,  following  the  common  version,  ex- 
plains it  as  follows:  "The  prophet  asks 
the  question  in  order  to  answer  it  more 
leremptorily.  He  raises  the  doubt  in  order 
to  crush  it  the  more  inipressively.  '  Is  there 
iniquity  in  Gilead  ?  '  Alas  1  there  was  no- 
thing else.  Bwrely  they  are  vanity;  or, 
strictly,  they  have  become  merely  vanity" 
There  does  not  appear,  however,  sufficient 
reason  for  departing  from  the  ordinary 
meaning  of  the  word,  (s)  namely,  if  thus, 
If  Gilead  is  iniquity  (Worthlessness),  surely 
they  have  become  va/nity.  The  clause  thus 
rendered  may  denote  one  of  two  things — 
either — (o)  moral  worthlessness  followed 
by  physical  nothingness,  that  is,  moral 
decay  followed  by  physical — sin  succeeded 
by  suffering ;  or  (/B)  progress  in  moral  cor- 
ruption. To  the  former  exposition  corre- 
sponds the  comment  of  Kimchi,  as  follows : 
" '  If  Gilead  began  to  work  vanitj[  (no- 
thingness),' for  they  began  to  do  wicked- 
ness first,  and  they  have  been  first  carried 
into  captivity.  »lf  "jk  can  connect  itself 
with  what  precedes,  so  that  its  meaning  is 
about  Gilectd  which  he  has  mentioned,  and 


the  sense  would  be  repeated  in  different 
words.  Or  its  sense  shall  be  in  connection 
with  Gilgal.  And  although  zakeph  is  on 
the  word  vn,  all  the  accents  of  the  inter- 
preters do  not  follow  after  the  accents  of  the 
points."  Similarly  Rashi :  "  If  disaster  and 
oppression  come  upon  them  (the  Gileadites) 
they  have  caused  it  t>  themselves,  for  cer- 
tainly they  are  worthlessness,  and  sacrifice 
bullocks  to  idols  in  GilgaL  The  verb  vn  is 
a  prophetic  perfect  implying  the  certainty 
of  the  prediction,  as  though  already  an 
accomplished  fact."  The  exposition  of  Aben 
Ezra  favours  (6) ;  thus :  •'  If  the  Gileadites, 
before  I  sent  prophets  to  them,  were  worth- 
lessness, surely  they  have  become  vanity, 
that  is,  instead  of  bi'ing  morally  better,  they 
have  become  worse."  To  this  exposition  we 
find  a  parallel  in  Jer.  iu  5,  "  They  have 
walked  after  vanity,  and  are  become  vain." 
They  sacriflee  bullocks  in  GUgal.  a^t^vf  for 
DniBf,  like  D"mn  from  nia  The  inhabitants 
of  Gilgal  on  the  west  were  no  better  than 
the  Gileadites  on  the  east  of  Jordan;  the 
whole  kingdom,  in  fact,  was  overrun  with 
idolatry.  The  sin  of  the  people  of  Gilgal 
did  not  consist  in  the  animals  offered,  but  in 
the  unlawfulness  of  the  place  of  sacrifice. 
The  punishment  of  both  Gilgal  and  Gilead 
b  denounced  in  the  following  part  of  the 
verse.  Yea,  their  altars  are  as  heaps  in  the 
furrows  of  the  fields.  Gilead  signified  "  heap 
of  witnesses,"  and  Gilgal  "  heaping  heap." 
The  latter  was  mentioned  in  ch.  iv,  15  and 
ix.  15  as  a  notable  centre  of  idol-worship 
("  all  their  wickedness  is  in  Gilgal "),  and  re- 
tained, as  we  learn  from  the  present  passage, 
its  notoriety  for  unlawful  sacrifices,  sacri- 
fices customarily  and  continually  offered 
(viz.  iterative  sense  of  Piel) ;  the  former 
was  signalized  in  ch.  vi.  8  as  "  a  city  of  them 
that  work  iniquity,"  and  "  polluted  with 
blood."  The  altars  in  both  places  are  to  be 
turned  into  stone-heaps;  this  is  expressed 
by  a  play  on  words  so  frequent  in  Hebrew ; 
at  Gilead  as  well  as  Gilgal  they  are  to 
become  gallim,  or  heaps  of  stones,  such  as 
husbandmen  gather  off  ploughed  land  and 
leave  in  useless  heaps  for  the  greater  conve- 
nience of  removal.  D^n  (related  to  tell, 
•  hill,  that  which  is  thrown  up)  is  a  furrow 
as  formed  by  casting  up  or  tearing  into. 
The  ruinous  heaps  of  the  altars  implied, 
not  only  their  destruction,  but  the  desolation 
of  the  country.  The  altars  would  become 
dilapidated  heaps,  and  the  country  depopu- 
lated. The  Hebrew  interpreters,  however, 
connect  with  the  heap-like  altars  the  idea 
of  number  and  eonspiouousness ;  this  they 
make  prominent  as  indicating  the  gross 
idolatry  of  the  people.  Thus  Eashi :  "  Their 
altars  ore  numerous  as  heaps  in  the 
fuiTowi  of  the  field.    <v>  'n  is  the  fnrrow 


en,  XII.  1—14.] 


THE   BOOK   OF   HOSEA. 


371 


of  the  plongher,  oalled  telem ; "  Aben  Ezra : 
"  '33  is  by  way  of  figure,  because  they  were 
numerous  and  oonspicuous."  Pocooke  com- 
bines with  the  idea  of  number  that  of  ruinous 
heaps — "  rude  heaps  of  stones,  in  his  sl°;ht ; 
and  such  they  should  become,  no  one  stone 
bi  ing  left  in  order  upon  another."  Kimchi's 
romment  on  the  verse  is  the  following: 
"  The  children  of  Gilgal  were  neiglibours 
to  the  land  of  Gileaid,  only  the  Jordan 
was  between  them;  they  learnt  also  their 
ways  (doings),  and  began  to  serve  idols  like 
them,  and  to  practise  iniquity  and  vanity, 
and  sacrificed  oxen  to  strange  gods  in  the 
place  where  they  had  raised  an  altar  to 
Jehovah  the  blessed,  and  where  they  had 
set  np  the  tabernacle  at  the  first  after  they 
had  passed  over  Jordan:  there  also  they 
sacrificed  oxen  to  their  idols.  Xot  enough 
that  they  made  an  altar  in  Gilgal  to  idols, 
but  they  also  built  outside  the  city  altars 
many  and  conspicuous,  like  heaps  of  stones 
on  the  farrows  of  the  field." 

Vers.  12,  13. — And  Jacob  fled  into  the 
eonntry  of  Syria,  and  Israel  served  for  a  wife, 
and  for  a  wife  he  kept  sheep.  And  by  a 
prophet  the  Lord  brought  Israel  out  of  Xgypt, 
and  by  a  prophet  was  he  preserved.  The 
connection  of  this  verse  with  what  precedes 
has  been  variously  explained.  The  flight 
of  Israel  and  his  servitude  are  intended, 
according  to  Umbreit,  "to  bring  out  the 
double  servitude  of  Israel — the  first,  the 
one  which  the  people  had  to  endure  in  their 
forefather ;  the  second,  the  one  which  they 
had  to  endure  themselves  in  Egypt."  Cyril 
and  Theodoret  understand  them  to  give 
prominence  to  Jacob's  zeal  for  the  blessing 
of  the  birthright,  and  his  obedience  to  the 
command  of  God  and  bis  parents.  Fusey 
says,  "Jacob  chose  poverty  and  servitude 
rather  than  marry  an  idolatress  of  Canaan. 
He  knew  not  whence,  except  from  God's 
bounty  and  providence,  he  should  have 
bread  to  eat  or  raiment  to  put  on ;  with  his 
staff  alone  be  passed  over  Jordan.  His  volun- 
tary poverty,  bearing  even  unjust  losses,  and 
repaying  the  things  which  he  never  took, 
reproved  their  dishonest  trafiio;  his  trustful- 
ness in  God,  their  mistrust ;  his  devoted- 
ness  to  God,  their  alienation  from  him  and 
their  devotion  to  idols."  There  may  be  an 
element  of  truth  in  each  of  these  explana- 
tions, and  an  approximation  to  the  true 
sense ;  but  none  of  them  tallies  exactly  with 
the  context.  There  is  a  contrast  between 
the  flight  of  the  lonely  tribe-father  across  the 
Syrian  desert,  and  the  guidance  of  his  pos- 
terity by  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  through 
the  wilderness ;  Jacob's  servitude  in  Fadan- 
aram  with  Israel's  redemption  from  the 
bondage  of  Egypt  j  the  guarding  of  sheen  by 
the  patriarch  with  the  Shepherd  of  Israel's 
guardian-care  of  them  by  his  prophet  when 


be  led  them  to  Canaan.     Tli,us  the  distress 

and  affliction  of  Jacob  are  contrasted  with 
the  exaltation  of  his  posterity.  The  great 
object  of  this  contrast  is  to  impress  the 
people  with  the  goodness  of  God  to  them  in 
lifting  them  up  out  of  the  lowest  condition, 
and  to  inspire  them  with  gratitude  to  God 
for  such  unmerited  elevation  and  with 
thankful  yet  humble  acknowledgment  of 
his  mercy.  Calvin's  explanation  is  at  once 
correct  and  clear;  it  is  the  following : 
"Their  father  Jacob,  who  was  he?  what 
was  his  condition?  ...  He  was  a  fugitive 
from  his  country.  Even  if  he  had  always 
lived  at  home,  his  father  was  only  a  stranger 
in  tlie  land.  But  he  was  compelled  to  flee 
into  Syria.  And  how  splendidly  did  he 
live  there?  He  was  with  his  uncle,  no 
doubt,  but  he  was  treated  quite  as  meanly 
as  any  common  slave  :  he  served  for  a  wife. 
And  how  did  he  serve?  He  was  the  man 
that  tended  the  cattle."  This,  it  may  bo 
observed,  was  the  lowest  and  the  meanest, 
the  hardest  and  worst  kind  of  servitude. 
In  like  manner  Ewald  directs  attention  to 
the  wonderful  care  of  Divine  providence 
manifested  to  Jacob  in  his  straits,  in  his 
flight  to  Syria,  in  his  sojourn  there  as  a 
shepherd,  and  also  to  Israel  his  posterity 
delivered  out  of  Egypt  by  the  hand  of 
Moses  and  sustained  in  the  wilderness,  so 
that  one  scarcely  knows  what  to  think  of 
Israel  who,  without  encountering  such 
perils  and  distresses,  and  out  of  sheer 
delight  in  iniquity,  so  shnmefuUy  forsook 
their  benefactor.  Such  is  the  substance  of 
Ewald's  view,  which  presents  one  aspect  of 
the  case,  though  he  doc  s  not  bring  out  so 
fully  the  fact  of  Israel's  elevation  and  the 
humble  thankfulness  that  should  be  exhi- 
bited therefor.  The  exposition  of  the  Hebrew 
commentators  agrees  in  the  main  with  what 
we  have  given.  Bashi  says,  "Jacob  fled  to 
the  field  of  Aram,  etc.,  as  a  man  who  says, 
*  Let  US  return  to  the  former  narrative  which 
we  spoke  of  above ; '  and  he  wrestles  with  the 
angel;  and  this  further  have  I  done  unto 
him ;  as  he  was  obliged  to  fly  to  the  field  of 
Aram  ye  know  how  I  guarded  him,  and  for 
a  wife  he  kept  sheep."  "  Ye  ought  to  con- 
sider," says  Aben  Ezra,  "  that  your  fattei 
when  he  fled  to  Syria  was  poor,  and  so  he 
says, '  And  be  will  give  me  bread  to  eat  '(Gen. 
xxviii.  20).  '  And  he  served  for  a  wife,'  and 
this  is,  'Have  I  not  served  thee  for  Eachel?' 
'  And  for  a  wife  he  kept  sheep ; '  and '  I  made 
him  rich.'"  The  exposition  of  Kimehi  is 
much  fuller,  and  is  as  follows:  "And  they 
do  not  remember  the  goodness  which  I  exer- 
cised with  their  father,  when  he  fled  from 
bis  brother  Esau.  Yea,  when  he  was  there 
it  was  necessary  for  him  to  serve  Laban  for 
a  wife,  that  he  should  give  him  bis  daughter, 
and  the  service  consisted  in  keeping  hit 


S7S 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oa.  XII.  1—14. 


aheep,  end  m  for  the  other  daughter  \rhich 
be  gave  him  he  kept  hia  sheep  in  like 
manner.  And  I  am  he  that  \ras  with  him 
and  blessed  him,  eo  that  he  returned  thence 
with  riches  and  substance.  And  further,  I 
showed  favour  to  his  sons  who  descended 
into  Egypt  nnd  wore  in  bondage  there ;  and 
I  sent  to  them  a  prophet  who  Drought  them 
op  out  of  Eg3  pt  with  much  substance,  and 
ne  was  Moses.  The  forty  years  they  were 
in  the  wildernesB  they  were  guarded  by 
means  of  a  prophet  whom  I  gave  them,  and 
they  wanted  nothing.  But  all  these  bene- 
fits they  forget,  and  provoke  me  to  anger  by 
abominatioiia  and  no-gadi." 


Yer.  14. — ^Ephraim  provoked  him  to  anger 
most  bitterly:  therefore  shall  he  leave  his 
blood  upon  him,  and  hia  reproach  shall  his 
Lord  return  unto  him.  Instead  of  liumble 
thankfulness  and  due  devoteilness,  Ephraim 
provoked  him  to  anger  most  bitterly.  There- 
fore bis  blood-guiltinesB  and  consequent 
punishment  are  left  upon  him ;  his  sin  and 
its  consequences  are  not  taken  away.  The 
dishonour  done  to  God  by  Ephiaim's  idolatry 
and  sins  shall  bring  back  a  aure  recompense 
and  aeveie  retribution. 


HOMILETICa 

Vera.  1—6. — Reproof,  retrospect,  and  exhortation,  Ephralm  la  reproved  for  the 
pursuit  of  empty  and  vain  courses,  and  courses  detrimental  to  their  best  and  real 
inteieata.  Judah  la  included  in  the  threatening  which  followa.  They  are  exhorted 
to  follow  the  example  of  the  patriarch  which  is  proposed  for  their  imitation,  with 
implied  promise  of  similar  success.  The  unchangeableness  of  Ood,  who  not  only 
accepted  Jacob,  but  blessed  and  prospered  him,  is  held  out  to  the  descendants  of  Jacob 
fts  a  guarantee  of  like  blessings  in  case  of  their  turning  to  God  and  bringing  forth 
fruits  meet  for  repentance. 

I.  The  natural  aveeseness  of  the  heart  to  Gk)D.  This  feature  of  the  natural 
heart  is  patent  in  the  case  of  Ephraim.  The  people  of  the  northern  kingdom  spared 
neither  pains  nor  expense  to  obtain  human  help  rather  than  seek  help  from  God.  1. 
We  notice  the  ea^nsjw  nature  of  their  proceeding.  They  made  a  covenant  with  the 
Assyrians,  and  that  was  an  expensive  compact ;  for  Menahem  King  of  Israel  had  to  pay 
Ful  the  Assyrian  monarch  a  thousand  talents  of  silver  for  the  desired  help,  and  Hoshea 
became  tributary  to  Shalmaneser,  and  gave  him  costly  presents ;  while  the  national 
exchequer  was  drained  in  another  direction,  valuable  exports  of  oil  being  sent  into 
Egypt.  2.  The  energetic  pursuit  of  their  purpose.  They  are  represented  aa  "  following 
after,"  and  "daily  increasing."  They  imposed  more  toil  on  themselves  to  get  away 
from  God  than  they  would  have  required  to  turn  to  God.  They  had  "no  less  pains 
by  going  out  of  God's  way  than  if  they  had  kept  in  it ;  but  God's  way,  as  it  is 
undoubtedly  the  surest,  so  in  many  respects  it  is  even  the  easiest,  course."  3.  The 
empty  consequences  of  this  course.  Their  hopes  were  doomed  to  bitterest  disappoint- 
ment, and  their  human  helps  proved  hurtful  in  the  extreme.  The  presents  which  they 
had  lavished  on  the  Egyptians  had  no  other  effect  than  to  compromise  them  with  tlie 
Aasyrians;  while  the  issue  was  the  imprisonment  of  this  prince  and  the  captivity  of 
the  people.  Bo  is  it  still ;  men's  carnal  confidences  deceive  them,  like  wind  which  may 
fill  but  cannot  feed  them ;  and  not  only  deceive,  but  draw  down  on  them  greater 
calamities  than  those  they  hoped  to  escape  from.  Thus  they  prove  not  only  profitless 
as  the  wind  but  pernicious  as  the  east  wind.  The  outcome  of  all  ia  not  only  lying 
vanities  but  desolation. 

II.  Tee  apobtast  or  God'b  own  people,  howeveb  partial  and  temporary,  is 
JUSTLY  FUNIBHABLG.  God  does  not  connive  at  ain  in  his  saints  that  serve  him,  any 
more  than  in  sinners  that  have  never  sought  him ;  neither  do  men's  ordinary  good 
deeds  atone  for  their  occasional  misdeeds.  Sin  in  the  people  of  God  is  sure  to  bring 
chastisement  in  some  form.  At  first  sight  it  might  seem  strange,  or  even  contradictory, 
that  the  Lord  should  have  a  controversy  with  Judah,  of  whom  it  had  been  asserted  a 
few  verses  before  that  "Judah  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and  is  faithful  with  the  saints." 
But  a  ready  and  right  solution  of  the  apparent  difficulty  is  found  in  those  striking 
statements  of  the  Apocalypse,  in  which  God,  after  bestowing  deserved  commendation  on 
certain  Churches  for  this  or  that  course  of  conduct,  immediately  adds,  "  Nevertheless  I 
have  aomewhat  against  thee."  Their  goodness,  of  whatever  kind  it  was,  did  not  cause 
their  ill  deserta  t»  be  overlooked.    "  Some  there  are,"  aays  an  old  writer,  "  who,  if 


OB.  HI.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  879 

there  be  any  evil  in  men,  can  see  no  good  in  them ;  this  is  wicked.  But  there  are 
othetB  that,  if  there  be  any  good  In  them,  can  see  no  evil ;  this  is  too  much  indulgenceii 
They  err  in  both  pxtremes," 

IIL  Thb  imfabtialitt  or  TBI  Divnnt  dealinos.  1.  It  !■  not  a  little  strange  how 
men  sometimes  try  to  screen  themselves  by  the  sins  of  others,  or  to  palliate  their  wrong- 
doing by  the  yet  greater  wrong-doing  of  others.  It  might  have  been  so  with  Ephraim ; 
they  might  have  pleaded  the  sins  of  Judah  in  extenuation  of  their  own,  or  even 
charged  the  Most  High  with  uneven  dealing  with  them  in  punishing  their  sins,  when 
Judah's  sins  were  condoned.  They  might  have  said,  "  We  are  not  so  very  much  worse 
than  Judab ;  there  are  sins  in  Judah  as  well  as  in  Israel ;  why,  then,  should  Judah 
escape  ?  "  So  with  many  still ;  they  are  ready  to  say,  "  We  are  not  worse  than  others ; 
we  have  our  faults,  so  have  our  neighbours  ;  if  we  deserve  punishment,  so  do  others  as 
welU"  God  shows  us  that  his  ways  are  equal,  that  he  will  not  punish  Ephraim  and 
allow  Judah  to  escape,  but  that  he  will  render  to  every  man  as  his  works  shall  be.  2, 
But  their  plea  might  be  easily  turned  against  them  to  their  great  discomfiture.  If 
Judah  ia  admittedly  superior  to  Israel,  and  retains  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah 
though  with  certain  drawbacks,  and  if  Israel  has  renounced  that  worship,  and  is  in 
other  matters  in  a  worse  case,  might  it  not  be  asked  in  words  similar  to  a  New  Testa- 
ment Scripture,  If  even  with  Judah  Qod  has  a  controversy,  how  can  Israel  expect  to 
escape?  "If  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  sh^l  the  ungodly  and  sinner 
appear?"  3.  Though  every  sin  deserves  the  severest  judgment,  being  an  infinita 
offence  against  the  infinitely  Holy  One,  yet  he  proportions  his  chastisementa  to  the 
degree  and  aggravation  of  each  offence,  and  the  obstinacy  of  the  offender. 

IV.   ThBEE  HISTOBIOAL  sketches  out  07  THE  LIFE    OF  JaCOB  AND  THEIB   LESSONSL 

These  histories  record  the  three  great  struggles  of  the  patriarch's  life,  1.  His  birth, 
when  he  takes  his  brother  by  the  heel,  gives  evidence  of  a  Divine  instinct  or  a  divinely 
directed  inclination  to  struggle  for  the  birthright  and  its  blessings.  (1)  The  first  lesson 
taught  us  in  the  Scripture  record  of  Jacob's  birth  (Gen,  xxv.  22,  26)  is  the  electing 
love  of  God,  or  that  gracious  favour  which  God  is  pleased  to  extend  to  men,  and  that 
without  respect  to  their  works  of  merit  or  deserts  of  any  kind.  Not  only  are  the 
people  of  God  chosen  by  him  from  eternity,  as  we  read, "  He  hath  chosen  us  in  him  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and  consequently  before  they  have  done  either  good  or 
evil,  but  sometimes  they  are  made  partakers  of  his  sanctifying  grace  from  the  womb ; 
thus  we  read  of  Jeremiah  (i.  5),  "  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly  I  knew  thee ;  and 
before  thou  camest  forth  out  of  the  womb  I  sanctified  thee ; "  so  also  of  John  the 
Baptist  (Luke  i.  44),  "  Lo,  as  soon  as  the  voice  of  thy  salutation  sounded  in  mine  ears, 
the  babe  leaped  in  my  womb  for  joy."  (2)  Jacob's  struggle  to  anticipate  Esau  in  being 
the  firstborn,  and  so  to  secure  the  birthright  and  its  blessing,  presaged  the  high 
spiritual  position  to  which  in  the  purpose  of  God  he  was  to  attain.  Even  the  unsuccess 
of  the  effort  does  not  lead  Jacob  to  relax  his  efforts  or  relinquish  his  object,  till  grace 
compensated  his  natural  disadvantage  and  crowned  his  persistent  struggling  with 
success.  (3)  The  posterity  of  the  patriarch  are  here  taught  not  to  fall  back  on,  and 
tfjast  of,  the  dignity  and  privileges  of  their  ancestor,  but  to  bestir  themselves  as  he  had 
done  to  secure  spiritual  blessings.  (4)  When  God  bestows  grace  in  any  it  furnishes 
abundant  cause  of  thanksgiving,  but  especially  is  this  the  case  when  that  grace  is 
granted  in  early  life,  so  as  to  prevent  those  youthful  follies  and  lusts  that  war  against 
the  soul,  and  which,  in  the  case  of  those  afterwards  converted,  often  make  them  to 
poBseiss  the  iniquities  of  their  youth  and  embitter  all  their  after-years.  2,  The  wre*- 
tling  with  the  angd  and  prevailing  formed  the  next  great  epoch  in  Jacob's  life.  This 
which  is  recorded  in  Gen.  xxxii.  was  a  season  of  great  terror  and  distress,  as  well  as  of 
no  little  danger  from  his  brother  Esau.  But  he  did  not  give  way  before  the  dangeri 
that  threatened  him,  nor  succumb  under  the  difficulties  of  his  position ;  he  bravely 
faced  the  discouragements  that  surrounded  him — not,  however,  in  his  own  strength.  By 
the  strength  which  God  gave  he  had  power  with  God ;  in  the  vigour  of  his  strength  he 
wrestled  with  the  Angel  of  the  covenant  and  prevailed.  He  saw  the  providence  of 
God  in  all  that  betided  him,  and  wrestled  for  the  Divine  favour  and  succour.  The 
wrestling  symbolized  the  intense  earnestness  and  energy  which  he  put  forth  {  the  object 
for  which  he  strove  so  earnestly  and  energetically  was  the  blessing  of  his  Godj  the 
means  employed  were  prayers  and  tears  aud  fervent  suppUcations ;  the  persistence  with 


374  THE  BOOK   OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xn.  1—14. 

which  be  prayed  and  pled  is  expressed  in  the  words,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except 
thou  bless  me."  Thus  as  a  prince  he  had  power  with  God  and  with  men,  and  prevaUed. 
(2)  What  evidence  we  have  here  of  the  rio|ies  of  Divine  grace!  Tie  omnipotenjt  One 
gives  us  the  power  in  virtue  of  which  we  prevail  with  him,  even  with  himself  I  The 
method  by  which  men  prevail  with  God  is  tlie  ordinances  of  prayer  and  suppUcation 
which  he  has  himself  appointed ;  while  the  spirit  suitable  to  such  employments  is  a 
broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  for  such  the  Lord  will  not  despise.  Jacob  was  truly  mag- 
nanimous, and  yet  tender-hearted  and  contrite,  and  his  weeping  was  the  outpouring  of 
his  tenderness  of  heart  and  contrition  of  spirit.  (3)  The  choicest  blessings  of  provi- 
dence and  grace  are  often  bestowed  upon  men  after  seasons  of  afdiction  and  distress ; 
and  bestowed  after  intense  wrestlings,  earnest  prayers,  and  solemn  supplications.  Hers 
was  a  lesson  for  the  people  of  the  prophet's  day  to  encourage  them  against  the  dangers 
and  difficulties  that  were  fast  crowding  upon  them,  and  to  instruct  them  by  the  example 
of  their  honoured  progenitor  to  put  their  confidence  in  God,  and  not  in  miserable,  dis- 
appointing human  confederacies.  Thus  by  the  power  of  Omnipotence  itself  they  might 
retrieve  their  sinking  fortunes,  surmount  all  difficulties,  and  triumph  over  all  enenues. 
Here,  too,  is  a  lesson  worth  learning  by  us  all.  Power  belongeth  unto  God ;  that  power 
we  may  partake  of ;  prayer  brings  that  power  near  and  allies  it  to  our  side,  and  in  virtue 
of  that  power  we  shall  prevail  over  all  enemies  whether  temporal  or  spiritual.  8.  The 
third  era  in  Jacob's  history  was  marked  by  his  finding  God  at  Bethel.  (1)  Twice  God 
had  been  pleased  to  manifest  himself  to  Jacob  at  Bethel,  first  when  he  left  his  fether's 
house  and  set  out  for  Padan-aram,  as  recorded  in  Gen.  xxviii.,  when  he  saw  that 
wondrous  vision  of  the  ladder  connecting  heaven  and  earth,  the  creature  and  the  Creator, 
while  angels  as  heavenly  messengers  ascended  and  descended  upon  it.  The  other 
occasion  was  when  he  was  in  great  trouble  and  terror  in  consequence  of  the  slaughter 
of  the  Shechemites.  To  this,  which  is  narrated  in  Gen.  xxxv.,  the  prophet  specially  ' 
refers  in  the  passage  before  us.  The  occasion  was  a  memorable  one,  and  in  one  respect 
a  melancholy  one,  in  Jacob's  history.  He  bad  forgotten  the  tows,  or  at  least  failed  to 
pay  them  ;  he  had  neglected  duty  of  a  solemn  and  binding  character.  And  now  he  is 
in  danger  and  distress,  yet  finds  God,  and  in  him  succour  and  support.  God  had  been 
with  the  fugitive  who  returned  a  prince  and  a  patriarch ;  he  had  prospered  him  and 
brought  him  back  in  safety  and  in  peace,  causing  him  to  find  grace  in  the  sight  of  his 
brother  Esau,  father  of  the  dukes  of  Seir.  Arrived  at  Succoth,  Jacob  had  built  him  a 
house,  made  booths  for  his  cattle,  and  there  his  grazing  flocks  and  herds,  his  peaceful 
dwelling,  his  large  and  powerful  family,  all  attested  the  faithfulness  of  the  covenant 
God.  But  for  long  there  is  no  word  of  Bethel,  and  apparently  no  remembrance  of  the 
vow  he  had  made  to  repair  thither  on  his  return,  make  that  place  a  house  of  God,  and 
allot  the  tenth  of  his  substance  to  it*  maintenance.  He  left  Succoth,  passed  the 
Jordan,  and  removed  to  Shalem ;  he  lingered  there,  and  time  passed  on,  some  seven  or 
eight  years  elapsed,  and  still  Bethel  is  unvisited  and  the  vow  unfulfilled.  At  length 
deup  family  affliction,  sad  family  dishonour,  and  dark  family  guilt  united  to  afflict, 
perhaps  punish,  the  patriarch ;  and  it  became  necessary  for  God  himself  to  remind 
Jacob  of  Bethel,  and  the  wondrous  vision  he  had  seen  there,  and  the  solemn  vow  he 
had  made  there,  all  of  which  seemed  to  have  faded  from  his  memory,  and  might  per- 
chance have  been  entirely  forgotten,  had  not  God  said  to  Jacob,  "  Arise,  go  up  to 
Bethel."  In  his  distress  bo  sought  the  Lord,  and  the  call  of  God  reminded  him  of  his 
duty.  Under  such  circumstances  he  found  him  at  Bethel,  "  which  may  be  understood 
both  of  God  who  prevented  Jacob  by  a  vision  the  first  time,  and  with  a  call  the  second 
time ;  and  of  Jacob  who  found  God  there  when  he  sought  unto  him."  (2)  Thus,  after 
a  period  of  forgetfulness  or  neglect,  soon  as  Jacob  was  stirred  up  to  seek  the  Lord,  he 
found  him.  Here  was  encouragement  for  his  erring  posterity  to  seek  that  God  who 
never  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob  any  more  than  to  Jacob  himself,  "  Seek  ye  my  face  in 
vain,"  (3)  It  is  well  worthy  of  note  that  the  means  whereby  God  is  pleased  to  have 
intercourse  with  his  people  is  his  Word,  as  we  may  rightly  infer  from  the  expression, 
"  there  he  spake  with  us.  And  it  is  further  noticeable,  that  God's  revelations  of  himself 
of  old  remain  the  heritage  of  the  Church  in  all  after  ages.  The  words  there  hg  spake 
with  us  show  that  the  communication  was  not  merely  personal  to  Jacob,  but  for  his 
posterity.  God  spake  with  them  as  though  present,  and  what  he  said  concerned  them 
though  they  were  yet  in  the  loins  of  their  progenitor.     So  with  tiie  Church  and  people 


OH.  XII.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  S7S 

of  God  still ;  what  was  written  aforetime  was  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through 
palience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope.  Yer.  6,  "  Even  the  Lord  Qod 
of  hosts  ;  the  Lord  is  his  memorial,"  The  God  who  appeared  to  Jacob,  who  conversed 
with  him  in  reference  to  his  posterity  as  well  as  himself,  and  whom  Jacob  found  at 
Bethel,  was  the  God  of  Jacob's  siicceedin;;  race ;  the  God  agunst  whom  they  had  tres- 
passed, but  to  whom  they  are  now  urged  to  turn.  (1)  That  Otoi  is  Jehovah,  the  self- 
existing  One  whose  title  is  "  I  am  that  I  am,"  wliich  is  a  sort  of  paraphrase  of  the  name 
Jehovah.  He  is  the  first  of  all  beings,  the  greatest  of  all  beings,  supreme  over  all 
beings,  whose  being  is  without  limit  of  time— everlasting,  and  without  bound  of  space ; 
infinite,  having  all  being  in  himself,  and  giving  to  all  creatures  life  and  breath  and 
all  things.  He  is  Jehovah,  the  everliving  and  never-changing  God,  the  same  in  kind- 
ness, the  same  in  covenant  relation  to  his  people,  and  the  same  in  accessibility.  What 
he  did  to  Jacob  he  was  ready  to  do  for  the  posterity  of  the  patriarch,  yea,  he  is  willing 
to  do  to  all  people  that  call  upon  him  in  truth,  seeking  his  face  and  favour  free.  (2) 
He  is,  moreover,  God  of  hosts ;  the  armies  of  heaven  are  at  his  command,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth  are  subject  to  his  will,  the  powers  of  nature  and  all  tlte  forces  of  the 
universe  are  under  Us  control.  This  expression  is  employed  in  allusion  to  those  hosts 
of  God  that  met  him  after  he  had  wrestled  with  God,  after  his  name  had  been  changed, 
and  of  whom  we  read,  "  The  angels  of  God  met  him.  And  when  Jacob  saw  them,  he 
said.  This  is  God's  host,"  and  in  relation  to  whom  he  called  the  place  Mahanaim,  the 
two  camps  or  hosts  of  God.  (3)  Jehovah  is  his  memorial.  Men  short-lived  and  mortal 
raise  monuments  to  keep  up  their  remembrance ;  but  the  name  Jehovah  is  the  Divine 
memorial,  the  name  by  which  he  wishes  to  be  remembered  through  all  generations,  as 
he  says  elsewhere,  "  This  is  my  name  for  ever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  to  all  gene- 
rations." This  term  may  have  reference  to  the  memorial  stone  which  Jacob  had  set 
up  for  a  pillar,  to  keep  up  the  remembrance  of  the  gracious  vision  that  had  been 
vouchsafed  to  him,  and  as  a  memorial  of  his  vow.  (4)  The  case  of  Jacob  proves  the 
need  we  have  of  a  memorial  to  help  our  memories ;  for  oh,  how  deceitful  our  hearts 
are ;  how  treacherous  our  memories  in  the  things  of  God !  We  need  helps,  and  means, 
and  memorials,  and  remembrancers.  Pictures  are  not  needed  for  this  purpose,  images 
are  not  needed.  God's  name,  as  indicating  his  nature,  is  sufficient  memorial  of  him ; 
his  Word  and  his  works  are  to  keep  men  in  remembrance  of  him.  The  name  Jehovah 
is  God's  memorial ;  every  time  we  read,  or  hear,  or  speak  that  name,  we  are  reminded  of 
the  glory  and  greatness  of  him  who  is  the  first  and  best  of  beings,  as  also  of  his  good- 
ness and  grace.  We  are  reminded  by  that  name  of  the  unchangeableness  of  his  nature 
and  his  never-ceasing  mercy  to  man — the  same  to  the  posterity  of  Jacob  as  to  the 
patriarch  himself,  the  same  to  us  as  to  our  forefathers,  the  God  of  our  fathers  being 
still  the  God  of  their  succeeding  race.  "  There  is  no  shortening  of  his  power  and  no 
darkening  of  his  glory,  but  with  whatsoever  power  God  has  wrought,  in  whatsoever 
glory  he  has  appeared,  in  former  times,  he  may  manifest  the  same  for  us  now." 

Y.  The  fbactioal  application  of  thb  fbbcedino  statements.  The  application 
which  the  prophet  makes  of  the  subject  is  introduced  with  a  "  therefore."  This 
"  therefore "  gathers  up  the  several  foregoing  thoughts  into  one  urgent  appeal. 
1.  Motives  to  repentance.  By  the  fact  of  Jacob's  wrestling  with  God  and  the  success 
of  this  spiritual  struggle,  by  the  memorial  of  the  name  Jehovah  as  an  index  of  the 
unchanging  mercifulness  of  his  nature,  and  by  the  implied  spiritual  declension  of  his 
descendants,  the  people  of  both  the  northern  and  southern  kingdoms  in  general  and 
each  individual  in  particular  are  earnestly  admonished  to  turn  to  God,  their  fathers' 
God,  their  own  God,  as  it  is  stated,  "  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy  God."  2.  Fruite 
meet  for  repentance.  The  amendment  answerable  to  repentance  comprises  the  duties 
of  the  so-called  second  table  of  the  Law.  Justice  and  mercy  may  be  regarded  as  a 
summary.  (1)  The  golden  rule  of  all  justice  is  that  royal  law  of  Christ,  "All  things 
whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them ;  for  this  is  the 
Law  and  the  prophets."  It  would  be  out  of  place  to  enter  into  the  details  of  justice ; 
this  one  principle  includes  all,  it  is  plain  to  all,  it  is  applicable  to  all ;  it  comprehends 
princes  aiid  people,  masters  and  servants,  brothers  and  sisters  ;  it  extends  to  all  stations 
and  relations,  it  is  imvarying  in  its  application  to  all  persons  in  all  matters  and  at  all 
times ;  it  embraces  hot  only  all  the  business  transactions  of  buyers  and  sellers,  but 
all  situations  and  stations  m  which  we  can  stand  towaids  our  brother  man,  whether 


376  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xu.  1—14 

as  inferiors  or  superiora  or  equals ;  it  is  a  rule  easily  understood,  easily  put  in  practice, 
and  coniniends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience.  Thus  rending  the  Sciipture  text 
before  us  in  the  light  of  our  Lord's  teaching,  we  have  a  rule  of  justice  easily  accom- 
modated to  all  cases,  and  of  ready  adaptation  to  all  the  vast  variety  of  circumstances 
that  bring  us  into  relation  with  our  fellow-creatures.  In  this  duty  of  keeping  judgment 
or  justice,  which  is  the  same  word  (mishpat)  in  the  original,  you  have  only  to  make 
the  case  of  your  fellow-man  your  own,  to  conceive  circumstances  changed  with  him 
and  yourself  in  his  position ;  and  then  whatever  you  could  reasonably  expect  of  him, 
supposing  yourself  to  be  in  his  circumstances,  that  do  to  the  utmost  of  your  ability 
to  every  child  of  man.  This  principle  not  only  includes  that  more  obvious  duty 
of  acting  justly  in  all  the  transactions  of  life  which  the  apostle  enjoins,  saying,  "  Let 
no  man  ^o  beyond  or  defraud  his  brother,"  but  also  prohibits  those  acts  of  injustice 
that  might  not  chance  to  fall  within  the  bounds  of  human  law  or  of  ciTil  enactments, 
by  awarding  to  every  one  his  due — honour  to  whom  honour  is  due,  fear  to  whom  fear, 
tribute  to  whom  tribute,  instruction  to  the  ignorant,  relief  to  the  oppressed,  bowels 
or  compassion  to  the  poor,  and,  in  the  wprds  of  Solomon,  by  withholding  not  good 
(of  whatever  kind)  from  them  to  whom  it  is  due.  (2)  Strict  justice  is  much,  very 
much  more  than,  alas  1  is  often  dispensed ;  yet  it  is  not  enougli.  There  must  be  mercy 
too,  and  mercy  tempering  justice.  When  we  have  done  full  justice  to  a  fellow-being 
we  have  not  done  all  that  God  requires  of  us  towards  our  fellow-creature ;  he  has  other 
claims  upon  us,  and  God  has  given  him  those  claims.  Reversing  the  order  of  the 
words  accor'Hng  to  the  parallel  passage  in  Micah,  "  Do  justly  and  love  mercy,"  we  may 
say, "  Just  first  and  kind  next "  is  the  requirement  of  this  Scripture ;  "  Just  first  and  then 
generous  "  is  a  common  saying.  We  might  exact  strict  justice  for  ourselves,  standing 
upon  our  bond  like  him  of  old  and  demanding  our  pound  of  flesh,  we  might  exact 
what  is  justly  our  due,  but  what  benevolence  would  not  and  mercy  could  not  claim, 
and  so  verify  the  old  Latin  proverb-  about  the  "  height  of  justice  being  the  height 
of  injury ; "  but  the  requirement  of  mercy  prohibits  and  prevents  that.  Then,  0  man, 
love  mercy — it  is  the  characteristic  of  your  heavenly  Father,  who  is  the  Father  and 
Fountain  of  mercies ;  love  mercy,  that  generous,  large-hearted  benevolence  which  does 
good  according  to  its  power  to  all  men  under  all  circumstances,  "  especially  to  them 
who  are  of  the  household  of  faith ; "  love  mercy,  that  heaven-born  principle  which, 
if  even  an  enemy  hunger,  feeds  him,  if  he  thirst  gives  him  drink,  if  he  be  naked 
clothes  him.  "  And,"  to  borrow  the  well-known  words,  "  as  in  the  course  of  justice 
none  of  us  should  see  salvation,  we  do  therefore  pray  for  mercy,  and  that  same  prayer 
doth  teach  us  all  to  render  the  deeds  of  mercy."  (3)  Further,  we  are  not  only  to  do 
justly  and  to  love  mercy,  but  to  delight  therein.  Thus  we  shall  not  only  do  some  acts 
of  justice  and  perform  some  acts  of  mercy,  but  fceep  them  both ;  mercy  first,  as  having 
the  pre-eminence  aud  being  the  consummation  of  justice — the  one  the  fruit,  and  the 
other  the  root.  In  this  way  we  are  required  to  keep  mercy  and  justice,  that  is,  to 
observe  uniformly  and  practise  habitually  mercy  and  justice.  For  a  pattern  of  mercy, 
read  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan ;  for  the  opposite,  the  story  of  Hazael,  and  the 
parable  of  the  man  who  owed  ten  thousand  talents, 

VI.  True  bbpbntanob  includes,  as  its  natcbal  effect  aud  tbue  etidenoe, 
THE  PBEFonMANOE  OP  ouB  DUTY  TO  GoD  AS  WELL  AS  TO  MAN,  The  former  duty  is 
here  expressed  in  the  words  "  wait  on  thy  God  continually,"  The  connection  of  the 
words  is  very  suggestive.  Repentance  is  put  to  a  practical  test  and  its  sincerity 
proved  ;  the  proof  consists  of  a  right  discharge  of  the  duties  we  owe  both  to  man  and 
God.  The  duties  to  man  are  put  first,  because  we  not  unfrequently  find  persons 
ihowing  a  zeal  for  the  outward  ordinances  of  religious  worship  and  yet  neglectful 
(if  mercy  and  judgment  to  their  fellow-creatures;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  such  duties 
ixs  never  discharged  aright  where  God  is  not  truly  worshipped ;  they  may  be  per- 
lormed  by  fits  and  starts,  but  not  steadily  and  continuously  as  the  keeping  of  them 
lequires,  unless  there  is  genuine  godliness.  Thus  momlity  has  its  root  in  religion,  and 
religion  without  morality  is  only  a  name  without  reality.  In  order,  therefore,  to  keep, 
in  the  sense  of  regularly  observing  mercy  and  justice,  there  must  be  continual  waiting 
upon  God. 

YII,  The  nature  of  waiting  on  God,  Waiting  on  God  implies  want  and 
weakness  and  danger  on  our  part,  as  also  that  God  is  the  Source  of  fulness,  of  strength, 


OH.  xn.  1—14.]  UHB  BOOK  0?  H08EA.  S77 

and  of  gnfficiency.  It  also  implies  service.  "As  the  eyes  of  serrants  look  unto  the liand 
of  their  masters,  and  as  the  eyes  of  a  maiden  unto  the  hand  of  her  mistress,  so  our 
eyes  wait  upon  th«  Lord  our  God."  Waiting  on  Ood  denotes  waiting  on  him  in 
expectation,  trusting-  in  him  for  help,  looking  to  him  for  deliverance.  1.  The  whole 
of  rtXigion  is  at  times  summed  up  in  the  expression, "  waiting  on  God ;"  in  this  sense 
the  psumist  uses  the  words  three  times  in  a  single  psalm.  After  confessing  his  own 
faith  in  God,  he  prayed  for  all  that  possessed  like  precious  faith,  saying,  "  Let  none  that  ~ 
wait  on  thee  be  ashamed."  Again,  addressing  God  his  Saviour  and  supplicating  Divine 
guidance  and  Divine  instruction,  he  says,  "  On  thee  do  I  wtut  all  the  day."  And  a 
third  time,  referring  to  the  might  and  multitude  of  his  enemies  and  supplicating 
deliverance,  he  pleads  his  own  relationship  to  God,  using  the  same  words,  "  for  I  wait 
on  thee,"  and  adding,  "  Redeem  Israel,  0  God,  out  of  all  his  troubles."  Similarly  in  the 
Book  of  the  Prophet  Isaiah,  in  reference  to  the  spread  of  the  true  religion,  not  only  over 
the  broad  continents  and  countries  of  earth,  but  throughout  those  multitudinous  and 
distant  islands  that  rise  in  beauty  and  rest  in  sunshine  amid  the  wild  waves  of  ocean  that 
roll  and  rage  around  them,  we  read,  "  He  shall  set  judgment  in  the  earth,"  and  "  The 
isles  shall  wait  for  his  law."  2.  Eeatont  for  and  vnotive*  fo  waiting  on  God.  There 
is  good  reason  for  waiting  on  Ood.  God  is  the  God  of  providence,  and  therefore  all 
wait  upon  him.  "  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon  thee,  and  thou  givest  them  their  meat  in 
due  season ;  thou  openest  thy  hand,  and  satisfiest  the  wants  of  every  living  thing." 
He  is  the  Author  of  every  good  gift  and  of  every  perfect  boon,  ruling  the  changing 
year,  making  everything  beautiful  in  its  season,  causing  the  sun  to  rise  and  the  shower 
to  fall,  and  by  that  gentle  shower  and  genial  sunshine  preserving  to  our  use  the  kindly 
fruits  of  the  earth;  all  his  people  acknowledge  his  goodness  and  wait  upon  his  bounty. 
"  Are  there  any  among  the  vanities  of  the  Gentiles,"  asks  Jeremiah,  "  that  can  cause 
rain ?  or  can  the  heavens  give  showers?  Art  thou  not  he,  0  Lord  our  God?  therefore 
we  will  wait  upon  thee,  for  thou  hast  made  all  these  things."  He  is  the  God  of  grace 
and  salvation  especially,  and  therefore  we  wait  upon  him ;  thus  Israel  says,  "  I  have 
waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  Lord;"  and  in  like  manner  the  good  old  Simeon,  who  is 
called  a  just  and  devout  man,  is  represented  as  "  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel :  and 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him."  He  is  the  God  of  mercy,  in  him  compassions  flow ; 
and  therefore  it  is  our  privilege  as  well  as  our  duty  to  wait  upon  him,  and  say  in  the 
language  of  ancient  piety,  "And  now,  Lord,  what  wait  I  for?  my  hope  is  in  thee; 
deliver  me  from  all  my  transgressions,  make  me  not  the  reproach  of  the  foolish." 
3.  Manner  of  waiting  on  Ood  and  exhortation  to  the  duty.  Wait  on  the  Lord  in 
faith,  for  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  him,  and  whatever  is  not  of  faith  is 
sin.  Wait  on  the  Lord  in  prayer ;  "  In  all  things  by  prayer  and  supplication  ...  let  your 
requests  be  made  known  unto  Qoi"  for  he  heareth  prayer,  and  unto  him  shall  all  flesh 
come.  Wait  on  the  Lord  in  patience,  and  let  patience  have  its  perfect  work ;  "  for 
patience  worketh  experience  and,  experience  hope."  Walt  on  the  Lord  with  resignation ; 
■ay  in  your  heart  as  you  pray  with  your  lips,  "  Thy  will,  0  God,  be  done  ;"  "  It  ia  the 
Lord;  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  Wait  on  him  In  the  ordinances  which  he 
has  appointed,  reverencing  his  sanctuary,  keeping  holy  his  day  of  rest,  observing 
those  seasons  of  communion,  which  are  green  spots  in  the  desert,  where  the  good 
Shepherd  feeds  his  flock,  making  them  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures,  leading  them 
by  still  waters,  and  causing  them  to  rest  at  noon.  Wait  on  him  by  fulfilling  the  vows 
of  God  whiclk  are  upon  you,  paying  those  vows  in  spite  of  the  world,  and  in  sight  of 
God's  people  all.  Wait  on  the  Lord  in  your  family,  and  wherever  you  have"a  house 
let  God  have  an  altar ;  and  let  the  incense  of  prayer  and  praise  regularly  ascend  from 
that  altar  to  the  God  and  Father  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Wait  on  him  in 
closet  prayer,  entering  thy  chamber,  shutting  to  the  door,  praying  to  your  Father  who 
heareth  in  secret,  and  who  will  reward  you  openly.  Wait  on  the  Lord,  not  occasionally 
merely,  but  continually  ;  not  in  certain  spasmodic  efforts,  but  habitually ;  not  after  long 
intervals,  but  at  all  times.  Wait  on  the  Lord,  and  you  will  thereby  renew  your 
strength.  There  were  giants  in  the  earth  in  days  of  old.  A  terrible  struggle  once 
took  pjace,  as  we  read  in  classic  story,  between  two  lusty  giants.  Prodigious  they  were 
in  strength,  fearful  in  prowess }  they  struggled  hard  and  wrestled  long,  but  one  of 
them,  every  time  he  touched  the  earth,  renewed  thereby  his  strength  and  prevailed  over 
his  antagonist.    We  need  not  stop  to  inquire  whether  the  story  be  a  fiction  or  a  fact ; 


378  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xn.  1— li. 


it  matters  not,  as  it  serres  equally  well  the  purposes  of  illustration.  Scripture  records 
a  fact  which  that  fiction  illustrates.  The  giant  renewed  his  strength  every  time  he 
touched  the  earth ;  the  believer  renews  his  strength,  not  by  touching  earth  or  grovelling 
among  the  things  thereof,  but  by  laying  hold  of  the  throne  of  grace  in  heaTen  and 
waiting  on  the  Lord. 

Vers.  7—10. — Extent  of  IsraePs  tipogtasy.  L  Here  we  are  shown  how  pab  Israel 
HAD  APOSTATIZED,  how  Unlike  they  were  to  the  patriarch  of  whom  they  boasted,  and 
how  far  they  fell  short  of  admonitions  that  had  been  addressed  to  them.  1.  They  were 
liker  the  Canaanite  whom  they  despised  than  the  patriarch  from  whom  they  wer* 
descended.  They  had  become  liker  fraudulent  merchants  than  God-fearing  members  of 
the  Church  of  God.  To  fraud  they  added  oppression  where  they  had  the  power.  2.  The 
love  of  money  was  the  root  of  this  evil  trait  of  Jewish  character — a  trait  that  shows  itself 
t<}0  frequently  at  the  present  day,  and  which  is  not  confined  to  the  Jew,  but  compre- 
hends the  Gentile  also.  Men  hasten  to  be  rich,  and  capnot  long  be  innocent.  3.  There 
is  no  greater  aggravation  of  sin  than  the  love  of  it.  The  people  of  Israel  at  the  period 
specified  were  not  only  addicted  to  the  sin  of  covetousness  or  greediness  of  gain,  but 
were  actually  enamoured  of  their  sin.  One  of  the  worst  features  of  wicked  men,  which 
the  apostle  has  so  vividly  photographed  in  that  black  catalogue  of  sin,  is  that,  "  know- 
ing the  judgment  of  God,  that  they  which  commit  such  things  are  worthy  of  death, 
not  only  do  the  same,  but  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them."  4.  Men  addicted  to 
covetousness  and  whose  hearts  are  set  on  getting  gain  make  light  of  the  doctrines  of 
religion.  Thus  in  the  days  of  our  Lord  "  the  Pharisees  also,  who  were  covetous,  heard 
all  these  things :  aiid  they  derided  him."  Sacred  truths  and  Divine  mysteries  were 
dKspised,  while  the  ways  and  means  of  amassing  wealth  were  their  delight.  So  here 
the  connection  of  ver.  7  may  be  the  prophet's  complaint  of  his  countrymea's  neglect  of 
his  exhortations,  owing  to  their  covetousness.  "  The  scope  of  the  prophet  and  the  con- 
nection here  is-^We  may  exhort,  but  so  long  as  their  hearts  are  covetous,  and  set  upon 
their  way  of  getting  gain,  they  will  never  regard  what  we  say  ;  they  will  not  turn  to 
God,  they  will  not  hear  of  it,  but  will  rather  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  all  entreaties." 

II.  Excuses  fob  sin.  Here  we  see  how  wicked  men  excuse  themselves  and  palliate 
their  sins.  1.  Success  furnishes  them  with  a  plausible  plea  for  self-vindication.  The 
jirosperity  of  fools,  we  are  told,  destroy*  them;  while  the  worldly  prosperity  of  the 
wicked  is  frequently  fatal  to  their  spiritual  welfare.  "  Fret  not  thyself  because  of  him 
who  prospereth  in  his  way,"  says  the  psalmist,  afterwards  adding,  "for  evil-doors  shall 
be  cut  off."  It  has  been  well  and  truly  said  that  "  prosperity  in  sinful  ways  is  an  old 
saaie,  hindering  men  from  heeding  challenges  or  God's  anger  because  of  them."  2.  The 
boastftd  spirit  of  the  wicked ;  they  glory  in  their  gains  as  self-procured;  they  attribute 
all  to  their  own  skill,  or  slrennth,  or  ingenuity,  pr  industry,  or  ability,  and  refuse  to 
acknowledge  God.  Nor  is  it,  indeed,  possible  they  should,  for  how  could  they  bless  God 
for  what  they  have  acquired  by  sin  or  gained  by  fraudulent  dealing?  3.  False  refitges 
to  which  wicked  men  resi>rt:  they  divest  themselves  of  all  dread  of  Divine  displeasure 
or  of  danger  on  the  ground  of  prosperity ;  they  force  themselves  to  believe  that  if  their 
conduct  were  either  displeasing  to  God  or  fraught  with  danger  to  themselves,  they  would 
not  be  so  prosperous  in  getting  gain  or  have  such  success  in  sin.  Another  false  refuge 
is  to  seek  relief  for  a  guilty  conscience  from  the  outward  comforts  procurable  by  ill- 
gotten  gain.  4,  Other  false  shifts  or  hypocritical  evasions  are,  as  is  here  intimated, 
resorted  to  by  sinners.  Sometimes  they  gloss  over  their  sins  with  fair  names;  thus 
their  dishonesties,  whether  by  i'raud  or  force,  take  the  name  of  the  fruits  of  their  labours, 
the  earnings  of  their  industry,  or  the  profits  of  their  calling.  Sometimes  they  depend 
on  secrecy  and  defy  detection,  and,  while  they  feel  themselves  free  from  discovery,  they 
fancy  themselves  safe  in  their  sin,  as  though  the  eye  of  God  did  not  penetrftte  such 
thin  disguises,  or  as  if  God  had  not  said,  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  Some- 
times they  hypocritically  profess  abhorrence  of  sins  they  habitually  practise ;  or,  if  they 
acknowledge  c|in  at  all,  they  salve  their  wounds  of  ron science  by  the  consideration  that 
their  sins  are  very  venial  offences,  and  such  as  are  incidental  to  their  situation,  or  common 
to  their  calling,  or  peculiar  to  their  trade.  Thus  they  minimize  their  culpability  uid 
impose  on  their  own  souli!. 

III.  Effects  of  sin.    God's  goodness,  which  is  designed  to  lead  men  to  repent  of 


OH,  xn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  379 

Bin,  aggiaVatea  the  sin  of  the  impenitent,  1.  God's  chama  on  Israel's  gratitude  had  been, 
indeed,  mighty  and  manifold,  as  well  as  from  ancient  times.  The  glorious  deliverances 
he  had  wrought  for  them,  the  low  estate  from  which  he  had  lifted  them,  the  prcat 
exaltation  to  which  he  had  raised  them,  the  good  land  into  which  he  had  brought  thcin, 
the  rich  grace  he  had  bestowed  on  them,  and  the  religious  privileges  he  had  conferred  on 
them, — ail  these  blessings,  having  been  abused,  increased  the  sin  of  their  in<;ratitude  and 
intensified  their  guilt.  2.  God  cannot  hold  the  sinner  guiltless.  Siir,  wherever  it  is 
found  or  by  whomsoever  it  is  committed,  cannot  pass  unpunished.  The  offences  of 
God's  own  dear  children  bring  down  chastisement  upon  them ;  he  will  not  spare  their 
faults.  A  father  does  not  love  his  son  less  because  he  corrects  him ;  he  pities  while  he 
punishes ;  his  bowels  of  compassion  move  while  his  hand  holds  the  rod.  So  Israel, 
having  been  unmindful  of  God's  mercy,  must  be  exiled  from  their  goodly  pleasant  land, 
and  go  into  a  bondage  bad  as,  or  worse  than,  that  in  Egypt  of  yore.  3.  Tet  God  for  all 
that  does  not  renounce  his  interest  in  his  people;  he  will  give  them  occasion  again  to 
remember  bis  goodness  and  to  celebrate  his  redeeming  love.  Their  preservation  and 
restoration  should  again  afford  abundant  matter  for  gladness  and  thanksgiving,  when 
they  would  join  trembling  with  their  mirth,  and  celebrate  the  solemn  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles, with  joy  drawing  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation.  Whether  the  reference  be 
to  a  literal  joyful  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  own  land,  or  a  glad  time  of  revival  and 
refreshing  to  all  the  true  Israel  of  God,  whether  Gentile  or  Jew  in  gospel  times,  the 
encouragement  is  gracious  and  the  prospect  glorious.  Nor  is  it  less  so  from  the  contrast 
between  the  chastisement  so  deserved  and  the  consolation  promised. 

IV.  Excellence  of  Divine  teaching  and  inbxcusableness  of  those  privileoed 
THEBEWiTH.  1.  To  hls  people  in  the  past  God  spake  at'  sundry  times  and.  in  divers 
manners,  or  in  divers  portions,  as  they  needed  or  could  bear  it,  and  in  divers  ways,  by 
prophecy,  by  visions,  by  similitudes,  aud  by  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  The  means  of 
grace  were  thus  abundant  and  multiplied.  2.  However  different  the  modes  of  ministration 
were,  the  speaker  was  still  one  and  the  same.  It  is  God  who  thus  speaks  to  us  by  his 
messengers.  If  we  reject  the  message  and  the  messenger  that  brings  it,  we  reject  the 
Author ;  if  we  receive  the  message  from  the  lips  of  the  messenger,  we  receive  him  who 
gave  the  commission.  What  ft  grave  responsibility  I  What  need  to  take  heed  how  we 
hear  as  well  as  what  we  hear!  And  how  incumbent  on  ministers  also  to  take  good 
heed,  not  only  to  the  matter,  but  to  the  manner  in  which  they  convey  the  message  they 
have  reciivefi,  remembering  that  they  stand  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  like  Aaron 
when  he  took  his  censer  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation  till  the  plague  was 
stayed.  3.  The  inexcusableness  of  those  who,  like  Israel,  enjoy  so  many  privileges. 
The  plainness,  the  variety,  and  the  frequency  of  the  Divine  teaching  impose  a  weighty 
responsibility,  for  unto  whamsoever  much  is  given,  of  them  much  shall  be  required;  it 
is  even  a  hnman  prinoiiile  practised  among  men,  that  to  whomsoever  men  have  com-, 
mitted  much,  of  him  ti.ey  ask  the  more.  How  God  has  left  us  all  without  excuse, 
seeing  that  in  these  days  of  light  and  liberty  God  has  given  us  such  a  clear  revelation 
of  his  wil',  so  many  ministries  to  explain  and  enforce  it,  so  much  freedom  to  exercise 
ourjudgme.it  upon  it,  and  deriTe  light  and  leading  from  it,  while  we  sit,  like  Israel 
of  old,  under  our  vine  and  fig  tree  in  peace  and  safety,  none  daring  to  make  us 
afraid  I 

Vera.  11 — 14. — Sqproo/a  and  rtmembranceru  Reproofs  for  lin,  and  utmembrancers 
of  mercy. 

I.  Kebukes  fob  sin.  1.  The  richest  temporal  blessings  are  blighted  by  sin.  Gilead  was 
a  fruitful  and  pleasant  region,  as  may  be  inferred  from  references  to  it  in  Scripture,  as 
when  God  saya,  "  Thou  art  Gilead  unto  me,  and  the  head  of  Lebanon :  yet  surely  I  will 
make  thee  a  wilderness,"  and  when  its  productions  are  spoken  of,  and  its  pasturages 
celebrated.  It  is  still  a  beautiful  district,  with  its  hills  and  dales,  wooded  slopes,  luxu- 
riant pastures,  lovely  flower*,  and  refreshing  streamlets.  In  addition  to  the  natural 
advantages  of  the  country,  there  was  the  city  of  Gilead,  where  the  ministers  of  religion 
on  the  other  side  of  Jordan  dwelt.  But  sin  sadly  marred  this  fair  and  fertile  land ;  so 
with  many  a  region  "  where  every  prospect  pleases,  and  only  man  is  vile."  The  inhabi- 
tants are  branded  as  transgressors  of  buth  tables  of  the  Divine  Law;  iniquity  character- 
ized their  conduct  towards  man,  and  idolatry  their  worship  of  God ;  while  the  priests, 


380  THE  D00&  OF  HOSEA.  [oil  zn.  1—14. 

instead  of  hindering,  only  helped  the' people  in  their  einfal  service.  However  incredible 
it  might  appear,  neverthelest  it  was  a  fact ;  nor  were  they  improving  at  the  time  to 
which  the  prophet  refers — nay,  they  seem  to  have  been  going  from  bad  to  worse.  2. 
The  vanity  of  will-worship.  Will-worship  may  show  much  zeal,  as  appears  to  have 
been  the  case  with  the  Gilendites;  yet,  without<a  Divine  warrant,  it  is  vanity  all  the 
same.  They  contravened  the  institution  of  the  Most  High,  which  had  appointed  one 
temple,  one  altar;  and  one  priesthood.  Severely,  too,  had  they  suffered  for  their  sins, 
Inhabiting  a  bordei-land,  they  were  exposed  to  the  inroads  and  attactcs  of  enemies,  and 
much  needed  the  Divine  protection ;  but  by  their  sins  had  forfeited  that  protection. 
Consequently  they  "were  tlireshed,"asaconteraporary  prophet  tells  us,  "with  threshing 
instruments  of  iron,"  and,  being  among  the  first  that  fell  under  the  power  of  Assyria, 
they  were  carried  away  captive  from  their  goodly,  pleasant  land.  3.  Superstition  no 
$ubstitute/or  spiritual  service.  Nearness  to  God  in  outward  relation  or  prolession  may 
coexist  with  absence  of  right  religious  principle ;  and  where  such  is  the  case,  outward 
observances  neither  secure  from  sin  nor  shield  from  its  punishment.  Thus  the  peo[)le  oi 
Gilgal,  though  west  of  the  Jordan  and  belonging  to  Judah,  were  nearer  the  temple, 
and  BO  nearer  in  outward  relation  to  its  worship,  yet  were  quite  as  bad  as  the  traus- 
Jordanic  Gileadites.  They  had  the  externals  of  religion,  and  were  no  doubt  zealous 
about  them  ;  they  presented  rich  sacrifices  and  possessed  numerous  altars ;  but  the 
altars  they  had  set  up  were  either  to  strange  gods  in  opposition  to  the  true  God,  or  to  the 
true  God  in  opposition  to  his  own  appointment.  "  Whosoever  they  be,  this  side  or  the 
other,  who  profess  to  come  nearest,  if  they  mingle  their  own  inventions  in  worship,  God 
will  be  more  sorely  displeased  with  them :  the  more  piety  and  holiness,  the  more  we 
profess  to  come  close  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  yet  withal  mingle  our  own  inventions, 
the  more  is  God  displeased ;  Gilgal  offends  more  than  Gilead." 

II.  Bemeubrancebs  of  uercy.  Tiiey  magnified  their  ancestor  Jaiiob,  but  misread 
his  histoiy ;  they  gloried  in  his  greatness,  but  forsook  the  God  who  made  him  great. 
It  is  a  common  thing  for  people  to  boast  of  their  family  and  forefathers,  however  much 
they  may  have  degenerated  from  those  forefathers ;  and  not  unfrequently,  the  more 
they  have  degenerated  the  louder  is  their  boasting.  1.  God  reminds  them  of  the 
humble  origin  and  lowly  condition  of  the  patriarch,  of  whom  they  boasted  so  much  as 
their  progenitor.  The  facts  of  which  he  thus  reminds  them  conveyed  instruction  to 
them,  and  teach  valuable  practical  lessons  still.  (1)  The  flight  of  the  patriarch;  his 
exile  in  Padan-aram ;  his  poverty  and  servitude ;  having  no  dowry  to  give,  his  service 
was  substituted  instead ;  his  hard  shepherd-life ; — all  these  wore  calculated  to  teach 
humility,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  vanity  of  their  boasting.  (2)  Though  Jacob  had 
been  obliged  in  early  life  to  turn  his  back  on  his  father's  house,  he  never  turned  his 
hack  tipon  hisfathei't  Ood,  or  the  worship  of  that  God.  Here  was  another  lesson,  at 
least  by  implication,  for  his  descendants  to  learn.  In  circumstances  unspeakably  more 
favourable  they  had  turned  aside  from  both,  and  wasted  their  energies  in  sinful  courses 
and  sottish  idolatry,  either  vainly  worshipping  God,  or  transferring  the  worship  due  to 
him  to  those  vanities  that  were  no  gods.  Thus  the  lesson  of  their  sad  apo,stasy  was 
next  to  be  unlearned.  (3)  The  secret  of  Jacob's  success  was  the  blessing  of  God  whom 
he  sought  and  served.  God  prospered  him  and  multiplied  his  seed  until  they  became 
a  great  people.  Here  was  cause  for  gratitude,  not  for  vain-glorying.  Another  lesson 
which  Israel  behoved  to  learn ;  and  not  Israel  only,  hut  all  who  at  any  time  or  in  any 
land  experience  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord.  If  we  are  put  in  possession  of  great 
privileges,  if  we  attain  to  a  position  of  usefulness  and  influence,  and  if  we  are  honoured 
in  God's  service,  let  us  not  forget  the  lowliness  of  our  original  on  the  one  hand,  nor 
fail  to  magnify  the  grace  of  God  in  our  exaltation  on  the  other ;  in  that  grace  alone 
may  we  glory.  2.  He  reminds  them  of  that  great  event  of  their  history,  that  ever- 
memorable  deliverance  out  of  Egypt.  (1)  From  this  he  will  have  his  people  learn  that 
when  they  are  brought  low  by  afflictive  promdencea,  and  suffer  severely  under  the  rod 
of  correction,  God  may  be  thus  preparing  them  for  rich  blessings  to  themselves,  and 
training  them  for  future  usefulness  in  his  service.  This  should  promote  patient  sub- 
mission, and  prevent  all  unseemly  murmuring  and  si  il'ul  complaining.  (2)  The  way 
and  means  of  their  deliverance  were  fraught  with  other  profitable  instructions.  The 
blessing  of  deliverance  was  great,  not  only  for  present  relief,  but  subsequent  preservation. 
The  Author  of  it  was  Jehovah,  to  whom  all  the  praise  and  glory  were  due  and  ever  to  be 


CH.  xu.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  881 

ascrilied ;  the  agent,  s  prophet  whom  God  honoured  in  accomplishing  his  high  purpose 
for  the  benefit  of  his  people. 

III.  RETBiBmiON  TBBEATENED.  Punishment  is  slow,  but  sure.  1.  Ifotwithstanding 
all  the  waruings  and  instructions  and  remembrancers,  Ephraim  persisted  in  sin,  and 
that  of  the  most  provoking  kind.  Instead  of  good  grapes  being  produced  in  the  highly 
favoured  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  Ephraim's  grapes  were  grapes  of  gall  and  clusters  of 
bitterness,  God  here  speaks  after  the  manner  6f  men  who  are  piovokcd  by  the  gross 
misconduct  and  affronts  from  their  fellow-men,  especially  from  those  whom  they  have 
served  and  benefited.  In  like  manner,  despite  is  said  to  be  done  to  the  Spirit  of  grace, 
and  the  Son  of  God  put  to  an  open  shame.  How  dreadful  this  misconduct  of  man, 
a  worm  of  the  dust  in  relation  to  God,  that  infinite  Spirit  I  2.  Huin  irremediable  cannot 
fail  to  be  the  result.  The  ruin,  too,  is  self-procured.  So  with  sinners  still ;  they  have 
themselves,  not  God,  to  blame ;  God  will  not  hold  them  guiltless,  yet  the  fault  lies  at 
their  own  door;  their  blood  is  on  their  own  bead ;  their  life  is  forfeited,  but  it  is  their 
own  doing ;  they  are  moral  suicides.  3.  Ephraim  by  iniquity  and  idolatry  had  brought 
dishonour  on  the  Name  and  people  of  God.  Sinners  cause  God's  Name  to  be  blasphemed  ; 
they  bring  reproach  on  our  holy  religion.  This  reproach  must  be  rolled  away  ;  but  it 
shall  at  the  same  time  be  rolled  over  or  back  on  those  who  have  occasioned  it.  Those 
that  bring  contempt  on  religion  shall  have  the  finger  of  scorn  and  contempt  pointed  at 
themselves  in  the  end ;  those  that  despise  God  shall  be  li);htly  esteemed ;  and  those  who 
bring  reproach  upon  his  cause  shall  have  that  reproach  returned  unto  themselves  even 
in  this  world,  while  in  the  eternal  world  they  shall  awake  up  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt. 

Afplication.  1.  Prosperity  confirms  ranners  in  their  evil  ways,  and  so  their  hearts  are 
hardened  and  their  coni-ciences  become  seared.  2.  "  It  is  folly  to  call  the  riches  of  this 
world  substance,  for  they  are  things  that  are  not."  3.  It  is  folly  to  attribute  our  riches 
to  our  own  industry  or  ingenuity,  as  if  we  made  ourselves  rich,  and  as  if  it  were  the 
might  and  power  of  our  own  hand  that  gets  us  wealth.  4.  It  is  folly  to  think  our 
riches  are  our  own,  for  ourselves,  and  that  we  may  do  what  we  like  with  our  own.  We 
are  only  stewards,  and  shall  one  day  be  called  to  give  an  account  of  our  stewardship. 
5.  It  is  folly  to  boast  of  our  riches  as  if  they  were  a  permanent  possession,  or  as  if  they 
were  evidence  of  peculiar  merit  in  the  possessor.  6.  "  It  is  folly  to  think  that  growing 
rich  in  a  sinful  way  either  doth  make  us  innocent,  or  will  make  us  safe,  or  may  make 
us  easy  in  that  way ;  for  the  prosperity  of  fouls  deceives  and  destroys  them." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR& 

Oh.  xi.  12 — xii.  6. — Jacob  an  example  to  his  descendants.  In  this  passage  the 
prophet  exposes  the  degeneracy  of  the  Hebrew  nation  by  contrasting  their  ungodly 
ways  with  those  of  their  ancestor  Jacob,  and  strives  to  win  them  back  to  the  service  of 
God  by  reminding  them  of  the  mercy  and  grace  of  which  that  patriarch  had  been 
the  recipient. 

I.  The  deoenebate  Jacob.  (Ch.  zi.  12,and  xLl,  2.)  The  entire  Israelitish  people 
had  proved  unfaithful  to  Jehovah.  It  was  especially  so  with:  1.  Sphraim.  The 
career  of  the  ten  tribes  had  been  one  of  faithlessness  and  falseliood.  The  whole  life  of 
the  northern  kingdom  was  a  lie.  Its  people  had  renounced  the  Divine  authority.  They 
had  lied  to  God  by  revolting  from  the  dynasty  of  David  ;  by  rejecting  the  priesthood  of 
the  sons  of  Aaron;  by  worshipping  the  golden  calves  of  Jeroboam;  by  abjuring 
Jehovah  to  do  homage  to  Baal  and  Ashtaroth;  by  loosening  the  bonds  of  morality  in 
their  social  life  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3) ;  and  by  seeking  help  in  times  of  national  distress,  at  one 
period  from  Assyria  and  at  another  from  Egypt  (ver.  1).  And  yet  all  the  while  they 
claimed  to  be  still  the  Lord's  people,  and  boasted  that  Jacob  had  been  their  father. 
Ephraim's  apostasy,  Hosea  says,  brought  the  people  no  satisfaction;  it  was  like 
"  feeding  on  wini  Their  career  of  national  hypocrisy  involved  them  in  "  desola- 
tion;" it  proved  as  disastrous  as  for  a  caravan  of  travellers  to  "follow  after  "the 
simoom,  which  bears  on  its  wings  the  hot  poison  of  death.  The  flegeneraoy  of  the 
nation  had  also  at  last  begun  to  atfect :  2.  Judah.  Although  the  guilt  of  the  southern 
kingdom  was  by  no  means  w  great  as  that  of  Ephraim,  yet  Judah  was  now  following 


382  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xu.  1— U 

in  some  meastm  the  bad  example  of  it8  northern  neighbour.  King  Abaz  had  ^Ten 
himself  up  to  gross  idolatry  and  iniquity ;  his  reign  at  Jerusalem  was  a  time  of 
sad  moral  deterioration  and  spiritual  darkness  (2  Eingt  xvii).  So  "  the  Lord  had  also 
a  controversy  with  Judah "  (ver.  2) ;  fur  Judah  was  "  unbridled  against  God,  and 
against  the  faithful  Holy  One  "  (ch.  xi.  13,  Eeil's  translation).  "  Jacob,"  i.e.  Ephraim, 
is  already  ripe  for  punishment ;  bat  Judah  has  now  gone  so  for  astray  as  to  require 
solemn  reproof  and  warning. 

IL  The  ttfical  Jacob.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  The  Jews  gloried  in  being  "  the  children 
of  Israel,"  and  here  the  prophet  shows  them  how  unlike  they  were  to  their  fathcir.  The 
national  career  of  Ephraim  had  been  one  of  constant  degeneracy :  from  the  time  of 
Jeroboam,  "  who  made  Israel  to  sin,"  the  people  had  gone  from  bad  to  worse  with 
oTer-accelerating  speed.  Their  ancestor  Jacob,  on  the  other  hand,  had  trod  the  path 
which  is  "  as  the  dawning  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  peifect  day  " 
(Proy.  iv.  18).  Born  with  a  selfish  and  unlovely  nature,  and  prone  to  acts  of  deceit 
and  meanness,  he  became  a  child  of  God,  and  had  his  heart  moulded  by  Divine  grace, 
until  he  showed  himself  not  only  a  really  religious  man,  but  a  great  saint.  Huw 
different  it  would  have  been  now  with  Ephraim  had  he  lived  conformably  to  his  claim 
of  being  "  the  seed  of  Jacob  "  I  The  prophet  recalls  various  acts  of  the  Divine  favour  to 
the  patriarch.  1.  Be/ore  his  Mrth,  His  taking  his  twin-brother's  heel  by  the  hand  did 
not  foreshadow  merely  his  future  overreaching  of  Esau;  rather  it  was  a  prognostic  of  his 
precedence  over  him  in  the  Divine  purpose  of  grace,  and  of  the  eagerness  with  which 
Jacob  would  labour  to  obtain  the  covenant-bletMng.  2.  At  Peniel.  There  what  at  first 
seemed  a  man  wrestled  with  him ;  and  perhaps  Jacob  mistook  him  for  a  robber  of  the 
road,  until  at  length  the  Stranger  with  a  touch  dislocated  his  hip-jOint,  thus  effectually 
disabling  him.  Then  Jacob  perceived  that  his  antagonist  was  an  "  Angel  "-^-the  Angel 
of  the  covenant  himself;  so  he  gave  up  his  useless  wrestling,  and  began  to  pray. 
"  He  wept,  and  made  supplication  unto  him  "  (ver.  4)  ;  and  the  Divine  blessing,  which 
he  could  never  have  obtained  by  wrestling  or  supplanting,  came  to  him  in  answer  to 
his  prayer.  At  Peniel  Jacob  "  was  knighted  on  the  field,"  and  there  he  received  his 
new  and  heavenly  name.  He  who  from  the  womb  had  been  known  as  the  supplanter, 
the  wrestler,  the  tripper-up,  now  became  Israel — "  a  prince  with  God  "  (Gen.  xxxii. 
24 — 29).  Ever  afterwards  Jacob's  weapons  were  not  carnal.  He  learned  at  Peniel 
to  "  prevail "  by  the  power  of  faith  and  prayer,  and  of  a  holy  life.  3.  At  Bethel. 
Hosea  elsewhere  calls  the  Bethel  of  his  time  by  the  contemptuous  nickname  of  Beth- 
aven  (ch.  It.  15  ;  v.  8 ;  x.  5) ;  for,  alas !  "  the  house  of  God "  had  become  "  the 
house  of  vanity"— an  abode  of  naughty  idols.  At  Bethel,  where  Jehovah  "found" 
Jacob,  he  himself  was  lost  by  Jacob's  degenerate  children.  At  Bethel,  where  Jacob 
saw  in  vision  the  stairway  reaching  to  heaven,  Satan  had  established  a  stairway  leading 
to  destruction.  But  now  the  prophet  recalls  the  early  national  associations,  so  pure  and 
hallowed,  which  were  connected  with  Bethel.  God  "  found  Jacob  in  Bethel,  and  there 
he  spake  with  us."  In  revealing  himself  to  Jacob  he  had  in  view  also  Jacob's  pos- 
terity. The  patriarch  received  a  Divine  visitation  at  Bethel  upon  two  occasions.  The 
first,  when  on  his  way  to  Padan-aram  (Gen.  xxviii.  11 — 22) ;  and  the  second,  twenty- 
five  years  afterwards,  some  time  after  his  return  to  Canaan.  Probably  Hosea  refers 
here  chiefly  to  the  latter ;  for  then  Jacob  performed  the  vow  which  he  had  made 
on  occasion  of  his  first  visit,  and  then  God  confirmed  his  new  covenant  name  of  Israel, 
and  repeated  the  promise  of  his  blessing  (Gen.  xxxv.  9 — 15).  God  did  all  this  at 
Bethel  to  Jacob  and  to  "  us  "  as  "Jehovah,  God  of  hosts  "  (ver.  5) :  as  "  God  of  hosts," 
omnipotent  in  heaven  and  earth  ;  and  as  "  Jehovah,"  the  unchanging,  covenant-keeping 
God,  who  desires  his  people  ever  to  remember  him  by  this  profoundly  significant 
Name  (Exod.  iii.  15). 

III.  How  DEGENERATE  Jaoob  MAT  BECOME  BEOENERATS.  (Ver.  6.)  These  words  are 
an  urgent  exhortation  to  Ephraim  to  return  to  God,  from  whom  he  had  "deejjly 
revolted."  The  word  "  therefore  "  indicates  that  the  call  is  grounded  upon  the  repre- 
sentation just  given  both  of  the  Divine  character  and  of  the  Divine  goodness  to  his 
ancestor  Jacob.  "  Turn  thou  to  thj/  God,"  i.e.  thy  covenant  God,  who  still  offers  him- 
self to  thoe,  and  is  still  ready  to  keep  bis  ancient  covenant,  if  thou  approach  him 
in  penitence  and  faith.  Why  should  Ephraim  go  down  to  destruction  when  he  may 
have  the  "  God  of  hosts  "  for  his  helper,  and  when  he  can  plead  the  promise  of  the 


CH.  xn,  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  383 

eternal  "I  Am*t  In  the  second  part  of  the  verse  the  prophet  looks  at  conversion  on 
its  practical  side.  The  reality  of  Ephraim's  return  to  God  would  show  itself  in  the 
discharge  of  moral  duty.  "  Mercy  and  judgment "  are  the  sum  of  the  duties  which  we 
owe  to  our  neighbour,  and  the  performance  of  these  is  the  most  convincing  outward 
evidence  of  piety  (Ps.  xv.).  Again,  to  "wait  on  God  continually"  excludes  idolatry 
and  image-worship,  and  all  other  sins  against  the  first  table  of  the  Law.  Jacob  had 
learned  at  Feniel  to  renounce  the  carnal  device  of  supplanting,  and  when  he  came  the 
second  time  to  Bethel  he  put  away  Bachel'a  teraphim  and  other  household  gods.  Now, 
Ephraim  must  begin  to-day  to  act  so  if  he  would  become,  before  it  is  too  late,  a  worthy 
descendant  of  hia  ancestor.  True  turning  to  God  involves  obedience  to  both  tables  of 
the  moral  Law. 

Lessons.  1.  The  sinfulness  of  insincerity  in  worship  (ch.  xi.  12),  2.  The  mis- 
chievousnesg  of  a  life  of  gin  (cb.  xii.  1).  3.  The  duty  of  following  the  faith  of  our 
godly  ancestors  (vers.  3,  4).  4.  Places  which  have  been  the  scenes  of  special  mercy 
should  be  dear  to  God  s  people  (ver.  4).  5.  The  power  that  there  is  in  penitent 
believing  prayer  (vers.  3,  4).  6.  "  The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower;"  it  brings 
to  the  godly  man  strength  and  hope  and  joy  (ver.  6).  7.  The  practical  nature  of  true 
piety  (ver.  6). — 0.  J. 

Vers.  7 — 14. — Three  painful  eontra$t$.  In  this  strophe  the  threatening  of  punish- 
ment is  again  repeated  (ver.  14).  Ephraim's  blood-guiltiness  is  to  be  left  upon  him  ; 
I.e.  his  sin  is  not  to  be  pardoned.  The  "  reproach  "  or  dishonour  which  he  has  done  to 
God  by  his  idolatry  and  iniquity  God  will  repay  him.  But  the  denunciation  is  mixed 
with  mercy.  "  I  will  yet  make  tliee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles"  (ver.  9)  seems  to  include, 
not  only  a  threatening  of  banishment  from  "  the  Lord's  land,"  but  a  new  redemption 
from  the  coming  Egypt-like  bondage,  which  shall  bring  with  it  rest  and  freedom  and 
prosperity.  Beyond  his  captivity,  Ephraim  shall  keep  the  joyous  Feast  of  Tabernacles 
again,  as  a  memorial  of  Meiisiauic  mercies  in  connection  with  his  restoration.  As 
Ewald,  however,  remarks,  the  main  feature  of  these  verses  consists  in  "  three  com- 
pressed comparisons." 

I.  "  Ibbaei.  "  HAS  BECOME  "  Canaan."  (Vers.  7,  8.)  The  "  prince  with  God  "  has 
degenerated  into  a  cheating  huckster;  the  descendants  of  the  godly  Jacob  have  become 
like  paltry  1  hoenician  pedlars.  Instead  of  "  keeping  mercy  and  judgment "  (ver.  0)  in 
their  commercial  dealings,  they  love  to  practise  deception  and  oppression.  Ephraim, 
accordingly,  does  not  deserve  to  be  called  by  the  honourable  name  of  "  Israel;"  he 
exhibits  rather  the  innate  characteristics  of  the  Canaanite  tribes,  and  may  well  be 
spoken  of  aa  "  Canaan."  But,  worse  even  than  that,  the  people  are  spiritually  self- 
complacent,  all  the  while  that  they  deal  so  dishonestly.  They  deceive  themselves  with 
the  notion  that  their  habits  of  social  injustice  involve  no  sin  against  God.  They 
ignore  the  teaching  of  their  law  about  "just  balances,  and  just  weights"  (Lev.  xii.  36; 
Deut.  XXV.  13 — 16).  Enough  for  them  if  they  become  rich  throuiih  their  iU-gotten 
gains.  They  even  argue  that  their  continued  success  in  acquiring  riches  by  means  of 
"  the  balances  of  deceit "  is  an  evidence  that  the  Lord  cannot  be  angry  with  them 
(ver.  8).  Lessons:  1.  It  is  a  spurious  piety  which  does  not  take  to  do  with 
"  weights  and  measures."  2.  The  dangers  of  covetousiiess,  a  besetting  sin  of  many 
Church  members.  3.  Long-continued  temporal  prosperity  is  not  necessarily  a  token 
of  God's  favour.  4.  Ungodly  men  pervert  the  Divine  goodness  and  forbearance  into  an 
encouragement  to  persist  in  their  sinful  courses. 

II.  Efhbaim  has  fobsakbn  the  prophets  fok  heathen  altars.  (Vers.  10, 11.) 
Jehovah,  who  had  been  his  God  "  from  the  land  of  Egypt,"  had  shown  his  love  for  the 
nation  in  raising  up  a  succession  of  men  as  their  teachers,  upon  whom  he  caused  his 
Spirit  to  rest.  The  prophets  instructed  the  people  in  spiritual  truth  and  moral  duty. 
They  rebuked  idolatry.  They  denounced  all  injustice  and  oppression.  They  warned 
of  coming  judgments.  They  testified  beforehand  of  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  of 
the  ultimate  salvation  of  the  world  through  him.  The  larger  number  of  the  great 
prophets  were  sent  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  and  yet  some  of  the  most  distinguished 
of  them  laboured  in  the  northern  kingdom,  as  e.g.  Elijah,  Elisha,  Amos,  and  Hosea 
himself.  The  Lord  gave  his  Word  to  the  prophets  in  a  variety  of  ways.  Sometimes  by 
an  audible  voice,  as  to  Samuel ;  more  frequently,  by  writing  the  message  in  burning 


384  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [en,  xii.  1—14 

thoughts  upon  the  prophet's  soul ;  and  often,  as  Hosea  here  reminds  the  people,  by 
"  multiplying  visions."  The  "  vision  "  was  a  frequent  vehicle  of  Divine  revelation 
during  the  whole  course  of  the  national  life  of  Israel.  Jehovah  multiplied  visions  to 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Zechariab,  Daniel,  etc.  And  the  prophets,  in  delivering  the 
Lord'*  message,  were  directed  to  employ  material  signs  as  a  means  of  adding  emphasis 
to  spiritual  truth.  The  Lord,  who  knows  our  frame,  and  who  has  made  the  earth 
"  but  the  shadow  of  heaven  "  (Milton),  took  care  to  •'  give  similitudes  by  the  prophets." 
The  Hebrew  seers  used  the  metaphor,  the  allegory,  the  parable,  the  dramatic  action. 
They  found  spiritual  analogies  everywhere  in  nature,  and  in  the  circumstances  of 
human  life.  And  all  this  was  a  manifestation  of  God's  solicitude  for  bis  people's  good. 
He  sent  the  "  prophets,"  and  gave  the  **  visions,"  and  suggested  the  "  similitudes  "  in 
tender  love  for  his  erring  children.  Yet  all  was  in  vain.  The  people  continued  to  live 
as  if  God  had  given  them  no  revelation.  Their  idolatry  extended  all  over  the  region 
beyond  Jordan,  here  represented  by  "  Gilead ; "  and  all  over  the  west  of  Jordan,  repre- 
sented by  "  Gilgal."  They  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  the  warning  voices  of  the  prophets. 
Ephraim  forsook  the  one  altar  which  God  recognized  as  his,  and  increased  the  number 
of  idol  shrines  until  they  covered  the  land,  like  the  heaps  of  stones  cleared  by  the 
farme;  out  of  a  ploughed  field.  The  idolatry  and  wickedness  of  Israel  were  committed 
against  the  clearest  ught  of  prophecy,  and  against  the  yearning  love  of  Jehovah,  which 
had  led  him  "daily  to  rise  up  early  "  and  send  the  prophets.  Lettont.  1.  The'privilege 
of  being  within  reach  of  an  earnest  gospel  ministry,  2.  The  advantage  of  the  judicious 
use  of  illustrations  in  religious  teaching.  3.  How  sad  it  is  when  localities  which  were 
once  the  scene  of  special  manifestations  of  God  become  polluted  with  scandalous 
wickedness  1  4.  How  aggravated  the  guilt  of  those  who  "  sin  wilfully  after  they  have 
received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (Heb,  x.  26)  I 

in.  ErHBAIU  HAS  FAILED  TO  LEABH  THE  LE880NS  OF  EI8  OWN  EABLT  BIBTOBT.    (Vers. 

]2 — 14.)  Had  he  reflected  aright  upon  the  course  of  Divine  providence  towards 
himself,  his  thoughts  about  God  would  have  been  thoughts  especially  of  humility  and 
gtatitude.  1.  Humility.  (Ver.  12.)  When  the  Jew  offered  his  basket  of  "  firstfruits  " 
annually  to  the  Lord,  he  was  to  say,  "  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father "  (Deut. 
xxvi.  5).  Jacob,  the  stem-father  of  the  tribes,  went  to  Mesopotamia  as  a  fugitive,  and 
remained  there  for  twenty  years  as  a  servant.  He  bad  no  dowry  to  offer  for  Bachel ; 
he  could  only  serve  for  her  as  a  shepherd.  Israel,  accordingly,  had  not  much  to  boast 
of  as  regards  his  national  origin ;  the  beginnings  of  the  nation  could  scarcely  have 
been  more  humble.  And  yet  how  different  was  Jacob's  life,  spiritually,  from  that  of  his 
children  to  whom  Hosea  spoke  this  prophecy  I  2.  Gratitude.  (Vet.  13.)  The  reference 
now  is  to  Muses.  If  Jacob's  condition  of  servitude  in  Fadan-aram  taught  a  lesson  of 
humility,  the  thought  of  the  slavery  of  hi«  immediate  posterity  in  Egypt  was  fitted  to 
inspire  sentiments  of  gratitude.  What  a  great  emancipation  was  that  of  the  Exodus ! 
And  the  agent  by  whom  that  deliverance  had  been  accomplished  was  a  prophet,  and 
one  who,  like  Jacob,  had  been  a  shepherd.  Degenerate  Israel  despised  the  teacher 
whom  God  sent,  forgetting  while  he  did  so  that  the  emancipation  from  the  bondage 
of  Egypt  had  taken  place  under  the  leadership  of  one  single  prophet.  The  Prophet 
Mosec  bad  conducted  the  tribes  through  the  Ked  Sea ;  and  bad  acted  as  their  guardian, 
and  their  mediator  with  God,  during  all  the  forty  years  which  they  spent  in  the  Arabian 
desert.  Under  him  the  people  had  passed  from  a  state  of  servitude  into  a  position  of 
sonship.  Yet,  alas !  the  nation  cherished  now  neither  humility  nor  gratitude.  The 
Lord  had  preserved,  enriched,  and  blessed  them  ;  but  in  return  they  only  "  provoked 
him  to  anger  "  by  their  grievous  sins,  until  it  became  impossible  that  they  could  escape 
the  punishment  of  their  impiety.  Lessont :  1.  The  profitableness  of  the  study  of 
Scripture  biography  and  history.  2.  God's  people  must  expect  to  be  subjected  to  dis- 
cipline as  a  condition  of  their  spiritual  advancement.  3.  The  Lord  uses  apparently 
humble  instruments  to  accomplish  great  results.  4.  The  duty  of  cherishing  gratitude 
for  past  mercies  in  our  national  history. — 0.  J. 

Ver.  3  (last  clause). — PrevaiUng  with  Qod.  It  is  no  small  thing  to  have  a  godly 
parentage.  To  be  bom  to  the  heritage  of  a  good  name  and  of  religious  influences 
brings  heavy  responsibility  and  noble  privilege.  The  man  who  turns  from  the  path  in 
which  his  godly  ancestors  walked  commits  a  greater  sin,  in  the  judgment  of  God,  thap 


CH.  xn.  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  886 


the  godless  who  have  never  known  the  advantages  of  a  religious  home.  Among  the 
nations,  "Israel"  had  this  peculiar  responsibility.  The  name  of  the  people  was  a 
reminder  of  the  prayer  in  which  their  great  ancestor  obtained  self-conquest,  knowledge 
of  God,  and  grace  to  keep  justice  and  do  mercy.  Hence  they  are  reminded  by  Hesea 
of  what  their  father  was,  that  they  might  know  what  was  still  possible  to  themselves. 
The  prophet  refers  here  to  Jacob's  agonizing  prayer  at  Jabbok,  and  speaks  of  a  "  strength  " 
which  was  in  him,  which  consisted  not  in  holiness  or  merit,  but  (as  the  next  verse 
suggests)  in  "  supplication  and  tears,"  God  could  not  overthrow  his  faith  and  con- 
stancy. He  could  not,  because  he  would  not.  The  touch  which  shrivelled  Jacob's 
thigh  showed  what  he  could  do.  The  delay  and  stiugde  were  only  imposed  on  the 
suppliant  (as  by  Jesus  on  the  woman  of  Syro-phoenicia)  in  order  to  prepare  him  to 
receive  a  loftier  blessing  than  he  began  at  first  to  seek.  The  incident  is  related 
in  a  highly  poetic  form,  and  to  Jacob  the  conflict  was  so  terrible  that  it  seemed 
an  actual  struggle  with  a  living  man.  The  voice  and  the  presence  were  not  material, 
but  they  were  none  the  less  real.  We  do  not  attempt  to  distinguish  between 
the  subjective  and  objective  in  this  great  conflict,  yet  we  believe  that  Hosea's  words 
respecting  it  are  true,  "  There  God  spake  with  «»,''  and  that  we  are  called  upon  to 
incline  our  hearts  to  the  inference  in  the  sixth  verse,  "Therefore  turn  thov  to  thy 
OiA,"  etc. 

I.  'Ihb  pebpaeation  foe  wrestling  with  Gk)D,  88  exemplified  in  the  experience 
of  Jacob.  Most  men  are  so  surrounded  by  what  is  material  that  they  want  the  help 
of  circumstances  to  enforce  upon  their  thoughts  the  deeper  necessities  of  their  nature 
and  the  nearness  of  tlieir  God.  Eefer  to  Jacob's  circumstances,  and  show  how  they 
constituted  such  a  crisis  in  his  life.     Examine  his  mental  condition,  and  see  in  it : 

1.  Remembrance  of  sin.  Twenty  years  had  gone  by  since  that  crime  was  committed 
which  deceived  his  father,  destroyed  the  peace  of  the  home,  and  made  Jacob  an  exile. 
Yet  changes  of  scene,  cares  of  business,  the  vexations  caused  by  an  exacting  employer, 
etc.,  had  not  prevented  the  rising  again  of  that  dreadful  memory.  Bury  sin  as  you  may 
beneath  cares  and  pleasures,  it  will  reappear  before  you.  IVIen  have  left  the  scene  of 
guilt,  formed  new  assuciations,  hushed  conscience  to  silence  successfully  for  years,  and 
then  a  chance  word,  or  an  unexpected  event,  has  raised  the  spectre  of  the  past  sin. 
Such  a  one,  like  Jacob,  would  give  anything  to  begin  life  again;  but  all  in  vain.  We 
walk  on  through  life  like  one  upon  a  path  in  the  cliifs  which  crumbles  away  behind 
him,  80  that  he  cannot  go  back  to  gather  the  flowers  he  neglected,  or  to  take  the  tiuu 
that  would  have  given  pleasure  instead  of  peril.  What  else  can  we  do,  when  the 
remembrance  of  sin  is  overwhelming,  but  "  weep  and  make  supplication  unto  God  "  ? 

2.  Eealization  of  peril.  Jacob  cared  nut  so  much  for  himself;  but  he  could  not  bear  to 
think  that  these  innocent,  dear  ones  around  him  might  suffer  death  or  captivity  because 
of  his  wrong-doing.  When  he  comtpitted  the  sin  he  had  neither  wife  nor  child,  and 
little  thought  how  far-reaching  and  disastrous  its  results  would  be.  So  the  sips  of 
youth  full  often  are  the  seed  whence  springs  a  harvest  of  sorrow  to  others  as  well  as 
to  ourselves.  Darwin  would  teach  as  plainly  as  David  that  the  sins  of  the  father  are 
visited  upon  the  children ;  as  Jacob's  children  were  in  peril  because  of  a  sin  their 
father  committed  before  they  were  born.  No  wonder  Jacob  turned  to  God  with  tears 
and  supplications,  and  "  there  God  spake  with  us,"  saying,  "Turn  thou  to  thy  God."  3, 
Consciutisness  of  solitude.  Jacob  was  left  alone.  Most  of  the  crises  of  life  must  be  faced 
in  solitude.  Hence  our  Lord  said,  "  When  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy  closet,"  etc 
He  himself  went  up  into  a  mountain  alone,  and  when  every  man  departed  to  his  own 
house,  he  went  to  the  Mount  of  Olives.  Moses  was  alone  on  Sinai,  John  in  Patmos, 
etc.  It  is  well  for  us  sometimes  to  shut  the  world  out,  to  think  over  the  past  and  to 
prepare  for  the  future  by  waiting  upon  God.    "  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy  God,"  etc. 

II.  Thb  ueaking  of  wbestlinq  with  Otooi  In  his  spiritual  struggle  Jacob  had : 
1.  An  apprehension  of  a  personal  Ood.  The  expressions  "  man  "  and  "  angel "  are  used 
to  show  that  God  was  as  real  to  him  as  a  man  would  have  been ;  that  Jacob  found  him 
to  be  One  with  whom  be  could  plead,  who  could  speak,  who  noticed  his  tears,  and  was 
able  to  bless  him  there.  Those  who  know  something  of  the  intensity  of  prayer  are  not 
satiafled  with  va^ue  ideas  of  God.  To  thera  he  is  not  an  abstract  notion  of  the  miml, 
projected  upon  nothingness;  nor  is  he  the  sum  of  natural  forces.  He  is  the  living  and 
true  God,  who  has  a  personal  interest  in  them,  and  listens  to  the  cij  of  their  heart), 

BOSM.  i  0 


386  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [ch.  xu.  I— 14. 

Nothing  less  tlian  that  satisfies  the  soul.  Idolatry  is  but  a  blind  attempt  to  create 
some  objective  perionality,  nothing  less  than  which  men  can  worship.  But  what  we 
want  is  glyen  to  us  in  Christ,  who  was  "  the  image  of  the  invisible  God."  Men  may 
be  satisfied  with  less  than  him  in  their  lower  life,  but  when  the  want  of  the  soul  is 
really  pressing,  when  the  hunger  of  the  heart  is  fairly  roused,  prayer  becomes  an  agony, 
in  which  they  can  say,  "  My  heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the  living  God  1 "  2.  Con- 
sciousness of  spiritual  struggle.  "  Struggle  "  does  not  correctly  describe  all  fellowship 
with  God,  as  we  may  see  from  Jacob's  own  experience.  When  he  first  left  home  he 
saw  the  heavenly  ladder  at  Bethel,  and  had  a  sweet  assurance  o(  God's  love  and  pro- 
tection ;  but  now  twenty  years  have  elapsed  he  goes  through  this  scene  of  darkness 
and  straggle  and  weeping.  This  is  not  what  many  would  have  expected.  They  demand 
that  religious  experience  should  always  begin  with  agony  over  sin.  But  it  does  not. 
Children  may  know  nothing  of  the  agony  of  soul,  yet  they  may  know  the  reality  of 
prayer.  By  the  foolish  expectations  of  some  Christians,  they  are  tempted  to  persuade 
themselves  that  Ihey  have  known  what  they  never  did  know,  or  else  to  regard  the 
devotion  of  their  childhood  as  sentimental  and  unreal.  Why  should  they  not  heed  the 
angels  of  Bethel  first,  and  have  the  agnny  of  Jabbok  twenty  years  after,  as  Jacob  did  ? 
But,  sooner  or.  later,  most  devout  men  know  snmetliing  of  struggle,  when  the  darker 
problems  of  life  and  its  more  terrible  issues  face  them ;  yet,  although  in  their  later 
years  they  have  to  fight  with  doubts  which  did  not  trouble  them  once,  they  have  no 
reason  on  that  account  to  suspect  the  reality  of  their  earlier  religions  life.  It  was  not 
Bethel's  pleasant  dream,  but  Jabbok's  dreadful  struggle,  that  transformed  Jacob  into  a 
prince.  3.  Victory  through  the  Divine  goodness.  Observe  the  change  in  the  attitude 
of  Jacob.  At  first  the  angels  "met  him"  as  it  coming  out  of  Seir,  to  remind  and 
rebuke  him  of  sin.  He  began  with  struggle,  1)Ut  ended  in  supplication.  The  end  oi 
all  wrestling  with  God  is  not  to  conquer  him,  but  to  conquer  self;  e.g.  one  assailed  by 
intellectual  doubts  finds  rest,  not  in  the  solution  of  the  difficulty,  but  in  trust  in  him 
whose  " greatness  is  unsearchable;"  another  troubled  by  the  conviction  of  sin  wins 
peace  by  confessing  sin,  not  by  disproving  the  charges  of  conscience.  The  conscioiisiiess 
and  acknowledgment  of  weakness  is  our  power,  "  weeping  "  is  our  eloquence ;  and  they 
who  come  with  the  supplication,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me,"  by  their 
strength  have  power  with  God. 

III.  Thr  issues  of  wbestlino  with  Gon.  See  what  Jacob  won.  1.  Knowledge  of 
Ood.  He  knew  him  as  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  with  power  to  rule  Esau  and  others,  and 
as  "Jehovah,"  who  would  fulfil  his  covenant  promise.  He  was  nearer  to  God  now  than 
ever.  Before  this  he  had  been  at  Beth-el,  "  the  house  of  God ; "  but  now  he  was  at 
Peni-el  he  saw  "the /ace  of  God."  2.  Change  in  character.  No  longer  Jacob  (sup- 
planter),  but  Israel  (prince).  Before  this  he  sought  Divine  ends  by  human  means,  but 
never  after.  In  the  presence  of  things  eternal,  things  temporal  faded  away  ;  and  in  the 
light  gf  God's  countenance  he  became  sincere  and  transparent,  "  Beholding  as  in  a 
glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  we  are  chan<!;ed  into  the  same  image,"  etc.  3.  Delight  in 
praytr.  When  an  old  man  he  blessed  his  sons,  having  faith  to  foresee  their  future,  an<l 
power  ID  prayer  to  win  their  blessings.  The  priesthood  of  Christians  on  earth  has  yet 
to  be  realized  inthe  fulness  of  its  power.  If  only  the  Church  had  the  spirit  of  suppli- 
cation which  Jacob  had  when  he  cried,  "I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me,'' 
there  would  come  a  wave  of  spiritual  influence  over  the  world  which  would  cover  tb- 
baie  rocks  of  scepticism,  and  sing  a  p^an  of  victory  over  the  dreary  wastes  of  sin. 
"  By  Us  strength  "  may  the  Church  have  "  power  with  God  "  t — A.  K. 

Ver,  1.— Feeding  on  wind.  The  conduct  of  Ephraim  is  in  many  respects  very 
iustractive  to  all  readers  of  Scripture.  There  is  nothing  in  that  conduct  upon  which 
llosea  lays  greater  stress  than  the  extreme  folly,  unreasonableness,  fatuity  of  sin.  This 
is  a  forcible  image  which  the  prophet  here  employs  to  describe  the  vanity  of  a  course  of 
life  distinguished  by  forgetl'ulness  of  God  and  rebellion  against  God,  by  a  constantly 
recnrring  though  constantly  disappointing  endeavour  to  find  satisfaction  in  the  pursuits 
and  pleasures  of  sin.     "  Ephraim  feedeth  on  wind,  and  chaseth  the  east  wind." 

I.  A  VAiK  AND  FALBB  BTANDABD  AMD  AiH.  Compare  the  wind  with  wholesome  food, 
and  you  feel  at  once  the  absurdity  of  regarding  the  one  as  though  it  were  equivalent  to 
the  other.     The  objects  upon  which  the  ungodly  and  the  worldly  set  their  heart  are  a& 


OL  xn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  SOT 

vnsubstautial  as  the  "  viewless  air."  Such  persona  call  evil  good,  and  commit  the  sin 
of  forsaking  the  fountain  of  liTing  waters,  and  hewing  out  to  themselves  broken  cisterns 
which  can  bold  no  water. 

II.  A  pooLiBH  FTTBsniT.  As  are  a  man's  oonceptions  of  excellence,  such  we  may 
expect  will  be  his  life.  It  is  natural  that  we  should  seek  that  which  we  deem  good. 
Seekers  of  satisfaction  in  the  pleasures  of  sin,  if  tliey  could  but  understand  their  real 
life,  would  see  themselves  to  l>e  chasing  the  east  wind.  All  earthly  aims,  when  substi- 
tuted for  God's  glory — ^the  one  true  end  of  our  existence — are  unworthy  of  our  nature, 
and  undeserving  of  our  devotion. 

III.  As  UNSATisFTnro  bgwabd.  To  swallow  the  wind  is  a  poor  substitute  for  eating 
suitable  and  sustaining  food.  And  sooner  or  later  every  person  who  has  given  himself 
to  the  quest  of  worldly  and  selSsh  aims  must  discover  their  utter  vanity,  their  inability 
to  afford  a  true  and  lasting  satisfaction.  When  the  illusions  of  earth  and  time  have 
vanished,  and  men  stand  face  to  face  with  eternal  realities,  how  empty  and  unworthy 
will  appear  what  has  so  often  inflamed  their  desire  and  excited  their  strenuous  effort  I 
Anticipating  so  clear  a  judgment,  let  the  bearers  of  Qod's  Word  be  wise  in  time.— T. 

Yer.  S. — Power  with  Ood,  The  prophet  here  introduced  a  reference  to  Jacobs  one 
of  the  ancestors  of  the  chosen  people,  in  order  to  encourage  his  descendants  to  apply 
for  mercy  to  the  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  The  Eternal  and  Unchange- 
■able  remained  the  same;  and  what  God  had  done  for  the  ancient  saints  he  was  willing 
to  do  for  their  posterity.  The  expression  used  with  regard  to  Jacob  deserves  attention : 
"  In  his  strength  he  put  forth  power  [or,  •prowess']  with  God." 

I.  Whence  power  with  God  fboceeds.  1.  From  a  sense  of  need  and  dependence 
on  the  part  of  the  suppliant.  He  who  needs  much  and  sorely  will  plead  powerfully. 
2.  Froin  a  conviction  of  Divine  l)ounty  and  kindness.  He  who  approaches  an  unwilling 
or  niggardly  person,  with  the  view  of  asking  from  him  a  boon,  loses  half  his  energy  by 
the  consciousness  of  the  illiberal  character  to  which  he  appeals.  But  he  who  comes  to 
God  comes  to  a  King  of  boundless  resources,  a  Father  of  infinite  compassion ;  and  the 
knowledge  of  this  should  prompt  to  urgent  entreaty. 

II.  How  FOWEB  WITH  GoD  MANIFESTS  ITSELF.  At  Feoiel  and  at  Bethel  Jacob 
proved  himself  a  true  suppliant ;  witness  his  "  wrestling "  at  the  one  place  and  his 
**  vow  "  at  the  other.  We  have  no  power  to  command  God,  but  we  have  power  to 
entreat  him.  We  may  feel  our  feebleness,  but  if  our  prayer  be  sincere,  ardent,  and  per- 
severing, it  will  have  power  with  the  Etprnal. 

"Yield  to  me,  Lord,  for  I  am  weak^ 
But  confident  in  self-despair." 

III.  What  it  is  which  power  with  God  secures.  1.  Personal  forgiveness  and 
acceptance.  Above  all  things  the  suppliant  sinner  craves  for  this.  To  be  in  the  light 
of  the  Divine  favour  is,  of  all  things,  the  most  urgently  desirable.  2.  The  supply  of 
every  real  need.     3.  The  relative  blessings  sought  in  intercessory  prayer. 

Application.  Let  not  the  thought  of  God's  greatness  cripple  the  energies  or  daunt 
the  heart  ot  the  lowly  applicant  for  metej.  Great  as  he  is,  he  delights  ta  be  conquered 
by  the  urgent  entreaties  of  his  children. 

"And  when  my  all  of  strength  shall  fail, 
I  shall  with  the  God-Man  prevail." 

T. 

Ver.  6.—"  Turn  thou  to  thy  Ood."  If  there  is  one  message  more  frequently  repeated 
than  another  in  the  Scriptures,  both  of  the  Uld  and  New  Testaments,  it  is  this  message 
requiring  repentance.  There  has  been  no  generation  of  men,  nay,  there  hac  beak  no 
iiMividual  man,  to  whom  it  might  not  jusdy  be  said,  Bepent  I 

I.  Human  charactbb  and  life  abb  suoh  as  to  bendbb  kbcessabt  this  TUKMine 
to  God.  One  who  is  on  the  right  road  already  has  no  need  to  turn ;  but  he  who  is 
travelling  in  the  wrong  direction  must  first  of  all  reverse  his  steps,  his  course.  As  sin 
and  error  have  been  universal,  no  limit  can  be  placed  to  the  appropriateness  of  the 
summons  of  the  text. 


888  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  fs-  ^^  1— !*■ 

n.  UAN   mat    riND  »  BIMBELF  HANT  AND   SUFFICIENT  REASONS  FOR  REPENTANCE. 

lIiB  interests  demand,  his  cunscicuce  enjoins,  his  hest  feelings  urge,  that  he  should 
tun  unto  God.  His  present  happiness  and  his  future  prospects  are  imperilled  by  his 
remaining  estranged  from  his  God. 

III.  In  God  himself,  and  in  his  bevelation,  are  many  grounds  fob  befent> 
ANOK.  1.  First  of  all  there  is  the  fact  that  he  is  our  God.  "  Turn  thou  to  thj/  God." 
How  just  and  proper,  then,  that,  instead  of  looking  away  from  him,  men  should  look 
towards  him  1  2.  It  must  be  considered  that  all  oui  happiness  is  bound  up  with  bia 
favour  and  fellowship.  To  turn  to  him  is  to  turn  to  .the  light  of  the  sun,  to  the  source 
of  life.  3.  The  Divine  directions  and  promises  furnish  the  most  persuasive  motive  and 
the  most  authoritative  justification  for  turning  unto  God. — ^T. 

Ver.  6. — "  Wait  *n  thy  Ood,"  It  is  very  instructive  that  the  prophet  in  this 
passage  admonished,  not  only  to  repentance,  reformation,  and  righteousness,  but  also  to 
"  waiting  on  God,"  Many  of  the  effects  of  repentance,  and  especially  the  moral,  sub- 
jective effects,  might  be  felt  immediately,  but  there  were  other  consequences  which 
misbt  probably  be  delayed.     Hence  the  admonition  of  the  text. 

I.  It  18  aoNOUBiNa  to  God  that  his  people  should  wait  upon  him.  It  is  not 
for  man  to  dictate  to  his  Maker,  to  seek  to  prescribe  wheuj  how,  and  where  God  should 
intcrrene  upon  behalf  of  a  suppliant.  His  wisdom  is  not  to  be  questioned ;  his  good- 
ness is  BOt  to  be  impugned. 

II.  It  IB  profitable  to  God's  people  to  wait  upon  him.  Thus  faith  and  patience 
are  cultivated — virtues  which  are  most  serviceable  to  Chiistians,  and  which  are  a  true 
ornament  to  the  godly  character. 

III.  It  is  well  to  wait  upon  God  oontinuallt.  Bemissness  in  so  doing  is  to 
be  condemned ;  weariness  in  waiting  b  dangerous.  Just  at  the  moment  when  the 
Helper  draws  nigh  the  needy  soul  may  be  in  slumber  or  may  be  otherwise  engaged. 
Waiting  means  watching. 

IV.  God's  people  cannot  wait  foe  him  in  vain.  They  may  wait  long,  but  their 
waiting  shall  be  rewarded.  Then  shall  they  sin<;  aloud  for  joy,  "  This  is  our  God ;  we 
have  waited  for  him."  Wait  for  the  harvest,  and  you  shall  reap.  Wait  for  the  morn- 
ings a&d  the  siu  sbali  rise  upon  your  expectant  soul. — T. 

Vtr  6. — Hap^nest  in  reserve.  The  mixture  of  promise  with  threat  is  one  of  the 
remarkable  and  instructive  characteristics  of  these  prophecies.  In  the  midst  of  wrath 
Qoi  remembers  mercy.  The  bright  lining  of  the  cloud  cheers  the  beholder  when  he  is 
downcast  and  troubled.  Hosea  is  commissioned  to  assure  Israel  that  upon  their  repent- 
ance they  sl)all  rejoice  before  God  in  the  glad  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  which  they  shall 
celebrate  to  his  glory. 

I.  True  happiness  consists  in  the  bemembranok  akd  celebration  of  Ood's 
MEMXBS.  The  feast  of  Tabernacles  observed  by  the  Jews  was  a  festival  in  which  the 
nation  commemorated  the  goodness  of  Jehovah,  both  in  supplying  their  wants  by  means 
of  the  harvest,  and  in  delivering  them  as  a  nation  from  the  power  of  Egypt.  Now  we 
as  Christians  have  even  greater  mercies  to  acknowledge ;  God  has  given  us  the  Bread  of 
life,  and  he  has  rescued  us  from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan.  It  behoves  us,  theiefore,  to 
cherish  gratitude  to  God  the  Saviour  for  all  the  great  works  he  has  wrought  for  us,  and 
for  all  the  loving-kindness  with  which  he  has  treated  us. 

n.  The  pbospeot  of  such  happiness  is  fitted  to  chebb  tee  heart  in  times 
OF  BOBBOW  AND  TBOUBLE.  If  this  be  the  wildei'uess  through  which  we  pass,  we  are 
journeying  to  the  land  of  possession  and  repose.  If  this  be  the  darksome  night  whose 
shadows  gather  round  us,  we  hope  soon  to  see  the  streaks  of  the  coming  day.  Let  the 
discouraged  and  harassed  Christian  learn  to  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  Why  art  thou 
cast  down,  0  iny  soul?  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?  hope  thou  in  God :  fur 
1  shall  yet  praise  him," 

III.  The  faithful  promises  of  the  Eternal  assure  a  happy  future  to  those 
WHO  TRUST  AND  LOVE  iiiM.  The  religion  of  Christ  places  the  golden  age  in  the  future. 
The  Christian  has  always  something  blessed  and  glorious  to  which  to  look  forward. 
His  dwelling-place  is  above.  And  he  has  ever  before  him  the  happy  and  inspiring 
prospect  of  sharing  in  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb." — T. 


oa.  xu.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  389 

Ver.  10. — Viiions  and  similitudes.  In  two  ways  Jehovah  showed  himself  to  be  in 
an  especial  manner  favourable  towards  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 
The  fint  was  by  his  providential  care  of  the  nation  throughout  its  history.  And  the 
second  was  that  mentioned  in  this  verse :  God  sent  continually  to  his  chosen  people 
prophets,  whose  communications  were  the  means  of  instructing,  warnin°;,  and  guiding 
them.    Observe  the  twofold  description  of  the  t)iviae  revelation  vouchsafed. 

I.  YiBiONS.  1.  The  name  given  to  the  class  of  inspired  teachers  and  guides  of  the 
nation  is  significant,  and  is  harmonious  with  this  passage.  They  were  seen.  2,  By  an 
illumined  faculty  these  Hebrew  prophets  saw  Divine  realities.  Intuition,  insight, 
inspiration, — such  are  the  terms  by  which  spiritual  vision  is  designated.  "  The  vision 
and  the  faculty  Divine  "  has  been  attributed  to  genius ;  but  the  order  of  men  in  ques- 
tion were  distinguished  by  their  perception  of  tpirititod  truth.  3.  These  visions  of 
Divine  realities  the  prophets,  by  language  or  otherwise,  conveyed  to  the  people. 

II.  Similitudes.  There  is  a  natural  and  ordained  correspondence  between  things 
natural  and  things  spiritual,  which  accounts  for  the  prevalence  and  the  efficiency  of 
pictorial,  metaphorical,  and  allegorical  methods  of  instruction  and  admonition.  1.  Some- 
times the  prophets  were  directed  to  make  use  of  parabolic  action.  We  have  several 
instances  of  this  kind  recorded  in  the  books  of  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  etc.  2.  Similitude  often 
took  the  form  of  parabolic  language :  e.g.  Isaiah's  comparison  of  Israel  to  an  unfruitful 
vine ;  Ezekiel's  comparison  of  the  return  from  captivity  to  the  revival  of  the  dry  hones, 
etc.  3.  In  both  these  prophetic  methods  there  is  a  sacred  purpose.  Condescension  to 
the  ignorance  and  unspirituality  of  many  of  the  people  was  one  reason.  4.  Our  Lord 
Jesus  himself  "used  similitudes,"  and  sanctioned  this  interesting  and  impressive 
method  in  his  parables  and  allegories. 

Application.  When  God  has  deigned  to  communicate  with  as  by  visions  and 
similitudes,  how  great  is  the  responsibility  of  listening  to  the  inspired  prophetic 
Word!— T. 

Ver.  13. — The  ministry  of  prophets.  The  reference  of  this  verse  is  obviously  to  Moses, 
who  was  indeed  a  great  national  leader  and  legislator,  but  who,  it  must  not  be  forgotten, 
was  the  first  and  the  greatest  of  the  prophets.  The  remarkable  fact  here  alluded  to  is, 
that  God  made  choice  and  use  of  a  prophet,  not  simply  to  teach,  but  to  effect  a  great 
deliverance  on  behalf  of  the  chosen  nation. 

I.  Thk  bblection  of  a  prophet  as  thb  ikstrument  fob  a  great  work  was 
HONonRiNO  TO  GoD  HIMSELF.  If  a  warrior,  a  hero,  had  been  employed  for  this  purpose, 
the  minds  of  the  people  might  naturally  have  attributed  their  deliverance  to  his  war- 
like prowess,  his  strategic  genius.  But  when  Moses,  the  meekest  of  men,  the  wisest  of 
human  teachers,  was  appointed,  it  was  clear  to  all  that,  though  the  hand  was  that  of 
Moses,  the  power  was  that  of  God. 

II.  The  great  work  which  was  done  by  thk  agency  of  the  prophet  authen- 
noATED  AND  ENFORCED  HIS  BELioions  TEACHING.  It  could  uot  be  otherwise  than  that 
the  children  of  Israel  should  regard  with  reverence  and  confidence  a  man  who  had  led 
them  out  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  notwithstanding  the  opposition  of  the  mighty 
monarch  whom  he  had  defied.  His  revelations  of  the  Divina  character,  his  declarations 
of  the  Divine  will,  came  home  to  the  people  with  tenfold  power  because  he  had  been 
the  means  of  making  the  presence  of  God  known  and  felt  among  them  in  a  way  which 
thb  whole  nation  could  appreciate.  The  same  principle  explains  why  it  was  ordained 
that  signs  and  wonders  should  so  usually  accompany  the  ministry  of  inspired  men. 

III.  The  combined  hanifestatioh  of  Divim  wisdom  and  Divine  power  benders 
DNBELiEF  AND  iRRELioioN  THB  MORE  CULPABLK.  It  was  •  reproach  to  Israel  that, 
after  experiencing  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence  so  unquestionable,  they  should 
have  cherished  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief.  Considering  that  the  Christian  dispensation 
has  lieen  marked  by  an  even  more  striking  display  of  divinity  than  the  Mosaic,  it  may 
well  be  asked,  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?" — ^T. 

Ver.  1. — Worthless  soul-food.  "  Bphraim  feedeth  on  wind."  Delitzsch  renders  this 
claiise,  "Bphraim  grazeth  wind."  The  idea  is  that  it  sought  for  support  and  satisfac- 
tion in  those  things  that  were  utterly  unsubstantial  and  worthless — '•  wind." 

L  Sensual  indulgences  are  worthless  soul-food.    Men  seek  happiness  in  the  grati- 


390  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xn.  1—14. 

hcation  of  their  Benses,  in  the  free  indulgence  of  their  appetites :  but  all  this  is  nothing 
but  "  wind ;"  it  leaves  the  soul  more  hungry  than  erer.  Souls  die  with  huoger  in  the 
pampered  body  of  the  gourmand  and  voluptuary.  *'Man  cannot  lire  b/  bread 
alone,"  eta 

II,  WoBLDiiT  DisTiNcnoNH  are  worthless  soul-food.  Thousands  seek  food  for  their 
souls  In  worldly  titles,  honour,  and  fame.  But  these  are  "  wind."  The  souls  of  our 
grandees  are  perishing  with  hunger.  Walk  Bottea  Bow  in  the  height  of  the  season, 
and  in  the  countenances  of  hundreds  of  those  rolling  in  the  stream  of  dazzling  chariots 
you  see  moral  hunger  depicted.    What  are  they  doing?    They  are  grazing  wind. 

III,  BsLioioua  FoitMALiTiES  are  worthless  soul-food.  Millions  gc  through  religious 
formalities  in  search  of  spirit-food.  They  crowd  temples,  synago^ues,  cathedrals, 
churches,  chapels,  rigorously  attend  to  the  mere  ceremonies  of  religion,  and  return 
from  their  devotions  with  hungry  and  unfed  soijls.  At  the  altars  they  have  been 
grazing  wind.  "  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that  which  is  not  bread  ?  and  your 
labour  for  that  which  satisfleth  not?  hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye  that  which 
is  good,  and  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness." — ^D.  T. 

Ver.  6. — Oenuine  human  goodness.  "  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy  God:  keep  mercy 
and  judgment,  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually,"  Delitzsch  renders  the  verse  thus : 
"  And  thou  to  thy  God  shall  return,  keep  love,  and  right,  and  hope  continually  in  thy 
God."  .  The  new  translation  gives  no  new  idea.  The  few  words  may  be  regarded  as 
representing  genuine  human  goodness.  Looking  at  it  in  this  respect  it  includes  three 
things. 

I.  Spiritual  oonvebbioit.  "  Turn  thou  to  thy  God."  An  expression  implying  that 
their  moral  mind  was  in  a  different  direction,  away  from  God.  It  was  so  with  Ephraim ; 
it  was  after  idols.  It  is  so  with  all  unregenerate  souls ;  they  are  alienated  from  God. 
Terrible  fact  this.  God's  intelligent  creatures  turned  from  him  and  against  him. 
Turning  to  him  includes  at  least  two  things.  1.  Accepting  him  as  the  supreme 
Monarch  to  obey.  It  means  the  making  of  his  will  the  law  of  all  their  laws,  the  test 
of  all  their  conduct,  the  guide  of  all  their  activities.  2.  Accepting  him  as  the  supreme 
Obfect  to  love.  Man  is  so  formed  that  he  must  have  some  one  to  love  supremely.  His 
crime,  degradation,  and  curses  are,. that  the  objects  which  he  has  chosen  on  which  to 
centre  his  paramount  love  are  imperfect  creatures  and  vanities.  He  is  the  only  Object 
worthy  of  the  soul's  su[ireme  love,  and  this  he  demands.  He  who  renders  him  this  will 
have  his  heart  enlarged,  and  run  with  joyous  alacrity  in  all  the  ways  of  his  command- 
ments.  Here,  then,  is  the  first  step  in  genuine  human  goodness — conversion.  "Eepent, 
and  be  converted."  This  is  the  grand  call  of  the  gospel,  God  calls  men  everywhere  to 
repent — that  is,  to  change  their  hearts,  turn  from  themselves  to  him  their  Creator. 

II,  Social  mobalitt,  "  Keep  mercy  and  judgment."  Notice  the  latter  first, 
1.  "Judgment"  that  is,  justice.  Justice  means  rendering  to  every  man  his  due;  it  is 
compendiously  expressed  in  the  words  of  Christ,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  have  men  do 
unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them."  It  goes  dead  against  all  frauds,  dishonesties,  and 
cruelties.  2,  " Mtrey."  Mercy  is  a  modification  of  love;  it  is  love  in  compassion, 
patience,  forbearance,  etc.  Paul  makes  a  distinction  between  a  good  man  and  a  just 
man.  There  are  men  conventionally  just,  who  are  not  good,  nor  generous,  nor  merciful. 
They  would  pay  every  man  his  due,  but,  like  Shylock,  they  will  extort  the  last  grain. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  enongh  for  a  man  to  "  keep  jud<!;ment  "—do  justice— to  his  fellow- 
man  ;  he  must  have  mercy  too.    **  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law," 

IIL  Life- WORSHIP,  "  Wait  continually  on  thy  God,"  God  must  be  the  All  in  all ; 
the  grand  Figure  in  all  the  sceneries,  and  the  ruling  chord  in  all  the  melodies  of  life. 
Afau  is  made  to  worship;  but  worship  is  not  a  ceremony,  not  a  passing  sentiment,  not 
an  occasional  service ;  it  is  a  life  revealing  itself  everywhere — in  marts  of  business,  halls 
of  study,  fields  of  recreation,  as  well  as  in  conventional  temples.  It  is  not  a  something 
that  appears  on  this  mountain  or  on  that  mountain,  on  this  day  or  that  day,  in  this 
act  or  mt,  but  something  that  is  every  where  and  when.    The  grand  puis*  of  being. 

"  True  religion,  sprung  (hna  Qod  alone^ 
b  like  her  Fountain,  fnll  of  charity : 
Embracing  all  things  with  a  tender  Inn. 
Fall  of  good  will  and  meek  expeotanoy: 


<■.  xn.  1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  S91 

Full  of  tnie  justice  and  sure  verity, 
In  heart  apd  voice :  ftee,  large,  even  infinitt^ 
Not  wedged  in  straight  particularity, 
But  graeping  all  in  her  vast,  active  spirit. 
BMght  lamp  of  God,  that  men  would  joy  in  thy  pure  light  I" 

(Hannah  Mor*.) 

D.T. 

Vers.  7 — 9. — Fortune*  hadltf  vsed,  badly  made,  and  hadly  ended.  "He  is  a  mer- 
chant, the  balances  of  deceit  are  in  bis  band :  he  loveth  to  oppress.  And  Ephraim 
said.  Yet  I  am  become  rich,  I  have  found  me  out  substance :  in  all  my  labours  they 
shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me  that  were  sin.  And  I  that  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the 
land  of  Euypt  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn 
feast."    Here  we  have — 

I.  FoBTUNEs  BADLT  USED.  "And  Ephraim  said,  I  am  become  rich,  I  have  found 
me  out  substance."     Here  is  a  fortune  held  and  no  doubt  employed  in  the  spirit  of 

;  haughty  egotism. ,  It  is  .a?l  !•    "  I  have  become  rich,  /  have  found  me  out  substance." 

1.  Here  there  \9  no  recog^iitipn  of  human  co-operation.    No  man  comes  in  possession  of 

,  wealth  witliout  the  e£forts  of  some  men  either  living  or  dead.     Wealth,  whoever  holds 

,  it,  is  the  result— in  inost,  perhaps  in  all  cases — of  the  efforts  of  a  large  number  of 

.  human  workers.     But  the  possessior  oftentimes  takes  no  note  of  this.    He  thinks  only 

.  of  himself.    He  does  not  think  of  the  toil,  the  sweat,  the  exhaustion  of  those  who  have 

helped  to  put  it  into  his  hand.    2.  Here  there  is  no  recognition  of  Divine  agency.    All 

;  fortunes  come  of  God — out  of  his  materials,  out  of  his  seasons,  out  of  the  activity  of 

his  creatures.     But  there  is  no  recognition  of  him  here.    "  /  have  become  rich,  /  have 

found  me  out  substance,"     How  many  fortunes  are  thus  held  and  employed  in  England 

this  day — hcl'l  and  employed  in  a  haughty  egotism  I 

II.  Fortunes  badly  made.  1.  Here  is  fraud.  "  He  is  a  merchant,  the  balances  of 
deceit  are  in  his  hand."  The  hand  of  fraud  has  ever  been,  and  still  is,  alas  1  the  most 
active  of  all  agencies  in  the  erection  of  fortunes.     There  is  deceit  everywhere.    In  all 

,  fabrics,  groceries,  trade  commoditiea.  Deceit  in  making,  deceit  both  in  the  buying  and 
the  sul  ing.  Were  all  the  fortunes  in  England  that  have  been  built  up  by  deceit  to  be 
destroyed  this  day,  the  whole  human  world  would  be  startled  with  the  terrible  crash. 
The  event  would  be  as  the  hurling  of  the  Himalaya  into  the  sea,  causing  the  billows  to 
roar  on  every  shore.^  2.  Here  is  oppression.  "  He  loveth  to  oppress."  Indeed,  fraud 
is  oppression  in  soiiie  form  or  other.  What  unrighteous  exactions  there  are  in  the 
building  of  many  fortunes!  Go  to  tbe  pits  of  mine-owners,  to  the  factories  of  manu- 
facturers, to  the  warehouses  of  merchants,  to  the  vessels  of  ship-owners,  and  everywhere 
you  will  meet  men  and  women  groaning  under  the  oppression  of  those  lor  whom  they 
are  building  up  fortunes.  3.  Here  is  cunning.  "In  all  my  labours  they  shall  find 
none  iniquity  in  me  that  were  sin."  Ephraim — this  typical  fortune-maker — took  such 
care  to  conceal  all  that  was  unfair  and  nefarious  in  his  operations  that  he  was  certain 
no  wrong  could  he  found  in  his  doings.  Wrong  there  was,  he  l<new,  but  he  was  careful 
that  none  should  discover  it.  By  plausible  and  well-guarded  statements,  by  legal 
formulse,  by  "  board  "  resolutions,  he  feels  that  he  can  say,  "  In  all  my  labours  they 
shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me."  Who  has  not  seen  many  men  of  this  type? — many 
who  have  made  a  fortune  by  a  swindle,  but  have  so  guarded  the  transaction  that  they 
have  clapped  their  bands  and  said,  "  None  will  ever  find  it  out." 

III.  FouTUNES  BADLT  ENDED.  "  And  I  that  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of 
E({ypt  will  yet  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles,  as  in  the  days  of  the  solemn  feast." 

.  The  meaning  of  this  is — ^Rich  as  thou  art,  I  will  strip  thee  of  thy  wealth,  drive  thee 
from  thy  home,  send  thee  back  again  to  the  wilderness  a  vagrant,  to  howl  for  bread 
and  water.  Ay,  ay,  to  all  such  fortune-holders  and  fortune-makers  retribution  must 
come  sooner  or  later.  "  I  tell  thee,"  says  'i'homas  Carlyle,  "  there  is  nothing  else  but 
justice:  one  strong  thing  1  find  here  below — the  just  thing,  the  true  thing.  My  friend, 
if  thou  hadst  all  the  artillery  of  Woolwich  marchiog  at  thy  back  in  support  of  an 
unjust  thing,  and  infinite  bonfires  visibly  waiting  aSead  of  thee  to  blaze  centuries  to 
come  for  thy  victory  on  behalf  of  it,  I  would  advise  thee  to  call '  Halt  1 '  to  fling  down 
thy  baton,  and  say,  'In  God's  Name,  no  I '  What  will  the  success  amount  to ?  K  th« 
thing  be  unjust,  thou  hast  not  succeeded,  though  bonfires  blazed  from  north  to  souta, 


iOi  tHfi  BOOK  of  msUA.  [ob-zilI— ll 

and  belli  rang,  and  editors  wrote  leading  articles,  and  the  just  thing  be  trampled  oat  ef 
sight  to  all  mortal  eyes,  an  abolished  and  an  annihilated  thing." — ^D.  T. 

Yer.  10. — OocTt  method  in  teaching  the  great  teacher$  of  fh»  tttorld,  "  I  have  bIm 
spoken  by  the  prophets,  and  I  have  multiplied  visions,  and  used  limilitudei,  by  the 
ministry  of  the  prophets."  God  is  the  great  Teacher  of  mankind.  "  Who  teaches  like 
him  ? "  He  teaches  the  best  lessons,  in  the  best  way  and  for  the  best  purpose ;  he 
teaches  man  through  the  works  of  nature,  and  through  the  best  of  men.  Ood  has 
always  employed  proi>hets  in  his  great  school  for  humanity.  Into  every  i^e  he  has 
sent  men  above  the  aveiage  of  the  race — men  gifted  with  high  intellect,  lofty  genius, 
and  special  inspiration.  They  are  evermore  his  prophets,  and  these  he  himself  teaches; 
they  are  in  his  "  normal  school."  He  teaches  them  that  they  may  teach  others.  The 
text  indicates  his  method  of  teaching  them. 

L  By  tisigns.  He  gives  to  those  men  inner  revelations,  unfolds  to  them  ipiritual 
realities,  opens  their  spiritual  eyes,  and  bids  them  look.  What  wonderful  Tisioni 
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  Daniel,  Paul,  and  the  Apostle  John  had  1  They  saw  wonderful  things ; 
but  what  they  saw  was  not  with  the  outward  eye,  but  with  the  eye  of  the  soul.  These 
visions  serve  to  show  three  things.  1.  T/ie  distinguishing  glory  of  the  human  mind. 
What  is  that?  It  is  a  power  to  see  the  sensuously  invisible,  the  universe  that  liei 
beyond  the  ken  of  mortal  sight.  What  a  universe  came  to  the  eye  of  the  sightless 
bard  of  England  1  In  some  this  visual  organ  is  keener  and  more  active  than  in  othei-s. 
He  who  has  it  in  the  highest  extent  is  the  poet,  the  prophet,  emphatically  the  seer. 
2.  Tfie  accessibility  of  the  human  mind  to  Ood.  Man  can  only  address  the  mind 
through  the  senses ;  the  Almighty  can  do  it  when  all  the  senses  are  closed  up,  in  the 
"  visions  of  the  night."  He  can  take  into  it  at  his  pleasure  a  whole  universe,  and  bid 
it  gaze  on  its  objects  and  listen  to  its  sounds.  3.  Zne  reality  t^  spiritual  things.  The 
bodily  eye  does  not  see  realities,  but  mere  forms  and  shadows.  The  soul  alone  can  tee 
the  real,  hence  God  brings  the  real  into  it.  By  visions  I  think  the  Almighty  hat  ever 
taught  the  great  thinkers  of  mankind,  not  only  in  ancient  but  in  modern  times.  All 
the  true  discoveries  of  men  of  science,  all  the  creations  of  sacred  bards,  all  the  flashee  of 
the  true  evangel,  are  but  visions  from  God.    "  In  visions  of  the  night." 

II.  Bt  SIMILITUDE.  "And  used  similitudes."  By  this  is  meant,  he  showed  them 
the  invisible  by  the  visible,  the  spiritual  by  the  sensuous.  He  gave  them  parables. 
"  Without  a  parable  spake  he  not  unto  them."  Hence  the  prophets  spoke  in  parables ; 
and  the  great  Prophet  of  the  world,  who  was  like  unto  Moses.  There  are  good  reasons 
Tor  this  mode  of  teaching  spiritual  truth.  Twp  may  be  mentioned.  1.  It  makes  the 
spiritual  more  attractive.  All  men,  whether  they  will  or  not,  from  their  very  bodily 
constitutions  are  vitally  interested  in  material  objects.  They  live  in  them  and  by 
them ;  and  without  direct  impressions  from  God,  we  can  scarcely  conceive  of  spiritual 
truth  beinc;  made  clear  to  them  but  by  their  means.  2.  It  makes  the  material  appear 
more  Divine.  Flowers,  trees,  streams,  and  stars,  when  they  have  become  emblems  to 
the  soul  of  spiritual  truth,  become  invested  with  a  mystic  charm.  The  picture  that 
has  himg  in  your  room  for  years,  and  on  which  your  eyes  have  rested  a  thousand  times, 
becomes  invested  with  a  strange  fascination  alter  you  have  made  the  acquaintance  and 
come  to  love  the  person  whom  it  represents.  Thank  God  for  his  parabolic  method  of 
teaching. — ^D.  T. 

Cli.  xi.  12 — ^xii.  1,  2. — Ood  faithful,  his  people  unfaithful.  Probability  seems 
against  the  rendering, "  Judah  yet  ruleth  with  God,  and  is  faithful  with  the  All-Holy ; " 
iur,  though  a  relative  truth  might  be  claimed  for  the  first  statement,  the  other  refer- 
ences to  Judah  are  in  a  very  different  strain  (ch.  ir.  16 ;  t.  6, 10, 14 ;  vi.  4, 11 ;  viiL 
H;  z.  11),  and  in  any  case  the  second  clause  would  be  untrue  to  fact.  "Faithful 
with  Ood  "  is  too  glaringly  at  variance  with  what  Isaiah  says  of  the  state  of  Judah  at 
this  time:  "Their  land  is  full  of  idols;  they  worship  the  work  of  their  own  hands" 
(ch.  ii.  8).  The  otiier  rendering,  "  Judah  vacillates  [roves  about]  with  God,  and  with 
the  faithful  Holy  One,"  better  meets  the  conditions  of  the  context.  Ephraim's  con- 
dition, however,  was  much  worse  than  Judah's. 

I.  Ephraim's  deceit.  Deceit  had  become  as  second  nature  to  Ephraim.  1.  S« 
nourished  himsdf  upon  it.    "  Ephralm  feedeth  on  wind,"  »a  on  lies.    Lies  were  his 


tm.  xn.  1-14.1  Tflfi  BOO:^  OP  SosfiA. 


pabulum.  He  belieTed  the  false  prophets  who  preached  "  peace  "  to  him.  He  built 
himself  up  in  hia  own  counsels.  He  greedily  listened  to  the  voice  of  seducers,  2.  Ee 
practiced  U,  Deceit  had  become  part  of  his  being.  It  corrupted  his  whole  existence. 
Beligion,  politics,  trade — all  was  penetrated  by  the  spirit  of  lies.  All  partook  of  the 
character  of  unreality.  There  was :  (1)  Deceit  in  religion.  "  Ephraim  compasseth  him- 
self about  with  lies,  and  the  house  of  Israel  with  deceit.*'  This  was  towards  Qod  (ch. 
xi.  12).  With  plenty  of  the  outward  show  of  religion— altars,  sacrifices,  feasts,  etc. — 
there  was  no  heart-reality.  All  was  hypocrisy,  pretence,  lip-worship.  God  was  owned 
in  name,  but  denied  in  fact.  His  worship  was  associated  with  that  of  idols,  and  con- 
ducted in  a  way  which  was  a  scandal  to  morality.  (2)  Deceit  in  politict,  "  He  daily 
increaseth  lies  and  desolation ;  and  they  do  make  a  covenant  with  the  Assyrians,  and 
oil  is  carried  into  Egypi"  (ver.  1 ;  cf.  cb.  x.  4).  This  duplicity  in  national  transactions 
brought  forth  its  natural  fruit  in  desolation.  Treachery  is  a  dangerous  game  to  play 
in  political  engagements.  (3)  Deceit  in  eommerce.  This  also  is  charged  against 
E]  hraim  in  the  chapter  (see  below,  ver.  7).  3.  lie  pursued  it.  "Feedeth  on  wind, 
and  foUoweth  after  the  east  wind."  Pursuing  their  ungodly  aims,  the  people  were  as 
those  chasing  the  scorching  blast  of  the  desert.  Their  hopes  deceived  them,  and  they 
were  destroyed  (cf.  ch.  xiii.  15). 

II.  Jddah's  mcoNSTANCT.  (Ch.  xL  12.)  Jndah  vacillated  with  Ood.  Ephraim 
sought  to  practise  deceit  on  the  Faithful  One.  Judah  trifled  with  the  Holy  One. 
Iteligious  inconstancy  shows  itself:  1.  /»  the  maintenance  of  a  right  theory  of  religion 
with  numerous  infldelitie$  in  practice.  Judah  maintained,  in  form  and  theory,  the 
right  order  in  religion.  They  had  the  temple,  the  Levitical  priesthood,  the  Davidic 
line  of  kings,  etc.  They  set  up  no  calves,  as  Jeroboam  had  done.  Yet,  with  this  show 
of  orthodoxy,  they  tolerated  many  things  that  were  not  right,  and  idolatry  was  winked 
at  when  it  ought  to  have  been  suppressed.  2.  In  the  alternation  of  great  fervours  in 
religion  with  times  of  backsliding  and  coolness.  Under  good  kings,  Judah  had  fre- 
quently reformations  of  religion.  At  these  times  there  seemed  no  bounds  to  the  piety 
and  fervour  of  the  people.  But  the  enthusiasm  did  not  last.  There  was  reaction  and 
greater  coldness  than  before.  3.  In  divided  service.  Judah  had  of  late  begun  to 
swerve  from  the  service  of  the  one  Qod.  They  imported '  idols.  More  and  more  the 
people  were  being  drawn  to  idol-service.  Their  hearts  vacillated  between  Jehovah  and 
the  false  gods.  Inconstancy  as  often  takes  this  form  as  any  other.  The  heart  is 
ostensibly  Qod's,  but  is  really  divided  between  God  and  the  world. 

III.  Jehovah's  faithfulness.  God  is  "the  faithful  Holy  One " (ch.  xi.  12).  Im 
virtue  of  his  faithfulness  and  holiness,  God :  1.  Resented  Ephraim's  deceit.  He  would 
punish  Jacob  (ver.  2).  2.  Was  displeased  at  Judah's  inconstancy.  He  had  "  a  contro- 
versy with  Judah  "  (ver.  2).  3.  Nevertheless  would  not  utterly  destroy  them.  This 
point  is  implied  in  what  follows.  4.  In  punishment  would  be  strictly  just.  "  Accord- 
ing to  their  ways." — J.  0. 

Vers.  8—4. — Power  with  Ood.  The  people  are  incited  to  repentance  by  the  example 
of  their  progenitor  Jacob.  His  wrestling  for  the  blessing  sets  their  imfaithfulness  in 
darker  contrast. 

I.  God's  electiom  does  not  sdfebsedb  hak's  effobt.  Before  Jacob  was  bom  God 
had  said,  "The  elder  shall  serve  the  younger"  (Gen.  xxv.  23).  Yet  the  blessing  had 
to  be  striven  for,  and  won  from  God  by  wrestling  and  supplication.  1.  Jacob  had  from 
the  first  an  impulse  to  realize  his  destiny.  (Ver.  3.)  Even  as  an  unconscious  balie  he 
gave  token  of  this.  He  struggled  in  the  womb  (Gen.  xxv.  22).  His  hand  took  hold  of 
the  heel  of  his  elder  brother  Esau  as  he  was  born  (Gen.  xxv.  22).  As  he  grew  older  we 
see  the  same  impulse  manifesting  itself,  not  always  in  right  ways.  The  catching  of  his 
brother's  heel  was  a  type  of  the  attempts  he  afterwards  made  to  take  the  blessing  from 
Esau  by  force  and  guile.  He  got  Esau  to  sell  the  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage  (Gen. 
xxv.  29 — 34).  He  obtAiaed  the  blessing  from  his  father  by  fraud  (Gen.  xxvii.).  The  acts 
were  indefensible,  but  they  testify  at  least  to  his  appreciation  of  the  blessing,  and  to  hia 
desire  to  obtain  it.  2.  His  efforts  were  pwifled  as  years  advanced.  (Ver,  4.)  The  bless- 
ing was  at  length  won,  but  by  far  other  means  than  Jacob  had  at  first  employed.  It  was 
won  from  God  by  earnest,  agonizing  supplication.  The  narrative  is  given  in  Gen.  xxxiL 
24 — 32.  There  Jacob,  as  a  prince,  had  power  with  God,  and  prevailed  (Qen.  xxxii.  28). 


394  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xu.  1—14. 

IL  God  puts  himself  in  hak'b  foweb,  that  uan  uay  obtau  blebsino  fbou 
HIM.  1.  H»  drams  near  to  man.  God  drew  near  to  Jacob  at  Peniel.  He  seemed  to 
be  a  "  man,"  but  Jacob  recognized  in  bis  mysterious  Visitant  an  angel — that  Angel  of  tlie 
covenant  in  whom  God's  Islame  was.  He  accordingly  laid  hold  of  him,  wrestled  with 
and  entreated  him,  and  would  not  let  him  go  till  he  had  blessed  him.  So  there  are 
awful  moments  in  our  experience  when,  "  left  alone,"  the  infinite  Presence  draws  near 
to  us,  OTershadows  ns,  touches  us,  invites  us  to  wrestle  with  it  for  the  supreme  good  of 
existence.  2.  ffe  gives  man  power.  If  Jacob  wrestled  prevailingly  with  God,  it  was 
because  God  gave  him  power  to  d^  so.  It  is  in  God's  own  strength  that  we  wrestle 
with  God.  God  puts  himself  in  onr  power,  not  crushing  us  by  his  majesty,  but  meeting 
us  as  on  a  human  footing,  and  permitting  us  to  prevail  over  him.  3.  Ee  invites  man's 
remiests.  Jacob  "  wept,  and  made  supplication."  Prayer  is  a  real  wrestling.  God 
wills  man  thus  to  wrestle  with  him.  He  gives  us  the  promise  of  blessing  if  we  ask, 
seek,  and  knock  (Matt.  vii.  7,  8).  Jacob's  prayer  was  (1)  earnest,  (2)  persevering,  (3) 
mighty.  Jesus  prayed  "  with  strong  orymg  and  tears,"  and  "  was  heard  in  tmit  he 
feared'CHeb.  V.  7). 

III.  Im  typical  cases  like  Jaooe^s,  God  fledoes  hib  oraob  to  tee  oekebatioks 
THAT  COME  AFTER.  Jacob  was :  1.  IsraePs  patriarch  head,  "  He  found  him  in  Bethel ; 
there  he  spalje  with  us  "  (ver.  4).  The  promises  given  at  Bethel  had  reference  to  the 
descendants  (Gen.  xxzv.  9 — 12).  The  blessing  was  to  be  theirs  also,  if  they  chose  to 
claim  it  as  Jacob  had  done.  2.  An  example.  He  who  spake  with  Jacob  was  "  the 
Lord  God  of  hosts :  the  Lord  is  his  Name  "  (ver.  5).  The  unchangeability  of  God  is  our 
guarantee  that,  if  we  act  as  Jacob  did,  we  shall  meet  with  like  reward.  8.  The  conse- 
quent duty.  "  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy  God :  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait 
on  thy  God  continually."  There  is  here  indicated  the  need:  (1)  Of  earnest  desire. 
"  Turn  thou  to  God."  Israel  must  turn  from  other  aims,  and  set  their  heart  upon 
the  blessing  as  Jacob  set  Us.  (2)  Of  obeiiieuce.  "  Keep  mercy  and  judgment."  For 
it  is  only  in  the  way  of  obedience  that  God  will  meet  us.  (8)  Of  perseverance  in 
seeking.  "  Wait  thou,"  etc  It  was  thus  that  Jacob  waited ;  wrestling  even  till  the 
daybreak.— J.  0. 

Vers.  7 — ^11. — Balaneet  of  deceit.  In  the  manner  of  his  acquisition  of  wealth, 
Ephraim  conjoined  deceit  and  oppression.  He  was  dishonest  in  trade.  He  oppressed 
the  poor.  He  was  a  better  imitator  of  Jacob  in  his  act  of  laying  hold  of  his  brother's 
heel  than  in  his  earnestness  in  wrestling  with  the  angel.  He  inherited  the  evil,  not  the 
good,  traits  in  the  character  of  his  progenitor.  He  was  a  "Jacob,"  not  an  "IiraeL" 
Tet  he  plumed  himself  on  his  success. 

I.  Efhbaim'b  bat  in  the  matter.  (Ver.  8.)  1.  Be  teas  puffed  up  with  the  thought 
of  being  rich.  "Ephraim  said,  I  am  rich,  I  have  found  me  out  substance."  This  was 
the  main  thing — ^he  was  rich.  It  did  not  matter  how  the  riches  had  been  got,  when 
they  were  there.  The  existence  of  the  riches  covered  a  multitude  of  sins.  This  is  too 
much  the  way  in  which  wealth  is  looked  at  in  the  world.  The  possessor  of  it  can  count 
on  being  honoured,  courted,  applauded  for  success,  with  few  questions  asked  as  to  the 
means  by  which  his  wealth  has  been  acquired.  1'he  love  of  the  honour  and  position 
which  wealth  gives  lead  men  to  seek  after  it  by  fair  means  and  foul.  "  Balances  of 
deceit "  are  not  unknown  among  ourselves.  "  Tricks  innumerable,"  says  Mr.  Spenoer, 
"  lies  acted  or  uttered,  elaborately  devised  frauds,  are  prevalent— many  of  them  estab- 
lished as  '  customs  of  the  trade ;  nay,  not  only  established,  but  defended."  Yet  this  is 
thought  of  little  moment,  if  only  men  can  say  in  the  end,  "  I  am  rich."  2.  He  took  the 
glory  </ his  riches  to  himself.  "  /have  found  me  out  substance."  It  was  himself  that 
did  it.  To  him  the  credit  and  glory  of  it  belonged.  He  said  in  his  heart,  "  My  power 
and  the  might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth,"  forgetting  that  it  is  God 
alom  that  had  given  him  power  to  get  wealth  (Dent.  viii.  17, 18).  3.  Ee  justified  him- 
se^in  his  ways.  "  In  all  my  labours  they  shall  find  none  iniquity  in  me  that  were 
sin."  As  Spencer  says  above  of  rogueries  in  trade,  "  not  only  established,  but  defended." 
The  dishonest  trader  is  yet  to  be  found  who  is  not  disposed  to  justify  himself.  He 
gets  to  look  on  his  dishonesties  as  trifles — bagatelles.  He  defies  proof  of  them.  He 
justifies  himself  by  the  practice  of  others.  That  cannot  be  wrong  which  everybody 
doee.    I^  like  Ephraim,  he  is  assiduous  in  the  practice  of  the  outward  duties  of 


OH.  zn.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  S96 

religion  (ret.  11),  he  may  regard  this  as  amply  outweighing  the  deceits  and  vppregsions 
of  his  business  life. 

II.  God'8  bat  is  the  hatteb.  (Vers.  8,  9.)  God :  1.  Expotet  the  iin  and  fatty  of 
Ephraim't  toasting.  "  And  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of  Egypt."  If 
Ephraim  was  rich,  it  was  God  who  made  him  rich.  If  he  had  substance,  it  was  God 
who  gave  him  substance,  not  Ephraim  who  had  found  it  out  for  himself.  Ephraim's 
boasting  was,  therefore,  entirely  out  of  place.  It  was  as  foolish  as  it  was  wicked  and 
ungrateful.  2.  Showi  the  inexcusdblenesi  of  Ephraitn!»  wnduct.  "  I  have  also  spoken 
by  the  prophets,"  etc.  Ephraim  had  l)een  well  taught  and  warned.  Moses,  in  the 
plains  of  Moab,  had  already  foreshown  the  dangers  to  which  Israel  would  be  exposed 
when  they  came  into  possession  of  the  goodliness  of  Canaan,  and  had  forewarned  them 
against  pride  and  undue  self-elation  (Deut.  viii.  7 — 18).  Other  prophets  had  been  gent 
as  occasion  required.  God  had  "multiplied  visions "  to  the  people,  and  had  "used 
similitudes"  to  make  matters  plainer,  and  to  draw  attention.  In  spite  of  all,  Ephraim 
continued  sinning.  If  such  were  his  privileges,  what  are  ours,  to  whom  God,  "  who 
at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners  spake  in  time  past  to  the  fathers  by  the 
prophets,"  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  by  his  Son  (Heb.  L  1,  2)?  3.  Declares 
Ephraimft  punishment.  "  I  will  make  thee  to  dwell  in  tabeinacles,  as  in  the  days  of  the 
solemn  feast."  Ephraim,  having  forfeited  his  blessings  by  his  sin,  would  be  turned  back 
again  into  the  wilderness,  there  to  renew  the  experience  of  the  old  wanderings,  of  which 
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  a  memorial  (Lev.  xxiii.  42,  43).  The  words  are  a  threaten- 
ing, yet  imply  mercy.  The  wilderness  wanderings  were  ft  punishment,  but  also  a 
discipline.  During  these  wanderings,  Israel  enjoyed  God's  protection  and  sheltwing 
care.  The  end  of  the  wandering  was  Canaan.  So  Israel's  present  1>anishmeut  if  with 
a  view  to  ultimate  recovery. 

III.  Thb  delusion  pbiceed.  (Yen  11.)  Ephraim,  like  the  Laodicean  Church,  said, 
"  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  and  knew  not  that  he 
was  "  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked  "  (Rev.  iii.  17).  He  had 
failed  to  take  God's  counsel  (by  the  prophets),  to  buy  of  him  "  gold  tried  in  the  fire  " 
that  he  might  be  rich,  and  "  white  nument"  that  he  might  be  clothed,  and  to  anoint 
his  eyes  with  eye-salve  that  he  might  see  (Rev.  iii.  18).  He  still  pursued  vanity  and 
deceit,  and  multiplied  transgressions.  This  state  of  delusion  in  which  he  lived  was  now 
to  be  rudely  broken  in  upon.  Gilead,  for  its  iniquity,  would  become  (or,  perhaps,'  had 
already  become)  vanity,  nothingness.  Gilgal,  where  bulls  were  offered  in  such  numbers 
in  sacrifice,  would  witness  (or  had  already  witnessed)  its  altars  made  as  heaps  of  stones 
in  (he  furrows  of  the  field. — J.  0. 

Yers.  12 — 14. — Preserved  by  a  prophet.  Comparison  With  Dent.  xzvL  6—10  shows 
that  the  point  in  this  passage  is  the  contrast  between  Israel's  original  low  estate  in 
Syria  and  Egypt — the  nation  in  the  former  case  being  represented  in  its  ancestor — and 
the  state  of  honour  to  which  God  raised  it,  when  he  brought  it  out  of  Egypt  by  Moses, 
•nd  settled  it  in  Canaan.  The  intention  is  to  show  the  full  enormity  of  Ephraim's 
ingratitude. 

I.,  Israel  in  Stria.  (Yer.  12.)  This  is  viewed  as  the  beginning  of  Israel's  servi- 
tude. There  was  little  in  Jacob's  condition  in  Fadan-Aram  to  indicate  the  honour  that 
was  afterwards  to  be  put  on  his  descendants.  His  state  was  one  of :  1.  Peril.  "Jacob 
fled  into  the  country  of  Syria."  Or,  as  in  Deuteronomy, "  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was 
my  father"  (ch.  xxvi.  6).  2.  Servitude.  He  was  a  serving-man  with  Laban.  He 
bound  himself  for  terms  of  years,  and  wrought  for  wages.  3.  Poverty.  When  he 
wished  a  wife,  the  only  thing  he  could  do  was  to  serve  for  her.  We  do  well  to 
remember  the  forlorn,  helpless,  wretched,  and  bound  state  in  which  we  were  when  graoo 
found  us. 

n.  Ibbasl  brouoht  out  of  Eotft.  (Vet.  13.)  Egypt  was  •  continuation  of  the 
state  in  which  Israel  found  himself  at  Fadan-Aram  ^f,  Deut.  xxvi.  5).  From  this 
state  God  delivered  him  by  a  prophet.  1.  It  tvas  Ood  who  delivered  and  preserved  him. 
Moses,  though  a  prophet,  was  but  QkA's  agent.  God  is  the  only  Saviour.  2.  A  prophet 
was  ffie  instrument  of  deliverance.  This  put  honour  on  the  prophetic  order,  it  may  be 
cited  as  a  reproof  to  Ephraim  for  slighting  the  prophets  now  sent  to  him  (ver.  10).  The 
Mediator  of  our  salvation  is  Christ,  the  "  Frophet  Ilk*  unto  Moses  "  (Acts  iii.  22).   8.  Se 


39< 


THE  BOOK  OP  nOSEA. 


[oh.  xiu.  1 — 16. 


wm  effectudUy  delivered.  The  Lord:  (1)  "Brought  him  forth"— gave  him  liberty, 
national  existence,  laws,  privileges,  a  rich  inheritance.  (2)  Preserved  him.  Guarded 
and  kept  him  in  the  desert,  and  safely  planted  him  in  Canaan, 

III,  Ibbabl's  becompeksb  of  God's  kindness.  (Ver.  14.)  1.  Ephraim,  instead  of 
showing  gratitude,  provoked  God  to  most  bitter  anger  by  his  transgressions.  He  had 
persisted  in  this  wrong-doing,  notwithstanding  warning  aud  entreaty.  2.  He  had 
br&ught  reproaoh  on  God.  "  His  reproach,"  i.e.  the  reproach  he  brought  on  God  by  his 
wanton  behaviour  (of.  Dout.  xxxii.  5,  6).  3.  He  would  accordingly  he  punished.  God 
would  leave  him  to  expiate  his  blood-guiltiness  by  suffering.-^.  0. 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XHL 

The  first  eight  verses  of  this  chapter  form 
the  premisses  from  which  the  prophet,  in 
the  ninth  verse,  draws  the  conclusion  that  the 
conduct  of  Israel  had  been  suicidal ;  that  they 
had  brought  on  themselves  the  calamities 
•which  they  had  experienced,  and  ultimately 
the  ruin  in  which  those  calamities  eventuated. 
The  various  particulars  of  their  sin  are  enu- 
merated, with  the  provocation  caused  or  the 
punishment  incuired  by  each.  Thus  the 
idolatry  of  Baal  stripped  them  of  the  autho- 
rity they  once  possessed,  and  issued  in  the 
dissolution  of  their  state.  After  they  had 
been  to  some  small  extent  reclaimed  from 
this  national  sin,  and  had  somewhat  retrieved 
their  position,  their  perseverance  in  the  calf- 
worship  and  the  progress  of  their  idolatrous 
practices  provoked  Jehovah  so  grievously  as 
to  threaten  their  sudden  and  entire  destruc- 
tion. Then  their  gross  ingratitude  to  God 
for  his  great  goodness  and  long-continued 
mercies,  followed  by  pride  and  haughtiness 
and  forgetfulnesB  of  the  Most  High,  brought 
down  on  their  guilty  heads  fearful  ven- 
geance. All  these  circumstances  justify 
the  conclusion  to  which  he  comes,  that  while 
God  had  been  their  Helper  and  Deliverer 
all  along,  they  wen  chargeable  with  their 
own  destruction. 

Yer.  1.— When  Ephraim  ipake  trembling, 
he  exalted  himself  in  Israel.  This  rendering 
of  the  Authorized  Version  (1)  is  supported 
by  the  Syriac,  which  is :  "  When  Ephraim 
spake  trembling  then  he  was,  and  was  great 
in  Israel."  Bashi  has  a  similar  rendering 
of  the  word  ftheth,  which  is  an  £ira{ 
\ry6nfvov,  and  causes  the  diversity  of 
translation  In  this  clause ;  but  bis  exposi- 
tion of  the  whole  sentence  is  vague  and  un- 
satiofactory.  Referring  it  to  Jeroboam  of  the 
tribe  of  Ephraim,  he  explains  as  follows: 
"When  Jeroboam,  zealous  for  God,  spoke 


against  Solomon  bard  words,  and  with  terror, 
Solomon  was  a  great  king."  Fococke's  ex- 
position is  in  harmony  with  the  Authorized 
Version,  and  is  the  following:  "When 
Ephraim  spake  with  fear  and  trembling  (like 
his  forefather  Jacob,  in  his  humble  supplioa- 
tiontoGod),he exaltedhimselfinlsrael."  But 
(2)  the  rendering  adopted  by  most  modems, 
is  decidedly  preferable,  as  agreeing  better 
with  the  context,  and  much  more  in  har- 
mony with  tribal  characteristics  of  Ephraim, 
88  intimated  in  this  very  book,  and  exhibited 
elsewhere.  The  translation  we  thus  prefer 
is ;  "  When  Ephraim  Epal;e,  there  was  trem- 
bling; he,  even  he,  exalted  himself  in 
Israel."  Such  was  the  fear  inspired,  and 
the  dererenoe  paid  to  the  authority  of  that 
powerful  tribe.  The  word  rHtieth,  though 
not  found  elsewhere,  has  a  cognate  root  in 
Aramaic,  with  the  meaning  here  assigned  to 
it;  for  nnl  is  to  fear,  slindder,  tremble; 
there  is  also,  in  Jer.  xlix.  24,  the  word  bd^ 
equivalent  to  "fear,"  similar  in  both  sense 
and  sound.  TheChaldee  supports  this  render- 
ing ;  its  paraphrase  is :  "  When  one  of  the 
bouse  of  Ephraim  spake,  trembling  seized 
the  peoples,"  Also  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi. 
The  former's  brief  comment  is:  "Before  his 
speaking  the  peoples  were  afraid;  and  the 
word  nn"  has  no  analogue  except  in  the 
Aramaic."  Kimchi's  explanation  is]:  **  From 
the  beginning,  before  Ephraim  sinned,  the 
fear  of  him  was  great  over  the  peoples  who 
surroiihded  him;  for  when  he  spake,  fear 
and  trembling  were  wont  to  seize  him  who 
heard  him;  and  he  was  great  and  strong 
among  the  tribes  of  Israel,  as  it  was  said  of 
him,  *  And  his  seed  shall  be  a  multitude  of 
nations.'"  (3)  The  LXX.  renders  rtheihhj 
SutautftaTo,  thus :  "  According  to  the  word  of 
Ephraim,  he  adopted  ordinances  for  himself 
in  Israel,"  that  is,  when  Ephraim  spoke,  the 
rest  of  ihe  Israelites  assented  to  his  ordi- 
nances and  rights,  reverencing  his  authority, 
BO  that  the  general  sense  differs  little  from  the 
Chaldee.  (4)  BosenmUller  constructs  and 
explains  diffurently ;  his  exposition  runs 
somehow  thus:  "  Wlien  Ephraim  spake,  in- 
stituting that  horrible  worship  of  the  calves, 
he  himself  bore   the  sin  of  tluvt  horrible 


OH.  XIII.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


897 


dletnm,  <«.  inw  gnfl^  of,  and  bore  its 
pnniBhmentj"  This  explanation:  of  tim  is  far- 
fetched and  unnatural.  Wo  have  no  hesita- 
tion in  preferring  "  lifted  up,"  i'.e.  his  head, 
or  exalted  himself,  for,  though  it  i*  usually 
the  Hithp.  that  is  employed  inthii  sense,  ex- 
amples also  occur  in  which  Qal  is  so  used,  for 
example,P8.  Ixzxiz.  10 and  Kah.i.5.  Eimchi 
supplies  ro$ho.  We  adhere,  therefore,  to  l^e 
rendering  and  exposition  of  (2).  Bi^  when 
he  offended  in  Baal,  he  died.  This  was  not 
merely  the  calf-worahip  which,  for  political 
leaBOus,  Jeroboam  instituted  and  uis  sue- 
oeesors  retained,  but  the  worship  of  Baal  for 
which,  no  doubt,  the  calf-worship  had  pre- 
pared the  way,  and  which  had  been  intro- 
duced by  Ahab  at  the  instigation  Ot  his 
Sidonian  ^ueen.  And  though  the  people 
were  partially  and  temporarily  reformed 
through  the  efibi'ts  of  Elijah  the  prophet 
and  by  the  royal  authority  of  Jehu,  eon  of 
Nimshi,  the  evil  was  not  eradicated,  but 
frequently  broke  out  again.  The  exaltation 
of  Ephraim  was  not  so  much  his  distinction 
among  his  brethren  as  the  goTernmental 
predominance  at  which  that  tribe  ever  aimed. 
That  elevation,  however,  was  soon  followed 
by  religious  declension,  culminating  in  the 
idolatry  of  Baal,  which  soon  sealed  the  doom 
of  the  northern  kingdom,  thenceforth  given 
up  to  destruction;  The  sentence  of  death 
was  pronounced,  and  the  actual  dying  com- 
menced with  the  introduction  of  idolatrous 
worship.  Thus,  correctly,  Eimchi:  "He 
lifted  up  his  head  in  Israel.  And  after  he 
offended  iii  £aal  he  died,  as  if  he  said,  he 
was  beaten  biefore  liis  enemies,  as  if  he  were 
dead,  the  power  of  bis  hand  had  departed." 
Ver.  2. — ^And  nbv  they  sin  more  and 
mors  (miatgin,  (idd  to  rin),  and  have  made 
them  nlolten  images  of  their  silver,  and  idols 
aooording  to  their  own  understanding,  all  of 
it  the  wo^k  of  the  craftsmen.  Tliis  part  of 
th6  vArse  declares  their  persistent  adherence 
to  idolatry.  The  note  of  time,  "and  now," 
marks  the  transition  from  the  past  period, 
when  Baal-worship  had  been  introduced  by 
Ahab  ahd  subsequently  overturned  by  Jehu, 
to  th^  prophet's  own  day.  Not  content  with 
the  calVes  of  Jeroboam'  a'nd  the  worship  of 
Baal,  they  added  new  superstitions  and  new 
hideous  dbjects  of  woHihip.  roBO,  a  molten 
image^  like  the  molten  calf  of  Aaron,  is  sin- 
gular, but  used  collectively,  so  as  to  corre- 
spond with  D'S^J?,  idols,  which  is  plural. 
The  reference  here  is,  (1)  not  to  the  calves 
or  to  Baal,  but  to  various  other  idols  which 
tliev  had  adopted,  as  at  Gilgal  and  Beer- 
sheba  (Amos  viii.  14^  Or,  (2)  not  content 
with  the  calves,  they  mtroduced'gods  of  tlieir 
own  as  their  peiiates.  The  material  out  of 
which  these  molten  ima^  were  manufac- 
tured was  silver.  Kimchi,  however,  gives  a 
cm^o'os  ez|jlanation  in  proof  thaf  the  mt^t^- 


rial  was  gold :  "  The  calves,"  he  says, "  were 
not  silver,  but  he  means  to  say  that,  of  t]je 
silver  which  they  each  one  gave  to  procuro 
gold  to  make  the  calves,  they  made  fnr 
themselves  idols  according  to  their  under- 
standing; and  these  were  the  calves."  The 
manner  in  which  they  made  these  idols  was 
(i)  tn  their  vnderetanding,  that  is,  in  their 
understanding,  such  as  it  was,  so  stupidly 
employed  in  such  sensuous  work,  or  their 
proficiency  in  the  art  of  graving.  Eimchi 
explains  it  somewhat  differently:  "The  ex- 
planation of  Djiana  is,  'As  if  they  had  care- 
fully reflected  on  the  matter  wl:at  form  they 
should  give  it,  and  then  had  agreed  to  make 
a  calf,  as  they  did  in  the  wilderness.' "  The 
reading  of  the  word  Ta  is  disputed,  but 
without  sufiScient  gronnd.  No  doubt  tho 
Septuagint,  which  is  followed  by  the  Ghal- 
dee,  Arabic,  and  Jerome,  probably  read 
raan?,  rad.  ,-oa,  to  build,  like  n'jan,  figure,  or 
niiDo?:  for  they  translate  (2)  according  to  the 
likeneas  or  fashion  of  idols;  while  some 
manuscripts  of  Eennicott  and  De  Bossi  pre- 
sent (3)  the  reading  D]ua3,  according  to 
(heir  undentanding,  their  own  peculiar  no- 
tions or  fancy,  and  not  as  Moses,  who  maile 
everything  after  the  pattern  showed  him  in 
the  mount.  The  full  form  would  be  oraiana, 
but  the  feminine  form  is  shortened  liefore 
the  sufiBx,  like  mo  for  nnno  (Job  xi.  9) ; 
and  me  for  ams  (Prov.  vii.  8);  rnw  for  omu' 
(Ps.  xlix.  15).  Some  suppose  it  from  » 
masculine  form,  yaa,  of  the  same  meaning. 
The  defect  of  thiB  man-made  god  is  expressed 
by  its  being  all  of  it  the  work  of  the  crafts- 
men, without  any  element  of  sense,  spirit, 
or  divinity  in  it.  On  which  Eimchi  has  well 
observed :  "  The  whole  calf  is  the  work  of 
the  hands  of  the  craftsman ;  there  is  nothing 
spiritual  in  it;  as  he  says,  'There  is  no 
breath  at  all  in  the  midst  of  it '  (Hab.  ii. 
19)."  They  say  of  them,  Let  the  men  that 
sacrifice  (margin,  the  merificers  of  men)  kiss 
the  calves.  Thebestexplanationof  thisdiili- 
cult  clause  is,  in  our  opinion,  (I)  that  nf  Keil. 
His  translation,  thougli  slightly  different 
from  that  of  the  Authorized  Version,  has 
the  same  general  import;  thns:  "Of  them 
(the  'a<sali&ini,  idols)  they  say,  viz. '  the  sacri- 
flcers  from  among  men'  equivalent  to  'the 
men  who  sacrifice^'  Let  them  worship 
calves.  By  the  apposition  zobh'che  'adam, 
and  the  fact  that  the  object  'agalim  is  placed 
first,  so  that  it  stands  in  immediate  contrast 
to  'adam,  the  absurdity  of  men  kissing  calves, 
i.e.  worshipping  them  with  kisses  (see  at 
I  Eings  xix.  18),  is  painted,  as  it  were, 
before  the  eyes."  As  parallel  to  zobh'che 
'adam,  comp.  evyone  'adam  (Isa.  xxix.  19). 
Several  eminent  modem  commentators  give 
the  same  or  a  similar  explanation,  with  the 
exception  that,  instead  of  translating  O!^,  "of 


398 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[CH.  XIII.  1 16. 


them,"  <.«.  the  tdols,  as  Eeil  doea,  they  trang- 
late  it  "to  them,"  i.e.  the  idoUworshippeit. 
Kimdii  in  the  malu  fayourg  this  explana- 
tion; he  says,  "On  their  acoonnt  (<.e.  on 
account  of  the  oalves)  the  priests  of  the  oalt 
say  to  tiie  people  who  come  to  ot£.'T  sacrifice: 
by  thettt  he  means:  whoever  of  the  children 
of  men  that  wish  to  ofier,  *  Let  them  kiss  the 
calvet  on  their  month;  for  their  worship 
shdl  not  be  perfect  nntil  they  shall  kiss 
them,'  for  so  was  their  custom."  But  (2) 
many  of  the  older  interpreters  among  the 
Hebrews,  as  also  Jerome,  Cyril,  and  Theodo- 
ret  among  Christians,  refer  the  expression 
to  human  sacrifices,  thus :  "  Sacrificing  men, 
they  kiss,  that  is,  adore,  calves."  The  ex- 
planation aocording  to  this  view,  as  given  by 
Schmid,  is  to  the  following  purport: "  To  thete 
who  now  worshipmany  idols,  and  among  them 
Moloch,  to  whom  they  even  saoriflce  men, 
those  the  fathers  of  such  as  only  worshipped 
the  calves  or  Baal,  wonld  say,  if  they  wer« 
alive,  *  Let  those  who  sacrifice  men  give  over 
such  cruel  sacrifice,  and  rather  kiss  calves  aa 
we  did.' "  Bashi's  comment  is :  "  The  idol 
priests  say  to  Israel,  *  He  that  sacrifices  his 
son  to  idols  is  worthy  to  kiss  the  calf,  for  he 
has  presented  to  him  a  pleasant  Rift.'  So 
have  our  rabbins  in  (the  tract)  Sanhedrin 
explained,  and  it  suits  the  text  of  Scripture 
better  than  the  translation  of  Jonathan ; " 
while  that  of  Aben  Ezra  is  as  follows :  "  To 
them  say  the  sons  of  men,  in  order  h>  mock 
them  (idss  tlie  calves],  because  they  kiss 
Baalim  which  are  the  images  of  calves,  as 
'  And  every  mouth  that  has  not  kissed  him ' 
(1  Kings  xix.  17),  while  they  shed  innocent 
blood,  and  this  is, 'And  his  blood  shall  he 
leave  upon  bim'  (ch.  xii.  15).  And  lot  he 
lias  reversed  the  manner  of  every  man,  for 
man  kisses  man  who  is  his  fellow,  and  slays 
calves  for  his  food."  The  method  of  kissing 
the  hand  in  worship  is  attested  by  the  deri- 
vation  of  the  word  adore,  from  ad  and  os; 
while  in  Job  xxxi  27  we  read  of  homage 
thus  rendered :  "  Or  my  mouth  hath  kissed 
my  hand :  this  also  were  an  iniquity  to  be 
punished  by  the  judge."  The  Septuagint, 
(3)  as  if  reading  inaj  for  tobh'cAe,'  and 
nDp»'  instead  of  mttr,  translate  by, "  They 

say, '  Saorifice  (eiffare)  men,  for  the  calvei 
haT«  come  to  an  end '  [or,  *  failed,'  iK\e\oi- 
iroo-i]."  "Thus,"  says  Jerome,  in  explana- 
tion,  "is  shown  the  greed  of  demons,  who 
are  nourished  on  the  blood  of  victims,  that, 
when  victims  fail,  they  desire  men  to  be 
sacrificed  to  them." 

Ter.  8. — Therefore  they  shall  he  as  the 
morning  olond,  and  as  the  early  dew  that 
passeth  away,  as  the  chaff  that  is  driven 
with  the  whirlwind  ont  of  the  floor,  and  as 
the  smoke  out  of  the  chimney.  The  illative 
particle  with  which  the  verse  begins  has 
reference  to  the  sins  uf  Israel,  so  greut  and 


multiplied  Uwt  punishment  eouM  not  be 
long  delayed.  Their  irrational  and  God- 
dishononnng  conduct  was  bringing  on  them 
snre  and  swift  destruction.  The  prophet 
employs  four  figures  to  exhibit  their  political 
extinction.  Two  of  these,  the  morning 
cloud  and  early  dew,  or  rather  the  dew 
early  passing  away,  have  already  been  em- 
ployed by  him  to  clkaracterize  the  transient 
nature  of  Israel's  goodness;  here  they  de- 
note the  evanesoent  nature  of  their  national 
existence.  The  other  two  are  the  chaff  and 
the  smoke;  the  former  whirled  away  by  the 
storm-wind  from  the  threshing-floor,  the 
latter  dissipated  and  speedily  vanishing  as 
soon  as  it  escapes  from  the  chimney  or 
lattice.  Such  shall  be  the  utter  extermina- 
tion of  IsraeL  The  senselessness  of  their 
idolatry  had  been  treated  with  derision  in 
the  preceding  verse;  the  punishment  of 
their  sin  is  sternly  denounced  in  this.  Kim- 
obi  comments  concisely  and  correctly  thus : 
"Therefore  they  shall  go  to  destruction,  and 
shall  be  as  the  morning  cloud,  or  as  the 
dew  speedily  disappearing  in  the  morning, 
which  vanishes  when  the  heat  of  the  sun 
has  touched  it;  ao  they  shall  go  away 
speedily.  So  also  shall  they  be  as  chaff- 
it  is  the  fine  particles  of  straw,  which  the 
wind  whirls  away  from  the  threshing-floor ; 
thus  shall  tliey  be  whirled  away  from  their 
land.  Or  as  a  pillar  of  smoke  which  goes 
forth  ont  of  the  lattice,  which  shall  speedily 
disperse  and  oease."  Instead  of  iia^K 
lattice,  irom  31K,  to  knit  or  twist,  the  Sep. 
tuagint,  according  to  Jerome,  read  na^K, 
locusts,  as  may  be  inferred  &om  their  ren- 
dering iTfds  i,irh  luepiSai'  in  the  Compluten- 
sian  edition  of  the  LXX.,  erroneously  written 
in  some  copies  Scuepiay,  that  is,  vapour  from 
locusts  or  from  tears. 

Vers.  4,  5. — These  verses  make  it  evident 
that  the  punishment  inflicted  on  Israel 
could  not  reasonably  be  accounted  too 
severe;  such  had  been  the  goodness  of 
Jehovah  and  the  gross  ingratitude  of  Israel. 

Yer.  4. — Tet  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from 
the  land  of  Egypt  The  prophet  here  com- 
menoes  a  recital  of  God's  favonrs  to  Israel 
from  ancient  times,  all  which  they  forgot, 
ungratefully  and  impiously  turning  aside 
from  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Jehovah 
had  been  Israel's  Chxl  long  before,  but 
never  before  had  the  evidence  of  his  power 
and  love  to  his  people  been  so  signal  and 
oouspicuous  as  at  the  period  of  the  Exodus 
and  onward.  And  than  shalt  know  no  god 
but  me.  The  use  of  yjn  in  the  imperfect  is 
to  connect  the  future  with  the  past  It 
may  be  rendered  either  (1)  "  Thou  knowest," 
Tiz.  a  God  of  such  wonderful  attestation 
thou  knowest  or  findest  not  beside  me — the 
opposite  of  the  statement,  "  Let  us  go  after 
other  gods,  which  thou  hast  not  known,  and 


Oir.  XIII.  1— 16."1 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


399 


let  tw  gerve  them"  (Deut.  xiii.  3);  or  (2) 
"  Thou  shouldest  not  know  or  recognize  any 
god  beside  me."  So  Kiraohi : «  Thou  shouldest 
not  know  other  gods,  nor  serve  them  beside 
me,  for  ye  see  there  is  no  helper  beside  me." 
Likewise  Bashi :  "Thou  shouldest  nut  rebel 
against  me."  Also  Aben  Ezra :  "  How  hast 
thou  turned  to  kiss  the  calf,  which  does  not 
save  nor  satisfy,  and  hast  left  him  who  has 
been  thy  God  from  ancient  days,  who  has 
helped  thee  and  knows  all  thy  necessities." 
The  word  *n^n  (from  ^n,  which,  as  the 
eognate  Arabic  signifies,  **to  go  forth  or 
away  ")  is  synonymous  with  'n^a. 

Ver.  5. — I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilder- 
ness. The  pronoun  at  the  beginning  of  the 
verse  is  emphatic :  Ai  for  me ;  or,  I  it  was 
that  knew  thee.  The  meaning  of  the  senti- 
ment is :  I  acknowledged  thee  with  kind- 
ness, with  paternal  care  and  kind  providbni'O 
watching  over  thee.  "Thou  shouldest 
gratefully  acknowledge  me,"  is  the  comment 
of  Kimchi,  "because  I  knew  thee  in  the 
wilderness,  and  oared  for  thy  necessity  in 
the  wilderness,  in  which  there  were  no 
means  of  livelihood."  In  the  land  of  great 
irought.  The  root  of  the  word  nhw^n  is 
3N^,  unused  in  Hebrew,  but  signifying,  in 
Arabic,  "  to  burn,  dry,  be  dry,"  akin  to  an^. 
Aben  Ezra  correctly  explains  it  to  be  "a 
dry  and  thirsty  land,  and  so  in  the  Arabic 
language;  and  (that  it  is  so  called)  on 
account  of  all  hardships  being  in  it,  is  the 
allegorical  explanation  and  not  the  literal 
sense."  Instead  of  a  lengthened  enumera- 
tion of  all  God's  loving-kindnesses  to  Israel 
at  the  Exodus  and  duiing  the  desert  wander- 
ings, the  prophet  sums  up  all  in  the  ex- 
pressive, "  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land 
of  Egypt ; "  and  "  I  it  was  that  did  know 
thee  in  the  wilderness."  It  is  as  (hough  he 
had  said,  "  I  pitied  thee  in  the  bondage  and 
among  the  brick-kilns  of  Egypt ;  I  brought 
thee  forth  with  a  strong  hand  and  out- 
stretched arm ;  I  led  thee  through  the 
wilderness;  I  relieved  thee  in  thy  straits; 
I  gave  thee  bread  from  heaven  to  satisfy 
thy  hunger,  and  water  from  the  rock  to 
quench  thy  thirst;  I  defended  thee  from 
enemies;  nor  did  I  relax  my  care  tm  I 
gave  thee  the  goodly  land  of  promise." 

Ver.  6. — Aooording  to  their  pasture  so 
were  they  filled.  The  literal  rendering  la, 
aceerdingto  (heir  pasturing  so  were  they  filled. 
The  reference  is  rather  to  the  care  in  pas-* 
turing  than  to  the  pasture-ground.  By 
God's  care  to  the  sheep  of  his  pasture  they 
waxed  full.  They  were  filled,  and  their 
heart  was  exalted.  Two  consequences  fol- 
lowed from  God's  great  goodness  to  Israel^ 
the  immediate  consequence  was  pride  of 
lieart ;  the  more  remote  was  forgetfulness 
of   God.      Furhaps   these   results   should 


rather  be  regarded  as  oononrrent,  being  in 
point  of  time  simultaneous  or  nearly  so. 
Therefore  have  they  forgotten  me.  This 
forgetfulness  of  God  is  identified  vrith  the 
abandonment  of  his  worship  in  the  Ohaldee 
Version,  which  is,  "  They  have  abandoned 
my  service."  The  metaphor  contained  in 
this  verse  is  taken  from  a  domestic  animal, 
which,  in  a  too  luxuriant  pasture,  becomes 
headstrong  and  unmanageable.  Thus  Bashi  .- 
"  As  soon  as  they  came  into  the  land  of 
their  pasture,  they  were  filled."  The  la=t 
clause  of  the  verse  notices  the  misuse  which 
Israel  made  of  the  riches  and  blessing  of 
Jehovah,  by  forgetting  their  gracious  Bene- 
factor; this  the  prophet  attributes  to  the 
abuse  of  the  blessings  so  richly  bestowed 
upon  them.  Aben  Ezra  identifies  the  blesd- 
ings  here  mentioned  with  those  vouchsafed 
to  them  on  their  entrance  into  Canaan  ; 
thus:  "  The  propbet  enumerates  the  benefits 
which  Jehovah  bestowed  on  their  fatljers 
when  they  came  out  of  the  wilderness  into 
the  land  of  Canaan."  Kimchi  quotes,  as  a 
parallel  to  this  passage,  Deut.  viii.,  of  which 
it  is  undoubtedly  a  reminiscence;  he  says, 
"  When  they  entered  into  the  place  of  their 
pasture,  and  it  was  the  land  of  Canaan, 
they  had  all  good,  and  were  filled ;  and 
their  heart  was  exalted,  and  they  forgot  mc, 
as  it  is  said  in  the  Thorah  that  they  were 
ready  to  do  so.  He  said, '  Lest  when  thou 
hast  eaten  and  art  full  .  .  .  then  thine 
heart  be  lifted  up,  and  then  forget  the 
Lord  thy  God,  which  brought  thee  forth  out 
of  the  land  of  Egypt  .  .  .  who  led  thee 
through  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness, 
.  .  .  wiio  fed  tliee  in  the  wilderness.'  " 

Vers.  7,  8. — These  verses  teach  that  the 
result  of  their  sins  is  inevitable  destruction, 
and  that  Jehovah,  merciful  and  gracious 
though  he  is,  has  now  divested  himself  of 
all  compassion  on  them.  The  appropriate- 
ness of  the  terrible  figures  here  employed 
arises  from  the  fact  that  Israel  had  been 
compared  in  the  previous  verse  to  a  fiock 
fed  and  filled  in  a  luxuriant  pasture;  the 
punishment  of  that  fiock  is  now  fitly  com- 
pared to  "  the  tearing  in  pieces  and  devour- 
ing of  that  fattened  flock  by  wild  beasts." 
The  beasts  in  question  are  a  lion,  a  leopard, 
a  bear,  a  lioness,  and  fierce  wild  beasts  in 
general. 

Ver.  7. — Therefore  I  will  be  unto  them  aa 
a  lion.  The  verb  <qtil  is  the  future  changed 
into  the  preterite  or  past  tense  by  vav  con- 
secutive, and  marks  the  consequence  of 
forgetting  God.  So  Aben  Ezra :  "  The 
preterite  in  reference  to  the  evils  which 
Jehovah  brought  upon  them."  While  the 
past  thus  implies  that  the  punishment  has 
commenced,  the  futures  which  follow  denote 
its  contiuuance.  Bosenmiiller  regards  tlie 
preterite  here  as  prophetic  sad  oontiuuat'ive, 


too 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[on.  xin.  1 — 16, 


and  paraplirases  the  meaning  by,  "  I  have 
at  length  become  and  have  been,  and  shall 
continue  to  be  to  them."  He  considers  the 
reference  of  the  [ireterite  to  be  to  past 
disasters,  especially  the  various  defeats  sus- 
tained by  Israel  at  the  hand  of  the  Syrians 
(2  Kings  viii.  12;  x.  32)  and  the  Assyrians 
(2  Kings  XV.  29).  He  also  very  aptly  com- 
pares Isa.  Ixiii.  7 — 10  in  relation  to  the  sub- 
ject in  hand.  The  Prophet  Isaiah,  after 
relating  the  loving-kindnesses  of  tiie  Lord 
and  his  praises  and  his  great  goodness  to 
the  house  of  Israel  on  the  one  hand,  and 
their  rebellion  and  vexing  his  Holy  Spirit  on 
the  other  band,  adds,  "  Therefore  he  was 
turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and  he  fought 
against  them."  As  a  leopard  by  the  way 
will  I  observe  them.  The  lion  and  the 
leopard  are  frequently  conjoined,  as  animals 
of  like  natural  ferocity,  by  the  ancients  both 
in  sacred  and  secular  writings.  The  out- 
look on  the  way  is  for  the  purpose  of  spring- 
ing upon  the  passers-by.  The  word  iw^  is 
properly  (1)  the  future  of  iw,  to  look  around, 
and  thence,  to  lie  in  wait ;  but  (2)  some, 
taking  the  initial  aleph  as  radical  and  the 
word  as  participle  of  l»N,  translate  it  by 
"  trodden  way,"  that  is,  away  trodden  and  fre- 
quented by  men  and  animals.  The  LXX. 
and  Vulgate  again,  also  Jerome,  Hitzig,  and 
Kwald,  (3)  translate  it  by  "o«  the  way  of  the 
Assyrians,"  either  referring  to  the  time  when 
they  would  be  led  captive  by  the  Assyrians 
or  when  they  persisted  in  going  thither  to  sue 
for  aid.  But  the  name  of  Assyria  is  always, 
written  iie>n,  as  Bashi  rightly  observes :  "  In 
every  place  where  'BiN  ocours  in  Scripture 
(i.e.  as  a  proper  name)  it  has  daghesh  (i.e. 
in  the  shin) ;  yet  here  it  has  raphe,  [to  show] 
that  it  is  not  the  name  of  a  place,  but  a 
verb :  '  1  observe  and  keep  watch,'  as  '  I  shall 
observe  him,  but  not  nigh '  (Numb.  xxiv. 
17)."  Kimohi  explains  the  verse  as  follows : 
"Because  they  have  forgotten  me,  I  also 
have  rejected  them,  and  have  left  them  in 
the  hand  of  the  peoples;  and  have  become 
to  them  like  a  lion  or  leopard,  which  observes 
the  way,  and  is  prepared  to  tear  whatever 
passes  by  it  on  the  way.  Just  so  have  I 
been  to  them,  for  I  have  caused  their  enemies 
to  rule  over  them,  and  they  have  not  had 
power  to  deliver  themselves  from  their  hand 
until  they  returned  to  me,  and  I  took  pity 
npon  them." 

Ver.  8. — I  will  meet  them  as  a  bear  that 
is  bereaved  of  hcT  whelps,  and  will  rend  the 
caul  of  their  heart.  The  noun  a"!  is  epicene, 
that  is,  the  one  form  serves  for  both  genders, 
as  here  the  masculine  includes  the  feminine, 
and  is  ased  as  such.  Of  all  animals,  Jerome 
Siiys,  the  she-bear  is  the  iieroeat,  either  when 
robbed  of  her  whelps  or  in  want  of  food. 
S'ghor  being  that  which  encloses  the  heart, 
is  either  the  pericardium,  the  immediate  and 


proper  enclosure  of  the  heart,  or  the  breast 
itself.  The  reference  is  to  a  beast  of  prey 
which  seizes  its  victim  by  the  breast  and 
tears  it  open,  so  that  the  heart  is  exposed. 
The  verb  ojej  is  akin  to  p:s,  the  meaning  of 
the  root-syllable  3B,  to  meet,  strike,  being 
the  same  in  both.  Such  is  the  continuation 
of  the  picture  of  the  threatened  punishment. 
The  picture  of  the  severity  of  the  Divine 
judgment  here  presented  is  very  terrible. 
Kimohi  remarks  on  this  picture :  "  A  bear 
robbed,  whose  young  ones  they  have  slain, 
which  is  bereft  and  bitter  in  spirit,  if  it 
find  man  or  beast  rends  it  speedily."  Some 
understand  tlie  verse  figuratively,  as  though 
it  meant  "  'I  will  rend  their  obstinate  heart,' 
the  enclosure  of  the  heart  being  equivalent 
to  a  shut  or  obstinate  heart,  as,  in  ver.  5  of 
tills  same  chapter, 'a  land  of  drought'  is  pretty 
much  the  same  as  '  a  dry  or  parched  land.' 
Thus  the  Chaldee  translates, '  I  have  broken 
the  wickedness  of  their  heart.' "  And  there 
will  I  devour  them  like  a  lion:  the  wild 
beast  shall  tear  them.    Sham  tliere  relers 

(1)  to  'al-derekh  of  the  preceding  verse;  or, 

(2)  AS  Kimchi  explains  it,  as  referring  to 
their  cities:  "There  in  their  cities  shall  I 
destroy  them  by  pestilence  and  by  the  sword 
of  the  enemy,  like  the  lion  that  teareth  with- 
out pity ; "  or,  (3)  more  simply  still,  "  there 
on  the  spot."  The  nj^n  njn,  equivalent  to 
1*n(«n  Ti,  is  the  wild  beast  as  opposed  to  nona, 
domestic  animals.  While  some  were  to  be 
destroyed  by  famine  and  pestilence,  others 
would  perish  by  the  wild  beast  of-the  field. 
"  Also,"  says  Kimchi,  "  shall  the  wild  beast 
of  the  field  rend  them  outside  (i.e.  outside 
their  cities),  as,  '  I  will  also  send  wild  beasts 
among  you,  which  shall  rob  you  of  your 
children,  and  destroy  your  cattle,  and  make 
you  few  in  number.' " 

Ver.  9. — 0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed 
thyself;  but  in  me  is  thine  help.  The  literal 
rendering  of  this  verse  is,  (1)  It  hath  de- 
etroyed  fhee,  0  Israel,  that  thou  }tast  been 
against  me,  against  thy  Help.  The  ellipsis 
is  accounted  for  by  the  strong  emotion  of 
the  speaker,  nrw  is  (a)  the  Piel  third 
person,  and  has  the  suifix  of  the  second 
person,  from  which  the  pronoun  nnN  ma/ 
be  supplied  as  subject  of  the  concluding 
clause.  The  preposition  he  has  here  the 
meaning  of  "  against,"  as  in  Gen.  xvi.  12  and 
2  Sam.  xxiv.  17,  while  '3  is  in  apposition  to 
it.  The  Hebrew  commentators  take  't?  as  » 
verbal  form;  thus  Rashi:  «Tiiou  hast  de- 
stroyed thyself,  0  Israel;"  and  Kimchi: 
(2)  "  The  calf  has  destroyed  thee  which  he 
had  n  entioned  above;  he  says,  'This  lias 
destroyed  thee  ;  for  unless  this  had  been  so, 
thy  help  had  been  in  me.' "  (6)  The  Sep- 
tuagint  and  Jerome  take  innty  as  a  noun,  the 
former  translating  by  r'n  Sia(pBopa, :  "  Who 
will    aid  thee  in  thy   destruction?"    the 


OH.  xni.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


iOl 


latter  by  "  Thy  destnictioa,  O  Israel ;  but  in 
me  ii  thy  help,"  the  noun  being  of  the  form 
-\7n  lap..  The  explanation  of  BaBhi,  who 
understands  (o)  the  verb  as  second  person 
preterite  Piel  with  suffix,  Is :  " '  Because  thou 
hast  acted  unfaithfully  against  me,  thou 
hast  rebelled  against  thy  help.'  The 
Scripture  uses  brevity,  but  he  who  under- 
stands the  language  of  Scripture  will  recall 
to  mind  tliat  '3  '3  is  '  because  against  me 
is  the  rebellion  with  which  thou  hast  re- 
belled. And  if  thou  shouldst  say.  What 
does  it  concern  thee?  Against  thy  help 
hast  thou  rebelled  when  thou  didst  rebel 
against  mo.' "  Kimchi  remarks  in  the  two 
beths  servile  that  one  of  them  would  suffice, 
and  that  the  sense  might  have  been  ex- 
pressed by  TiTj)  '3  '3  or  -jiiys  'jn  '3.  All  the 
disaster  and  destruction  previously  men- 
tioned are  charged  on  Israel's  misconduct; 
they  had  brought  all  upon  themselves  by 
their  rebellion  against  Jehovah  wlio  would 
otherwibO  have  been  their  Shield  and  De- 
liverer. The  sense  is  well  expressed  by 
Calvin  thus:  "How  conies  it,  ami  what  is 
the  reason,  that  I  do  not  now  help  thee 
according  to  my  usual  manner  ?  Thou  hast 
indeed  found  me  hitherto  to  be  tby  De- 
liverer. .  .  .  How  comes  it  now  that  I  have 
cast  thee  away,  that  thou  criest  in  vain,  and 
that  no  one  brings  thee  any  help?  How 
comes  it  that  thou  art  thus  forsaken,  and 
receivest  no  relief  whatever  from  my  hand, 
as  thou  hast  been  wont  to  do  ?  And  doubt- 
less I  should  never  be  wanting  to  thee,  if 
thou  wouldest  allow  me;  but  thou  closest 
the  door  ag.iiost  me,  and  by  thy  wickedness 
epurnest  my  favour,  so  that  it  cannot  come 
to  thee.  It  then  follows,  that  thou  art  now 
destroyed  through  thine  own  fault :  (3) 
Something  then  hath  destroyed  thee."  It 
will  be  observed  that  the  rebellion  against 
.T-jhovah  here  complained  of  is  not  that  of 
all  Israel,  when  they  are  said  to  have  re- 
jected Jehovah  by  asking  a  king  of  Samuel ; 
but  the  defection  of  the  ten  tribes  that  cast 
off  their  allegiance  to  the  house  of  David 
and  made  Jeroboam  their  king. 

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  concluding  Terse  is  at 
once  a  conclusion  and  commencement — an 
inference  from  what  preceded,  and  the  be- 
ginning of  a  second  line  of  proof  showing 
that,  while  their  ruin  was  by  themselves, 
their  restoration  would  be  by  God.  When 
the  kings  and  princes  whom  they  had  siu- 
fidly  souglit,  and  who  had  been  given  to 
them  in  anger  would  fail,  God  himself 
would  be  their  King,  as  is  stated  in  vera. 
10  and  11.  Furtlier,  when  in  consequence 
of  their  iniquities  treasured  up,  their  sorrows 
and  sufferings  would  be  extreme,  as  stated 
in  vers.  12  and  13,  yet  they  wowld  be  raised 
up  as  out  of  their  graves,  en  promised  in 
'or.  14. 


Vers.  10, 11. — ^Israel  had  shown  oontempt 
for  Jehovah  by  putting  confidence  in  kings 
of  their  own  choice,  yet  these  kings  could 
not  afford  them  help,  whence  the  questions 
of  ver.  10.  The  usual  rendering  is  at  fault. 
I  will  be  thy  King.  This  should  rather  be, 
Where  now  is  thy  king  i  though  eA»  may  be 
either  verb  or  adverb.  Where  is  any  other 
that  may  save  thee  in  aU  thy  cities  1  Better 
take  both  clauses  together  and  in  connection, 
thus :  Where,  now,  is  thy  king,  that  he  may 
save  thee  in  all  thy  dtiest  (1)  Tlie  word  eftt  we 
take,  with  Ewald,  to  be  a  dialectic  variation 
for  n>«,  or  shortened  form  '^!,  and  this  is 
strengthened  by  n'isn,  equivalent  to  the 
Greek  irore  or  Latin  tandem,  for  sake  of 
The    purpose    for   which   the 


Israelites  had  asked  a  king  was  that  he 
might  "judge  them  and  go  out  before  them 
to  fight  their  battles  "  (1  Sam.  viii.  20).  The 
question,  then,  does  not  indicate  the  want  of  a 
king,  or  the  prevalence  of  a  state  of  anarchy, 
but  that  a  crisis  had  come  when  such  a  king 
as  they  had  requested  should  exhibit  his 
prowess  and  display  his  power.  It  is  as 
though  the  prophet  asked,  or  rather  God  by 
his  servant,"  Where  is  now  the  king  that  can 
defend  the  besieged  cities,  or  deliver  the 
attacked  fortresses ;  and  defeat  the  Assyrian 
foeman  who  is  now  threatening  both  ?  Or 
where  are  the  judges  (thoph'tim),  or  the 
princes  (sarim},  who  constitute  his  cabinet  or 
royal  counsellors  sharing  in  the  counsels  of 
state,  and  administering  the  affairs  of  the 
kingdom  under  him  ?  "  The  answer  implied 
is  that  those  visible  helps,  on  which  Israel 
had  so  confidently  calculated,  turned  out 
valueless ;  the  kingly  constitution  on  which 
they  had  set  their  heart  proved  a  failure,  as 
far  as  help  and  deliverance  were  concerned. 
(2)  Kimchi  and  others  take  tin  as  first 
person  future  of  the  verb  nfl ;  thus :  "  I 
shall  be  established  for  ever,  but  where  is 
thy  king?  Whereas  thou  didst  reject  my 
kingdom,  and  demanded  a  king  who  should 
save  you ;  and  it  should  be  he  that  would 
save  you  in  all  your  cities  against  which  the 
enemies  came." 

Yer.  11. — I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine 
anger,  and  took  him  away  in  my  wrath. 
The  imperfects  'nsand  'pN  here  are  correctly 
explained  by  Kei.l  as  denoting  "an  action 
that  is  repeated  again  and  again,  for  which 
we  should  use  the  present ;  and  refer  to  all 
the  kings  that  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes 
had  received  and  was  receiving  still,  and  to 
their  removal"  Hitzig  calls  it  here  the 
historical  present.  Jerome,  Aben  Ezra,  and 
Kimchi  refer  the  first  clause  to  Saul  as 
given  in  anger;  and  the  second  to  Zedekiah 
as  taken  away  iu  wrath. 

Ver.  12. — The  iniquity  of  Ephraim  is 
bound  up ;  his  sin  is  hid.  Tliis  verse  is  in- 
tended  to  remove  all  doubt  about  the  punish- 

2  D 


402 


THE  BOOK  OF   HOSEA. 


[cH.  xin.  1 — 16. 


meat  of  Bin,  whateTer  interval  may  have 
elapsed.  The  day  of  reckoning  would  oer- 
tainly  come,  for  the  sin  of  Ephraim  was 
neither  forgotten  nor  blotted  out.  As  a 
miser  puts  bis  money  in  a  bag  and  seals  it 
to  prevent  it  being  lost,  so  the  Almighty 
had,  as  it  were,  hoarded  Ephraim's  sin, 
putting  it  in  a  bag  and  tying  it.  A  parallel 
expression  occurs  in  Job  xiv.  17, "  Hy  trans- 
gression is  sealed  up  in  a  bag,  and  thou 
sewest  up  mine  iniquity."  Usually  when 
men  put  money  into  a  bag,  purse,  or 
treasure-house,  they  count  it;  so  the  sins  of 
Ephraim  were  reckoned,  laid  up  in  the 
treasury  of  wrath,  till  the  amount  should  be 
full  and  the  day  of  reckoning  ariive.  The 
sinner  himself  is  represented  as  treasuring 
up  unto  himself  wrath  against  the  day  of 
wrath.  Aben  Ezra  only  remarks  on  the 
place  where  it  is  treasured :  "  It  is  bound  up 
in  my  heart ;  I  shall  not  forget  it  as  they 
have  forgotten  me,  as  is  written  above" 
(veT.  6,  "  They  have  forgotten  me"). 

Ver.  13.— The  sorrows  of  a  travailing 
woman  shall  come  upon  him.  Tlie  threatened 
punishment  that  is  to  overtake  them  is  com- 
pared to  the  throes  of  a  parturient  woman, 
on  account  of  their  severity,  as  1  Tliess.  v.  3. 
Their  sinfulness,  which  stands  in  the  way  of 
their  success,  shall  be  succeeded  by  severe 
sufferings  and  many  sorrows.  But  eventu- 
ally these  worldly  sorrows  shall, under  Divine 
grace,  issue  in  the  godly  sorrows  of  repent- 
ance :  then,  and  not  till  then,  shall  a  new 
and  happier  period  of  existence  be  ushered 
in.  The  sorrow  of  travail  shall  give  place 
to  the  joy  of  birth.  Delay  of  confession  and 
repentance  defers  that  joy,  prolongs  the 
sufferings,  and  puts  the  life  of  both  parent 
and  child  in  peril,  so  far  as  their  personality 
is  identical.  Be  is  an  unwise  son ;  for  he 
shoold  not  stay  long  in  the  place  of  the  break- 
ing forth  of  children.  Here  the  unwisdom 
of  Israel  is  accounted  for :  it  is  folly,  sheer 
folly  that  postpones  repentance,  and  delays 
efforts  and  aspirations  after  new  spiritual 
life.  The  literal  rendering  of  the  last  clause 
is :  (1)  For  it  is  time,  he  thould  not  tarry  at 
the  place  of  the  breaking  forth  of  children  ; 
or  rather,  (2)  When  it  is  time,  he  does  ruit 
place  himself  at  (literally,  stand)  or  come 
forward  to  the  opening  of  the  icomb;  and 
some  translate  nj;  (3)  "  at  the  time,"  but  that 
would  rather  require  ny,^;  it  might,  indeed, 
be  duration  of  time,  and  Aben  Ezra  so 
renders  it :  "  Therefore  at  the  time  he  will 
not  stand  in  the  breaking  forth  of  children." 
Also  Wiiusche :"  He  is  an  unwise  son,  for 
at  the  time  he  stands  not  in  the  breaking 
forth  of  children."  It  might  be  expressed, 
as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  with  a  slight 
modification ;  thus :  For  otherwise  he  would 
not  stand  long  time  in  the  place  of  the  breaking 
forth  of  children.    The  figure  is  now  shifted 


from  the  mother  to  the  child ;  such  abrupt 
and  sudden  transitions  are  not  infrequent  in 
Scripture,  especially  in  the  Pauline  Epistles 
(comp.  e.g.  2  Cor.  iii.  13 — 16).  The  danger 
is  represented  as  extreme,  as  maybe  inferred 
from  the  similar  expression,  "  The  children 
are  come  to  the  birth,  and  there  is  no 
strength  to  bring  forth."  A  perilous  period 
in  Israel's  history  is  indicated,  and  to 
escape  the  danger  he  must  make  no  tarry- 
ing, but  advance  at  once  into  the  new  life 
of  faith  and  repentance.  Kimchi  has  the 
following  comment :  "  Because  he  has  com- 
pared his  pains  to  the  pains  of  a  woman  in 
travail,  he  says, '  The  children  are  not  wise,' 
as  if  he  said, '  The  coming  generations,  who 
have  seen  their  fathers  in  aiSictiun  because 
of  their  iniquities,  are  not  wise,  and  do  not 
consider  that  distress  has  overtaken  theii 
fathers  because  of  their  iniquity ;  and  turn 
not  from  the  evil  deeds  of  their  fathers,  but 
have  done  wickedness  like  them.' "  He 
adds  :  "  There  are  children  lively  by  nature 
in  their  coming  forth  out  of  the  womb ;  so 
also  would  these,  if  they  were  wise,  not  stay 
a  single  hour  in  distress,  but  immediately 
on  returning  to  the  Lord  be  delivered  out  of 
their  distress."  The  LXX.  omit  the  ne- 
gative and  render  id  by  er  ativrfi^-g :  "  This 
wise  son  of  thine  [employed  ironically]  shall 
not  stand  [or, '  endure ']  in  the  destruction  of 
his  children  or  people." 

Ver.  14. — I  will  ransom  them  from  tho 
power  of  the  grave;  I  will  redeem  them 
&om  death.  God  here  promises  them 
deliverance  from  utter  ruin ;  the  grave  shall 
be  thus  deprived  of  his  victim,  and  the 
victim  rescued  out  of  the  tyrant  grasp  of 
death,  ills  is  to  redeem  by  payment  of 
a  price;  ^sj  by  right  of  kinship:  while 
VlNB',  the  under  world,  is  derived  (1)  by  some 
bom  ^K>,  to  ask  or  demand,  and  is  favoured 
by  such  statements  as  the  following: 
"  There  are  three  things  that  are  never 
satisfied,  yea,  four  things  say  not.  It  is 
enough :  the  grave,"  and  so  on  ;  "  Who  en- 
largeth  his  desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  death, 
and  cannot  be  satisfied."  Others  (2)  derive 
it  from  h^v,  equivalent  to  'jjjb'  (by  a  softening 
of  the  ayin  into  aleph),  to  be  hollow ;  but 
this  signification  of  the  word  is  not  satis- 
factorily established.  A  third  (3)  derivation 
is  h^iB,  to  hang  down  loose  or  slack,  then  to  ' 
be  deep,  or  low,  and  so  the  noun  comes  to 
signify  sinking,  depth,  abyss.  0  Death,  I 
will  be  thy  plagues  j  0  Grave,  I  will  be  thy 
destruction.  Thus  'hn  is  (o)  incorrectly 
taken  by  some  for  the  first  person  future  of 
n-n;  it  is  (b)  more  properly  taken  in  the 
sense  of  "where,"  as  in  ver,  10  of  the 
present  chapter.  T^a^  is  plural,  referred  by 
some  to  naj,  hence  Si/oj^,  LXX. ;  it  is,  how* 


CH.  xin.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


408 


ever,  the  plural  of  (o)  "lai,  pestilence,  and 
'!]3Dp,  pestilence,  destruction,  from  3isp,  to  out 
off,  akin  to  sen.  Hitzig  says  that  sbp,  ^bp, 
and  |bp  are  originally  iniinitiTeB,  and  the 
last  two  designate  instruments  or  members, 
and  thus  give  a  sort  of  support  to  the  tradi- 
tional xivrpov  of  the  LXX.  Now,  this  verse 
has  been  understuod  by  some  in  the  sense 
(1)  of  consolation;  and  by  others  (2)  in 
that  of  commiiiation.  In  the  latter  sense 
it  is  understood  by  the  Hebrew  commenta- 
tors, and  by  not  a  few  Christian  interpreters. 
Thus  Ras)ii :  "  I  am  he  who  redeemed  them 
from  the  hand  of  Sheol,  and  delivered  them 
from  death ;  but  now  I  will  set  myself  to 
speak  against  thee  words  of  death."  Aben 
Ezra:  "I  redeemed  thy  fathers;  now  I 
shall  be  thy  deadly  pestilence ;  I  will  also 
be  thy  destruction."  Kimchi  is  more  dif- 
fuse, as  usual ;  he  explains  thus :  "  I  _would 
have  redeemed  them  from  the  power  of 
Sheol,  if  they  had  been  wise.  But  now  that 
he  is  not  wise,  but  a  fool,  and  denies  my 
goodness,  it  is  not  enough  that  I  yhall  not 
redeem  thee  from  death,  but  I  shall  bring 
upon  thee  death  by  pestilence,  and  by  the 
sword,  and  by  famine,  and  by  evil  beast." 
The  condition  supplied  by  Kimchi  is  entirely 
arbitrary  and  without  anything  in  the  con- 
text to  suggest  it.  Calvin  in  like  manner 
interjects  a  condition  ;  thus :  "  I  will  redeem 
them  from  the  power  of  the  grave,  I  will 
redeem  them  from  death;  that  is,  except 
they  resist,  I  will  beccane  willingly  their 
Redeemer.  Some  have,  therefore,  rendered 
the  passage  in  the  subjunctive  mood, '  From 
the  hand  of  the  grave  I  would  redeem  them, 
from  death  I  would  deliver  them.  ...  I 
will  then  redeem  them,  as  far  as  this  de- 
pends on  me ;  for  a  eondition  is  to  be  in- 
troduced, as  though  God  came  forth  and 
declared  that  he  was  present  to  fulfil  the 
office  of  a  Bedeemer.  What,  then,  does 
stand  in  the  way?  Even  the  hardness  of 
the  people.  ...  He  afterwards  adds, '  I  will 
be  thy  perdition,  O  Death ;  I  will  be  thy 
excision,  O  Grave.'  By  these  words  the 
prophet  more  distinctly  sets  forth  the  power 
of  God,  and  magnificently  extols  it,  lest  men 
should  think  that  there  is  no  way  open  to  him 
to  save,  when  no  hope  according  to  the  judg- 
ment of  the  flesh  appears.  Hence  the  pro- 
phet says, '  Though  men  are  now  dead,  thereis 
yet  nothing  to  prevent  God  to  quicken  them. 
How  BO  ?  For  he  is  the  ruin  of  death,  and 
the  excision  of  the  grave ; '  that  is, '  Tliough 
death  should  swallow  up  all  men,  though 
the  grave  should  consume  them,  yet  God  is 
superior  to  both  death  and  the  grave,  for  he 
can  slay  death,  for  he  can  abolish  the 
grave.' "  He  afterwards  proceeds  to  "answer 
to  that  which  is  said  of  Paul  quoting  this 
The  solution  is  not  difficult.    The 


apostles  do  not  arowedly  at  all  times  ad- 
duce passages  which  in  their  whole  oon- 
text  apply  to  the  subject  they  handle ;  but 
sometimes  they  allude  to  a  word  only, 
sometimes  they  apply  a  passage  to  a  subject 
in  the  way  of  resemblance,  and  sometimes 
they  bring  forward  passages  as  testimonies. 
When  the  apostles  use  the  testimonies  of 
Scripture,  then  the  genuine  and  real  truth 
must  be  sought  out ;  but  when  they  glance 
only  at  one  word,  there  is  no  occasion  to 
make  any  anxious  inquiry ;  and  when  they 
quote  any  passage  of  Scripture  in  the  way  of 
resemblance,  it  is  a  too  scrupulous  anxiety 
to  seek  out  how  all  the  parts  agree.  But  it 
is  quite  evident  that  Paul,  in  1  Cor.  xv., 
has  not  quoted  the  testimony  of  the  prophet 
for  the  purpose  of  confirming  the  doctrine  of 
which  he  speaks.  What  then?  As  the 
resurrection  of  the  flesh  was  a  truth  very 
difficult  to  be  believed,  nay,  wholly  con- 
trary to  the  judgment  of  nature,  Paul  says 
that  it  is  no  matter  of  wonder  .  .  .  because 
it  is  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  God  to  be  the 
perdition  of  death  and  the  destruction  of 
the  grave.  .  .  .  He  is  endued  with  that 
incomprehensible  power  by  which  he  can 
raise  us  from  a  state  of  putrefaction ;  nay, 
since  he  created  the  world  from  nothing, 
he  wUl  also  raise  us  up  from  the  grave,  for 
he  is  the  death  of  death,  the  grave  of  the 
grave,  the  ruin  of  ruin,  and  the  destruction 
of  destruction ;  and  the  simple  object  of 
Paul  is  to  extol  by  these  striking  words 
that  incredible  power  of  God,  which  is 
beyond  the  reach  of  human  understanding." 
Others,  viewing  the  subject  in  the  same 
light,  read  the  clauses  interrogatively,  and 
the  imperfects  in  a  subjunctive  sense; 
thus — 

"  From  the  power  of  Sheol  shonld  I  ransom 
them? 
Prom  death  deliver  them?" 

The  answer  being,  "  Certainly  not." 

"  Where  are  thy  pestilences,  O  Death? 
Where  is  thy  destruction,  O  Sheol  ?    Let 
those  pestilences  and  that  destruction  be 
produced  for  Ephraim's  ruin." 

Eepentance  (relenting)  shall  be  hid  from  mine 
eyes.  This  Bashi  explains :  "  I  will  feel  no 
regret  over  this  calamity."  But  we  greatly 
prefer  the  sense  of  consolation  assigned  by 
many  Christian  interpreters  to  the  passage. 
No  doubt  the  verse  before  and  that  follow- 
ing this  fourteenth  verse  are  a  threat  which 
probably  induced  so  many,  as  we  have  seen, 
to  include  this  verse  in  the  menace.  But 
the  abruptness  of  the  prophet's  style  suffi- 
ciently accounts  for  a  bright  Messianic 
promise  to  relieve  the  gloom  of  the  dark 
predictions  among  which  it  is  interjected. 
Redemption  from  the  power  of  Sheol  signi^ 


401 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA. 


[oh.  XIII.  1 — ^16. 


fiei,  not  merely  deliverance  from  danger  and 
deliverance  from  death,  but  deliverance 
from  the  under  world  by  rescuing  the  living 
from  the  region  of  the  dead,  or  rescuing 
from  the  realm  of  death  those  already  sub- 
ject to  I J  is  grim  dominion;  while  the  de- 
struction of  death  is  celebrated  in  words  of 
triumph,  as  Theodoret  says,  "He  gives 
command  to  sing  a  psean  over  [literally, 
'  against ']  death."  To  the  Israelites  the 
promise  signified  the  power  of  the  Lord  to 
redeem  from  death  and  restore  them  from 
destruction  to  newness  of  life,  just  as  the 
dead  dry  bones  of  Israel  in  the  valley  of 
Ezekiel's  vision  are  restored  to  life.  The 
use  which  Paul  makes  of  this  verse  when 
he  couples  it  with  the  words  of  Isaiah, 
"  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  viotoiy,"  in 
1  Cor.  XV.  55,  is  to  confirm  tlie  full  and 
final  annihilation  of  death  at  the  resurrec- 
tion. This  fuller  and  deeper  meaning,  dimly 
unfolded  to  Old  Testament  saints,  was 
clearly  brought  to  light  in  New  Testament 
Scripture.  The  absence  of  repentance  de- 
notes the  irrevocable  accomplishment  of  the 
Divine  purpose  of  salvation.  Pusey  has 
peitiuently  remarked  upon  this  verse  :  "  God 
by  his  prophets  mingles  promises  of  mercy 
in  the  midst  of  his  threats  of  punishment. 
His  mercy  ovei  flows  the  bounds  of  the 
occasion  upon  which  he  makes  it  known. 
He  had  sentenced  Ephraim  to  temporal  de- 
struction. This  was  unchangeable.  He 
points  to  that  which  turns  all  temporal  loss 
into  gain,  that  eternal  redemption.  The 
words  are  the  fullest  which  could  have  been 
chosen.  The  word  rendered  '  ransom ' 
signifies  rescued  them  by  the  payment  of 
a  price;  the  word  rendered  'redeem'  re- 
lates to  one  who,  as  the  nearest  of  kin,  had 
the  right  to  acquire  anything  as  his  own 
by  paying  that  price.  Both  words,  in  their 
exactest  sense,  describe  what  Jesus  did, 
buying  us  with  a  price  .  .  .  and  becoming 
our  near  kinsman  by  his  incarnation.  .  .  . 
The  words  refuse  to  be  tied  down  to  a 
temporal  deliverance.  A  little  longer  con- 
tinuance in  Canaan  is  not  a  redemption 
from  the  power  of  the  grave;  nor  was 
Epliraim  so  dilivered." 

Ver.  15. — Though  he  be  fruitful  among 
his  brethren.  It  should  rather  be,  for  he 
will  bear  fruit  among  brp.thren.  '3,  in  this 
verse,  is  neither  a  particle  of  time,  "  when," 
nor  a  conditional  particle,  "  if,"  but  "  for," 
adducing  "  a  reason  to  prove  that  the  pro- 
mised grace  of  redemption  would  certainly 
stand  firm."  Ki  is  distinguished  from  DK 
by  being  "  only  used  in  cases  where  a  cir- 
cumstance is  assumed  to  be  real.  For  one 
that  is  merely  aupposed  to  be  possible,  dk  is 
required,"  as  may  be  inferred  from  the 
interchange  of  the  two  words  in  Numb.  v. 
19  and  2U.     The  name  Ephraim,  signifying 


"  double-fruitFulness,"  shall  be  verified,  con- 
firming the  promised  redemption  from  death, 
and,  by  the  pledge  of  blessing,  which  the 
name  implies  afibrding  a  guai-antee  that 
the  coming  storm  would  not  quite  over- 
whelm them.  The  play  on  the  name 
Ephraim  fixes  the  meaning  of  KHPli  ''^e 
aleph  taking  the  place  of  he.  The  S'eptua- 
gint  SuKTre^c?,  equivalent  to  "  shall  cause  a 
division,"  and  Jerome's  dividet,  suppose 
nn?'.  or  st'^9'_.  But  though  fruitful  among 
the  other  tribes,  yet  the  abuse  of  that  fruit- 
fulness  invited  the  instrument  of  destruction. 
There  is  an  allusion  to  the  patriarchal 
blessing,  "Joseph  is  a  fruitful  bough  by 
a  well ; "  the  source  of  his  fruitfulness  was 
that  well  or  fountain;  while  the  drying  up 
of  it  would  be  the  certain  cause  of  barren- 
ness. An  east  wind  shall  come,  the  wind 
of  the  Lord  shaU  come  up  &om  the  wilder- 
ness. Thus,  while  Ephraim  presents  the 
pleasing  picture  of  a  fair  and  fruitful  tree, 
the  element  of  destruction  is  already  on  the 
way.  A  wind,  the  east  wind,  with  its  rude 
vehemence,  blighting  heat,  and  desolating 
effect,  was  coming.  It  was  a  wind,  not 
coming  by  chance,  but  commissioned  by 
Jehovah  as  a  minister  of  vengeance  to  exe- 
cute his  wrath.  It  was,  moreover,  a  wind 
issuing  forth  from  its  home  in  the  desert,  and 
fraught  with  fiery  heat  from  the  scorching 
sands  of  the  Arabian  desert.  And  his  spring 
shall  become  dry,  and  his  fountain  shall  be 
dried  up.  This  flourishing  tree,  planted  by 
the  living  spring,  to  which  it  owed  its 
vigour  and  verdure,  was  doomed  soon  to 
wither  in  consequence  of  the  drying  up  of  the 
waters,  that  nourished  it,  by  the  east  wind. 
He  shall  spoU  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant 
vessels.  Here  the  figure  merges  in  the 
fact.  The  Assyrian  conqueror  was  the 
blustering  east  wind,  that  swept  like  a 
whirlwind  with  his  armies  from  the  east. 
He  not  only  ravaged  the  country,  but 
rifled  the  treasures  of  the  capital.  The 
kf'li  chemdah  included  all  the  valuables  and 
treasures  of  Samaria  referred  to  in  the  fol- 
lowing verse.  Kimchi  explains  the  verse 
as  follows:  "Eor  Ephraim  was  fruitful 
among  brethren  as  long  as  he  did  not  make 
calves.  He  became  increasingly  great  and 
fruitful  among  his  brethren,  as  Jacob  said 
of  him.  .  .  .  And  now  that  he  has  sinned, 
an  east  wind  of  the  Lord  shall  come ;  and 
it  is  the  King  of  Assyria  that  is  meant. 
And  he  compares  him  to  the  east  wind, 
because  it  is  a  wind  from  the  east,  for  the 
land  of  Assyria  lies  to  the  east  of  the  land 
of  Israel ;  and  further  he  says, '  east  wind  ' 
because  it  is  a  violent  wind.  And  he  sayi, 
'wind  of  Jehovah,'  to  magnify  the  wind 
and  emphasize  it ;  and  he  says  also,  '  spirit 
of  Je.iovah,'  because  Jehovah  the  blessed 
stirred  up  his  spirit  (i.e.  spurit  of  the  King 


CH.  xni.  1—16.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  aOSEA. 


40t 


of  Assyria)  to  crane  against  Israel,  •goeth 
up  from  the  wilderness; '  wind  is  always  in 
the  wilderness.  Or  the  explanation  is, 
because  the  willerness  is  between  the  land 
of  I  srael  and  the  land  of  Assyria ;  and  before 
this  wind,  which  is  the  Kin?;  of  Assyria,  ia 
dried  np  the  fountain  of  Ephraim,  which 
was  at  first  like  a  tree  flourishing  by  the 
waters."  And  now  before  this  wind  sliall 
its  spring  become  dry  and  its  fountain 
dried  np.  The  verb  tsiin;,  as  from  EJia,  is 
an  irregular  formation  for  »'2<_%  as  on  the 
contrary  we  find  the  Hiph.  »''3in,  as  if  from 

Ver.  16. — Samaria  shall  become  desolate ; 
for  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  Ood.  Others 
translate  shall  atone,  i.e.  bear  guilt  or  punish- 
ment. In  the  latter  sense  it  is  from  DCi'K, 
to  atone  or  suffer  the  punishment  of  con- 
tracted guilt;  in  the  former  sense  it  is  from 
DQK',  and  it  is  translated  accordingly  by 
a^avurBriSeTo!  in  the  LXX.,  and  perecU  by 
Jerome ;  so  also  Aben  Ezra:  "  It  shall  be  laid 
waste;"  Kimohi:  "The  aleph  has  sch'wa 
alone,  and  the  signification  '  desolation,'  and 
so  the  dwellers  therein  shall  be  made 
desolate."  He  thus  intimates  that  aleph, 
havinp;  sc/i'wa  alone  without  seghol,  does  not 
belong  to  the  root,  which  is  not  dck  (for  its 
future  would  be  Dty^n),  but  dd^.  Kashi, 
however,  understands  it  in  the  sense  of 
"  atone,"  or  "find  out  her  guiltiness; "  he  says, 
"  From  now  will  her  guilt  manifest  itself." 
The  reason  of  Samaria  being  thus  mentioned 
is  not  only  that  it  was  the  capital  of  the 
northern  kingdom,  but,  as  Eimchi  says,  "  it 


confirmed  Israel  in  the  worship  of  the 
calves ;  for  if  the  kings  had  been  good,  they 
would  have  brought  back  Israel  to  wliat 
was  good."  The  hi  assigns  the  -reason  of 
Samaria's  desolation  or  guilt ;  it  was  rebel- 
lion against  Jehovah,  for  Samaria  was  the 
seat  and  centre  of  idolatry,  and  hence  it 
spiead  thionghout  the  land.  Xhey  shall 
fall  by  the  sword:  their  infants  shall  be 
dashed  in  pieces,  and  their  women  with 
child  shall  be  ripped  up.  The  destruction 
thus  described  was  to  be  complete.  The 
present  population  would  perish  by  the 
sword;  the  future  progeny  would  be  ex- 
tinguished and  all  posterity  cut  off.  Not 
only  the  children  already  bom,  but  those 
unborn,  were  devoted  to  destruction;  and 
all  this  in  the  most  savage  and  barbarous 
manner.  The  word  hh^])  (from  hhy,  to  meddle, 
gratify  one's  self,  indulge  one's  caprice) 
presents  childhood  on  the  side  of  playful- 
ness or  petulance.  The  pronominal  suffix 
attached  to  nn  refers  to  the  city;  and  the 
feminine  noun  itself,  forming  subject  to  verbs 
in  the  masculine,  arises  from  the  fact  that 
the  feminine  of  the  imperfect  plural  becomes 
rarer ;  or  because  the  feminine  plural  only 
gradually  distinguishes  itself  by  a  peculiar 
form  from  the  masculine.  The  cruelties 
here  specified  may  have  been  occasioned  by 
those  of  the  same  kind  with  which  Menahem 
King  of  Samaria  smote  Tiphsah.  On  that 
occasion  "  all  the  women  therein  that  were 
with  child  he  ripped  up  "  (compare,  for  the 
cruel  practice, '  Iliad,'  Ti  58  i  2  King!  viii. 
12  and  xv.  16). 


HOMILETICS. 


Vers.  1 — 8. — Justification  of  the  ways  of  Ood  to  man.  Israel  had  been  the  cause  of 
their  own  calamities — another  proof  that  sin  is  the  procuring  cause  of  all  human 
suffering  and  sorrow.  (Jod's  character  is  seen  to  be  everlastingly  the  same — ^long- 
suffering  and  merciful,  ever  gracious  to  penitents,  abounding  in  goodness  and  truth  to 
all,  but  by  no  means  clearing  the  suilty. 

I.  The  secret  of  success.  Most  men  are  fond  of  power,  all  men  value  prosperity ; 
yet  few  men  know  the  right  road,  and  fewer  still  pursue  it.  Bighteousness  is  the  right 
road  to  success  of  any  kind,  and  the  sure  way  of  elevation  ;  it  exalts  either  nation  or 
individual  who  practises  it.  1.  As  long  as  Ephraim  worshipped  the  true  God  and 
abstained  from  idolatiy,  which  subsequently  became  their  besetting  sin,  they  had  power 
and  pre-eminence.  When  they  spake,  their  word  was  with  power  and  not  unfrequently 
inspired  terror ;  it  was  sure  to  come  with  authority  and  to  command  respect  among  the 
other  tribes  of  Israel.  Ephraim  had  long  been  the  premier  tribe,  enjoying  the  credit  of 
great  names,  Joshua  and  Samuel ;  and  of  great  deeds,  the  defeat  of  Midian  and  the 
death  of  the  two  Midianite  princes,  Oreb  and  Zeeb  ;  also  of  great  privileges,  the  naiional 
sanctuary  having  been  for  three  centuries  and  a  half  at  Shiloh,  within  the  confines  of  that 
tribe.  Nor  were  they  slow  to  assert  themselves  and  advance  their  claims.  2.  But  the 
tide  turneii.  They  offended  in  Baal ;  then  came  national  degradation  and  political  death 
— they  fell  by  their  own  hand  as  moral  suicides.  Sin  brought  Ephraim  down  from  his 
high  and  exalted  position,  and  laid  his  honour  in  the  dust.    He  became  like  a  dead  man, 


406  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  xni.  1— 16. 

despoiled  of  his  authority,  deprived  of  many  of  his  subjects,  and  on  the  verge  of  ruin  ; 
his  activities  and  vigour  gone  and  his  dignity  departed,  himself  already  dead  thougli 
not  yet  buried.  "  When  Ephraim  forsook  God  and  took  to  worship  images,  the  state 
received  its  death-wound,  and  was  never  good  for  anything  after.  Note :  deserting 
Gk)d  is  the  death  of  any  person  or  persons." 

II.  Sin  is  a  downward  slope.  The  sin  of  idolatry  was  gradually  developed  in 
Israel.  It  began  with  the  modification  of  the  national  worship  by  Jeroboam,  when  he 
changed  the  place  and  plan  of  that  worship.  When  he  had  audaciously  transferred 
the  place  of  worship  from  Jerusalem  to  Dan  on  the  Syrian  frontier,  and  to  Bethel  on  the 
border  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  in  order  to  keep  the  people  away  from  Jerusalem,  the 
true  place  of  worship  and  seat  of  the  Davidic  dynasty,  he  proceeded  further  to  introduce 
the  worship  of  the  calves — a  relapse,  at  least  as  to  form,  into  the  idolatry  of  Egypt.  His 
design  was  not,  indeed,  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  rival  deity,  but  the  modelling  of 
Jeliovah's  worship  under  an  external  and  symbolic  form.  The  sin  did  not  stop  here; 
it  progressed  until,  in  the  days  of  Ahab,  the  Phoenician  deity  Baal  became  an  object  of 
worship.  It  was  bad  enough  to  make  a  graven  image  or  material  representation  of  the 
true  God  and  bow  down  to  it,  thus  violating' the  second  commandment  and  neglecting 
the  solemn  instruction  that  the  worship  of  God  must  be  spiritual,  not  material ;  but  it 
was  still  worse  to  introduce  other  gods,  as  the  Phoenician  Baal,  in  direct  violation  of  the 
first  commandment  of  the  Law,  which  requires  the  exclusive  worship  of  Jehovah.  Thus 
the  sin  of  idolatry  progressed  in  Israel.  Nor  is  this  all ;  along  with  the  worship  of  Baal 
the  idolatry  of  the  calves,  as  we  learn  from  this  Scripture,  still  survived  two  huudred 
years  after  its. introduction  by  Jeroboam.  Thus  they  "grew  worse  and  worse;  owreted 
more  idols,  doted  more  upon  those  they  had,  and  grew  more  ridiculous  in  the  worship 
of  them."  Superstition  is  an  expensive  thing.  Israel  used  much  of  the  means  God 
had  given  them  in  making  molten  images.  It  is  a  whimsical  thing ;  men  follow  their 
own  fancies  in  carrying  it  out.  It  is  an  unspeakably  stupid  thing ;  that  image  which  is 
man's  work,  man's  wisdom,  the  product  of  man's  wilfulness,  becomes  the  object  of  man's 
worsh  ip.  It  is,  moreover,  a  debasing  thing ;  the  fervour  of  their  worship  ii  stimulated  by 
an  authoritative,  perhaps  a  royal,  edict,  enjoining  reverence  and  homage  to  the  senseless 
image  of  a  calf.  But  whether  the  command  proceeds  from  priests,  or  people,  or  prince, 
the  kissing  of  the  calves  was  in  token  of  "  the  adoration  of  them,  affection  of  them, 
and  allegiance  to  them  as  theirs."  It  has  been  justly  remarked  by  Pusey  that  "  sin  draws 
on  sin.  This  seems  to  be  a  third  stage  in  sin.  First,  under  Jeroboam,  was  the  worship 
of  the  calves.  Then,  under  Ahab,  the  worship  of  BaaL  Thirdly,  the  multiplying  of 
other  idols  (2  Kings  xvii.  9, 10),  penetrating  and  pervading  the  private  life,  even  of  their 
less  wealthy  people." 

III.  Tee  8H0BT-LIVED  STATE  OF  SINNERS.  They  have  often  the  show  of  prosperity, 
but  their  prosperous  state  is  short-lived.  "  I  have  seen,"  says  the  psalmist,  "the  wicked 
in  great  power,  and  spreading  himself  like  ft  green  bay  tree"  (or  a  green  tree  growing  in 
its  native  soil).  "  Yet  he  passed  away,  and,  lo,  he  was  not:  yea,  I  sought  him,  but  he 
could  not  be  found."  This  truth  is  illustrated  by  four  very  striking  similitudes.  The 
morning  cloud  glowing  in  the  early  sunshine,  assuming  phantastic  forms  and  displaying 
varying  hues  of  beauty,  often  presents  itself  as  a  forerunner  of  the  rain-shower  to  moisten 
the  dry  parched  ground ;  but  ere  long  it  vanishes,  and  the  cloudy  morning  ushen  in  a 
clear  and  rainless  day.  The  early  dew,  with  its  pearly  drops  so  bri<;ht  and  beautiful  on 
the  grass  of  a  summer  morning,  which  appears  as  if  to  promise  sufficient  moisture  to  the 
earth  even  in  the  absence  of  the  long  looked-for  rain,  is  soon  brushed  aside  by  a  passing 
foot,  or  evaporates  before  the  day  has  far  advanced.  Both  similititdes  had  ahready  been 
employed  by  the  prophet  to  exhibit  the  fleeting  and  transitory  nature  of  Israel's  religious 
profeosion  and  the  consequent  disappointment  to  the  Divine  expectations,  so  they  are 
used  here  in  turn  to  represent  the  transient  character  of  sinners'  prosperity  and  their 
disappointment  from  worldly  things.  The  two  other  similitudes,  though  less  pleasing, 
are  equally  powerful  as  representations  of  what  is  evanescent :  the  worthless  chaff,  which 
is  whWled  away  in  winnowing ;  and  the  offensive  smoke,  which,  as  has  been  rathily  said, 
swelleth,  welleth,  and  vanisheth — both  soon  dissipated  and  disappearing.  "  While  these 
four  emblems  in  common,"  says  Pusey,  "  picture  what  is  fleeting,  two,  the  early  dete 
and  the  morning  doud,  are  emblems  of  what;  is  in  itself  good,  but  passing ;  the  two 
ethers,  the  chaff  and  the  smoke,  are  emblems  of  what  is  worthless.    '  The  dew  and  the 


OH.  XULI— 16.]  THE   BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  407 

cloud  were  temporary  mercies  on  the  part  of  God  which  should  cease  from  them ;  goo  1 
in  themselves,  hut,  to  their  evil,  soon  to  pass  away.'  .  .  .  Such  dew  were  the  many 
prophets  vouchsafed  to  Israel ;  such  was  Hosea  himself,  most  brilliant,  hut  soon  to  pass 
away.  The  chaff  was  the  people  itself,  to  be  carried  out  of  the  Lord's  laud ;  the  smoke, 
'  its  pride  and  its  errors,  whose  disappearance  was  to  leave  the  air  pure  for  the  household 
of  God." 

IV.  Sin  IB  BASE  ingratitude  to  God.  1.  God  assures  Israel  that,  however  far  they 
had  degenerated  and  fallen,  however  much  they  had  changed,  the  chaage  had  been 
entirely  on  their  side,  not  on  his ;  as  though  he  had  said,  "And  I,  even  I,"  for  the  pronoun 
is  emphatic, "  am  still  Jehovah,  the  same  unchanging  and  unchangeable  Beino;,  the  same 
ia  mightiness  to  succour,  the  same  in  willingness  to  help ;  also  thy  God,  the  same  in 
covenant  relation,  the  same  in  faithfulness  to  every  promise,  and  the  same  in  ability 
to  fulfil  the  word  he  has  pledged."  2.  He  pleads  their  past  experience  and  the  many 
proofs  he  had  given  them  of  his  goodness ;  he  appeals  to  them  in  regard  to  his  treat- 
ment of  the  fathers  and  founders  of  their  race,  going  hack  to  the  period  of  the  Exodus, 
and  thus  gently  hinting  the  covenant  entered  into  at  Sinai  and  reminding  thera  of  its 
conditions.  In  view  of  God's  faithfulness  and  their  own  faithlessness,  of  God's  goodness 
and  their  ingratitude,  of  his  enduring  mercies  which  they  and  their  progenifcjrs  had 
experienced  for  centuries,  and  of  the  fitful  and  unfreqiient  conformity  of  their  conduct 
therewith,  they  must  surely  have  hung  their  head  in  shame  and  cried  out  in  the  lan- 
guage of  another  prophet,  "  0  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  unto  thee,  but  unto  us 
confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this  day."  3.  The  law  of  reciprocity  demands  a  return  on  the 
part  of  the  people  of  God.  He  had  made  himself  known  to  thera  by  his  Word  and  by 
his  works,  by  his  providences  and  by  his  prophets;  he  had  made  himself  known  to 
them  as  their  fathers'  God,  as  their  own  God  in  a  special  relationship,  acknowledging 
them  as  his  peculiar  people.  He  naturally  claimed,  not  only  their  knowledge,  but 
acknowledgment  of  himself.  It  was  their  bounden  duty,  in  turn,  to  acquaint  themselves 
with  hira,  to  know  him  to  be  their  God  and  no  other,  to  acknowledge  him  in  his  ineffable 
perfections,  in  his  glorious  attributes,  and  in  the  ordinances  of  his  worship,  and  also  to 
own  allegiance  to  him  alone.  And  if  all  this  was  a  duty  incumbent  on  Israel,  surely  it 
ia  a  duty  equally  incumbent,  yea,  much  more  so,  upon  ourselves ;  while  neglect  of  such 
duty  on  our  part  brands  us  with  an  ingratitude  deeper,  blacker,  and  baser  than  that  of 
Ephraim  when  the  prophet  wrote.  4.  He  backs  all  with  the  assurance  of  his  saving 
power,  and  assigns  as  a  special  reason  for  knowing  and  acknowledging  God  that  there  is 
no  Saviour  besides  him.  Of  this  he  had  given  abundant  proof  by  the  deliverances  he 
had  wrought  and  the  provision  he  had  made  for  them,  as  for  their  fathers  before  them, 
under  the  most  trying  circumstances,  when  they  were  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  land  of 
great  drought.  The  very  idea  of  God  implies  saving  power  on  his  part,  and  happiness 
in  time  and  eternity  for  all  who  are  his  true  Israel ;  and  "  as  where  we  have  protection 
we  owe  allegiance,  so  where  we  have  salvation  and  hope  for  it  we  owe  adoration."  Now, 
a  friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed.  Such  a  Friend  was  God  to  Israel,  an  all-sufficient 
Friend  ;  and  just  such  a  Friend  is  God  to  his  people  still. 

V.  Sin,  bt  reason  of  certain  aggravations,  becomes  more  heinous  in  the 
SIGHT  OF  God.  This  is  the  case  specially  when  the  good  gifts  of  his  providence  are 
used  to  the  dishonour  of  God  and  the  neglect  of  his  service.  It  was  thus  with  Israel, 
when  pride  of  heart  and  forgetfulness  of  God  were  the  return  they  made  him  for  all  his 
goodness  to  themselves  and  their  fathers  during  all  the  years  that  had  been  from  their 
entrance  into  the  land  of  promise.    The  Lord  himself  had  been  their  Shepherd  ;  he  had 

I  tended  them  with  greatest  care,  leading  them  in  green  pastures  and  by  still  waters.  But 
"  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  and  kicked."  How  often  is  this  conduct  of  Israel  repeated ! 
Prosperity  pampers  pride,  and  pride  makes  men  forget  God,  as  if  it  were  men's  neces- 
sities that  kept  them  mindful  of  God.  "  It  is  sad  that  those  favours  which  ought  to 
make  us  mindful  of  God,  and  studious  what  we  shall  render  to  him,  should  make  us 
unmindful  of  him,  and  regardless  what  we  do  against  him.  We  ought  to  know  that  we 
live  upon  God,  when  we  live  upon  common  providence,  though  we  do  not,  as  Israel  in 
the  wilderness,  live  upon  miracles." 

VI.  Sin's  sad  sequel.  The  sins  of  the  people  grew  worse  and  became  more  a^m- 
vated ;  the  Divine  judgments  are  in  proportion.  In  an  early  verse  (third)  of  the  chapter 
they  are  threatened  with  the  evanescence  of  their  prosperous  condition,  but  something 


408  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiii.  1— 16. 

much  worse  and  more  alarming  is  predicted  (vers.  7,  8)  as  ready  to  follow.  Not  only 
waf  all  good  to  be  taken  from  them,  but  all  evil  was  to  come  upon  them.  The  Lord'^ 
flock  is  to  lose  the  Shepherd's  care;  thus  deserted,  they  will  soon  fall  yiclims  to  savage 
beasts — nay,  their  former  Shepherd  not  only  abandons  them  to  beasts  of  prey,  but  does 
himself  assume  the  character  and  put  forth  the  fierceness  of  such  beasts.  The  ferocity 
of  the  lion,  the  fleetness  of  the  leopard,  and  the  fiiry  of  the  robbed  or  ravenous  she-bear, 
now  represent  the  means  which  he  employs  gainst  them.  And  as  if  it  were  not  enough 
to  specify  the  lion,  the  leopard,  the  bear,  and  the  lion  a  second  time,  he  adds  "  the 
wild  beast,"  that  is,  wild  bea-ts  in  general.  It  appears  as  if  the  dreadfulness  of  all  wild 
beasts  combined  was  required  to  exhibit  the  power  of  God's  wrath  and  the  fury  of  liis 
anger.  If  the  sinner  escaped  fiom  the  lion,  a  leopard  overtakes  him ;  or  if  he  escapes  the 
vigilance  of  the  leopard's  keen  vision,  a  bear  meets  him ;  in  a  word,  the  fierceness 
of  all  wild  beasts  together  is  not  equal  to  that  of  God's  wrath.  "All  the  dreadful- 
ness of  all  creatures  in  the  world  combined  meets  in  the  wrath  of  God."  A  sorrowful 
contrast  is  here  presented.  God  had  once  watched  over  them  for  good ;  now,  leopard- 
like, he  watches  their  wanderings,  and  with  lynx-eyed  vigilance  waits  as  if  to  take 
advantage  of  them.  On  the  other  hand,  their  heart  had  been  puffed  up  with  pride,  as 
well  as  hard  and  closed  against  the  gentlest  admonitions  and  most  fEithful  instructions ; 
now  their  heart  shall  be  torn  open  with  leonine  force  and  violence.  Sinners  may  shut 
the  remonstrances  and  warnings  of  the  Divine  Word  out  of  their  hearts  and  remain 
obdurate,  but  afflictive  providences  or  untoward  events  of  some  kind  may  at  God's 
pleasure  tear  away  the  obstruction,  and  tear  open  the  hardest  heart.  Whether  the 
opinion  of  thcjse  who  think  there  is  a  reference  here  to  the  four  ancient  monarchies  is 
founded  in  fact,  or  is  only  the  mere  oftspring  of  fancy,  we  care  not  to  examine.  That 
there  is  a  resemblance  between  the  terrible  threats  of  this  passage  and  the  terrible 
treatment  which  the  people  of  God  experienced  at  the  hands  of  those  monarchies,  there 
can  be  little  doubt.  Of  the  four  monarchies  represented  by  beasts  in  the  seventh  chapter 
of  Daniel,  the  Babylonish  was  the  lion,  the  Persian  a  bear,  the  Grecian  a  leopard,  the 
fleetness  of  which  suitably  set  forth  the  rapidity  of  Alexander's  exploits,  all  of  which 
he  performed  in  the  space  of  twelve  years,  while  he  himself  at  his  death  had  only 
reached  the  age  of  thirty-three  years.  The  Boman  empire  is  not  likened  to  any  one 
beast  in  particular,  but  is  described  as  dreadful  and  terrible  and  strong  exceedingly, 
with  great  iron  teeth,  devouring  and  breaking  in  pieces  and  stamping  the  residue  with 
the  feet,  its  ten  horns  standing  for  the  ten  kingdoms  into  which  it  was  subsequently 
parcelled. 

Vera.  9 — 13. — Man't  marvellous  perversity  and  OotTe  restorative  mercy.  L  Bum 
BT  SIN,  BECOVEBY  BT  sitACE.  Wheu  Isiael  had  destroyed  himself,  and  when  there 
was  neither  help  nor  hope  for  him  in  himself-  or  in  aught  that  man  could  do,  help 
was  to  be  found  in  God  and  in  God  alone.  Throughout  the  whole  course  of  human 
history  wrath  and  ruin  are  the  deservings  of  man,  goodness  and  mercy  the  dis- 
pensation of  God.  In  the  worst  of  times  and  in  the  darkest  day  help  is  to  be  had  in 
God.  In  the  midst  of  merited  wrath  he  remembers  mercy.  Qud  volunteers  his  help 
to  his  erring  children  even  when  their  sins  have  been  blackest  and  their  need  greatest. 
When  there  is  no  human  help  at  hand  or  anywhere  available,  God  graciously  proffers 
aid.  There  was  now  no  king  to  save  them  in  all  their  cities ;  God  interposes  and 
says,  "  I  myself  will  be  your  King."     When  there  was  no  judge  to  deliver  them,  such 

as  those  that  had  been  raised  up  for  them  on  great  emergencies  in  ancient  times no 

Gideon,  no  Jephtha,  no  Samson — God  himself  stepped  forth  for  their  protection  and 
stretched  out  his  helping  hand. 

II.  Belianoe:  on  human  help  is  often  as  frustbatino  as  foolish.  1.  Israel  had 
I'xpeded  much,  but  got  little,  from  a  king  and  princes.  Thus  we  read  in  1  Sam.  viii.  5, 
"  Make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  nations."  Princes,  though  not  expressed,  are 
clearly  implied  in  that  passage,  for  wherever  there  is  a  king,  there  must  of  necessity  be 
a  court  and  nobles,  or  officers  of  high  rank,  to  attend  him.  The  people  gained  their 
object,  but  find  their  trust  misplaced;  in  the  day  of  their  calamity  and  their 
oppression,  those  from  whom  they  confidently  expected  such  great  things,  are  powerless 
as  themselves  and  in  just  as  great  need  of  help.  Thus  history  confirms  the  lesson, 
"  Trust  not  in  princes  nor  man's  son."    2.  The  folly  of  obstinately  neglecting  or  rejecting 


OH.  XIII.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  409 

warning  well  meant  and  faithfully  given.  Forewarned  is  forearmed ;  this  should  be 
the  case,  but  the  maxim  is  often  disregarded.  Samuel  had  faithfully  warned  Israel  of 
the  inconveniences  to  which  they  would  expose  themselves  by  imitating  the  surround- 
ing nations  when  they  sought  a  king.  He  told  them  truly,  for  God  had  instructed 
him,  of  the  oppressions  they  might  expect,  the  exactions  they  would  be  subject  to, 
and  the  arbitrariness  of  rule  to  which  they  would  have  to  submit ;  but,  though  they 
could  not  gainsay  aught  of  his  warning,  they  obstinately  persisted  in  their  determina- 
tion, saying,  "  Nay,  but  we  will  have  a  king."  To  their  folly  they  added  sin,  as  is 
usually  the  case,  for  in  rejecting  Samuel's  counsel  they  rejected  the  prophet's  Master, 
as  it  is  written,  "  They  have  not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  rejected  me."  3.  How 
little  men  know  what  is  really  good/or  them  !  Frequently  we  set  our  heart  on  things 
most  prejudicial  to  our  best  interests.  Lilte  children  crying  for  hurtful  objects  which 
a  wise  parent  withholds  in  tenderest  affection,  and  which  if  granted  would  be  sure  to 
inflict  injury  or  even  prove  fatal,  we  clamour  for  things  that  would  prove  not  only 
unsuitable  but  most  harmful ;  and,  childlike,  we  complain  if  our  requests  are  not  granted. 
We  pray,  and  in  our  ignorance  we  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as  we  ought.  What 
need  we  have  of  grace,  that  the  right  desires  may  be  put  into  our  hearts  and  right 
words  in  our  lips ;  that,  coming  before  God  with  acceptance,  we  may  obtain  those  things 
that  are  most  conducive  to  the  Divine  glory  and  expedient  for  ourselves  I 

III.  Requests  granted  in  wbath.  God,  in  his  providence  ever  wise  and  holy, 
may,  as  it  were,  stand  aside  from  men  for  a  season,  and  allow  them  to  have  their  way. 
After  rejecting  the  salutary  warning  of  his  Word  they  may  succeed  in  their  vricked 
enterprises,  and  seem  even  to  be  seconded  in  them.  1.  No  ground  for  cavilling  at  OocPs 
providence.  Without  any  imputation  on  the  Divine  holiness,  men  may  be  permitted 
to  have  their  way  and  to  get  their  will,  yet  in  much  wrath.  "  God,"  says  Calvin,  "  so 
executes  his  judgments,  that  whatever  evil  there  is  it  ought  to  be  ascribed  to  men ; 
whatsoever  good  to  himself.  .  .  .  God  by  his  secret  counsel  had  directed  the  whole 
business,  and  yet  he  had  no  participation  in  the  sin  of  the  people.  .  .  .  Let  us  learn 
wisely  to  admire  the  secret  judgments  of  God,  who  thus  makes  use  of  wicked  men,  and 
directs  for  the  best  end  what  is  done  by  men  wickedly  and  foolishly."  2.  There 
appears  to  be  an  answer  to  a  latent  objection.  The  people  might  say  to  the  prophet, 
"Why  blame  us  when  God  permitted  us  to  have  a  king,  appointing  Samuel  to  anoint  Saul, 
and  allowing  Jeroboam  to  reign  over  ten  tribes  ?  "  To  this  God,  by  his  servant,  replies, 
"  I  gave  you  a  king  when  your  hearts  were  so  set  on  one ;  but  I  gave  him  to  you  in  anger 
and  as  a  punishment  of  sin — Saul  to  punish  your  sin  in  rejecting  Samuel ;  and  Jeroboam 
to  punish  the  idolatries  in  the  reign  of  Solomon,  as  also  your  rebellion  and  apostasy." 
3.  Qod's  gifts  are  sometimes  tokens  of  his  wrath.  "  God,"  says  Augustine, "  many  times 
in  giving  is  angry,  and  in  denying  is  merciful."  We  have  positive  proofs  of  this  in 
Scripture.  Besides  the  passage  before  us,  there  is  a  notable  instance  on  record  in 
Numb.  xi. ;  there  God  gave  the  people  what  they  greatly  longed  for,  but  in  wrath. 
They  had  "  wept  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord,  saying.  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat  ?  for  it 
was  well  with  us  in  Egypt."  They  got  the  flesh  they  so  vehemently  craved ;  their 
desires  were  gratified ;  why  ?  Just,  we  are  told,  because  they  despised  the  Lord  who  was 
among  them.  Thus  God  gave  them  flesh  to  eat,  but  it  was  in  anger.  The  psalmist 
(Ps.  Ixxviii.),  commenting  on  the  f.ict,  explains  it  so, "  While  the  meat  was  yet  in  their 
mouths,  the  vrrath  of  God  came  upon  them."  4.  Tlie  end  was  as  had  as  the  beginning. 
A  king  was  given  them  in  anger,  and  a  king  was  taken  away  in  wrath.  The  proverb 
says, "  Well  begun  is  half  done ; "  but  we  may  add, "  A  bad  beginning  has  most  frequently 
an  ill  end."  "Nothing  successful,"  says  Calvin,  "could  then  proceed  from  so  inauspi- 
cious a  beginning.  For  it  is  only  then  an  auspicious  token  when  we  obey  God,  when 
his  Spirit  presides  over  our  counsels,  when  we  ask  at  his  mouth,  and  when  we  begin 
with  prayer  to  him.  But  when  we  despise  the  Word  of  God,  and  give  loose  reins  to 
our  own  humour,  and  fix  on  whatever  pleases  us,  it  cannot  be  but  that  an  unhappy  and 
disastrous  issue  will  follow."  5.  Criteria  of  Ood's  gifts.  We  may  point  out  a  few 
tokens  by  which  men  may  judge  whether  God's  gifts  are  granted  in  love  or  in  wrath. 
There  are  (1)  desires  which  have  more  respect  to  the  gift  than  to  the  giver.  Of  such 
it  has  been  well  said,  "  Those  desires  that  are  not  out  of  love  are  not  satisfied  from 
love."  If  our  regards  are  fixed  on  the  creature  and  have  no  respect  to  the  Creator,  God 
may  grant  such  desires,  but  not  in  love.    "  Whatsoever  a  gracious  heart  would  havi 


*10  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiii.  1—16. 

from  God,  yet  this  is  the  main  thing  in  its  desires — Oh,  let  me  have  God  in  them ! " 
(3)  Great  vehemence  and  want  of  moderation  in  our  desires  betoken  that  the  gratifi- 
cation of  those  desires  proceeds  rather  from  wrath  than  love.  In  such  cases  God,  we 
may  conceive,  says,  "  If  you  must  have  them,  if  you  will  have  them,  take  them  ;  but 
take  the  consequences  along  with  them."  Hence  the  necessity  of  moderating  our  desires 
in  regard  to  all  worldly  things.  (3)  God  sometimes  grants  man's  desires,  but  with- 
holds the  blessing,  so  that  it  soon  becomes  abundantly  manifest  that  the  gift  has  come 
in  anger,  not  in  love.  The  desire  has  been  granted,  but  there  is  neither  comfort  with 
it  nor  satisfaction  in  it.  Thus  we  read,  "They  shall  eat,  but  they  shall  not  be  satis- 
fied." Or  a  worldly  benefit  is  bestowed,  yet  not  only  is  spiritual  enjoyment  withheld, 
but  spiritual  declension  follows;  as  the  psalmist (Ps.  cvi.)  says,  "He  gave  them  their 
request,  but  sent  leanness  into  their  soul."  (4)  When  benefits  are  bestowed,  but  grace 
for  the  right  use  Of  them  not  given,  we  have  good  reason  to  conclude  that  it  is  in  anger, 
not  in  love.  God  may  grant  us  prosperity  in  our  business  or  improvement  in  our  lot  of 
life ;  but  if  'we  have  not  sufficient  grace  to  make  a  sanctified  use  of  such  prosperity  or 
improvement,  the  benefit  is  not  a  sign  of  love,  but  of  anger.  It  has  been  well  said 
that  "  it  is  not  in  love  for  God  to  give  any  success,  except  he  give  a  measure  of  grace 
proportioned  to  the  success."  (5)  If  our  desires  are  attained  and  our  ends  accomplished 
by  unlawful  means,  we  have  a  priori  evidence  that  our  success  has  been  owing  to  anger, 
and  not  to  love.  Many  other  signs  might  be  added,  but  they  must  be  left  to  suggest 
themselves,  as  there  is  little  doubt  they  will  to  a  reflecting  mind. 

IV.  Eeckoninq  fob  sin  is  sure  to  comb  one  DAT.  Men's  iniquity,  like  that  of 
Ephraim,  is  bound  up  as  treasure  in  a  bag  ;  it  is  sealed  and  kept  safe,  in  order  to  be 
brought  forth  in  due  time.  Sin,  in  like  manner,  is  hid,  not,  however,  from  God,  but 
with  God,  till  the  day  of  reckoning  arrives.  Just  as  gifts  are  bestowed,  as  we  have 
seen,  sometimes  in  anger  and  not  in  love,  so  sin  is  often  hid  in  judgment,  not  in  mercy, 
that  is,  not  for  protection  but  desolation.  1.  God's  patience  towards,  is  no  acquittance 
of,  the  sinner.  His  forbearance  with  the  antediluvians  lasted  several  centuries,  till 
all  flesh  had  corrupted  its  way,  and  the  earth  was  filled  with  violence ;  but  his  Spirit 
would  no  longer  strive,  and  the  Flood  came,  sweeping  all  except  eight  souls  away.  He 
bore  with  Sodom  till  the  cry  of  their  wickedness  went  up  to  heaven,  and  Divine 
vengeance  descended  on  its  inhabitants.  He  bore  with  the  Amorites  till  the  cup  of  their 
iniquity  brimmed  over  and  brought  complete  destruction.  Every  sin,  however  secretly 
committed  or  subtlely  contrived,  however  long  overlooked  or  left  unpunished,  shall 
come  forth,  on  the  day  of  reckoning,  for  just  retribution.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  wiU  find 
you  out." 

"  Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small ; 
Though  with  patience  he  stands  waiting,  with  exactness  grinds  he  alL" 

2.  Beeurity  in  sin  is  no  safeguard  for  the  sinner.  One  of  the  most  destructive  devices 
of  the  evil  one  is  to  tempt  men  to  sin  by  suggesting  the  thought  that  what  they  do  is 
no  sin  at  all,  or  if  it  be  a  sin,  that  it  is  a  little  one,  or  too  trivial  to  be  punishable ;  or  that 
the  sin  they  commit  is  not  known  and  shall  never  be  known,  or  if  it  should,  that  it  is 
too  long  forgotten  or  unnoticed  to  be  ever  puiashed.  Equally  devilish  is  the  contrary 
device,  by  which,  after  he  has  succeeded  in  tempting  men  to  sin,  he  drives  them  to 
despair  by  the  thought  that  their  sin  is  too  great  to  be  forgiven.  3.  The  less  t?ie  appre- 
hension, the  nearer  .the  punishment.  As  in  the  natural  world,  so  in  the  moral — a  dead 
calm  is  sometimes  the  precursor  of  a  storm.  So  in  the  days  before  the  Flood,  men  were 
"  eating  and  drinking,  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,"  buying  and  selling,  building 
and  pulling;  down,  planting  and  sowing,  busying  themselves  in  the  various  engagements 
of  daily  life,  and  all  tlie  while  felt  perfectly  secure  till  the  very  day  that  Noah  entered 
into  the  ark,  and  knew  not  until  the  Flood  came  and  took  them  all  away,  Aga^ 
thought  the  bitterness  of  death  was  past,  just  before  Samuel  hewed  him  in  pieces  before 
the  Lord  in  Gilgal.  The  inhabitants  of  Laish  dwelt  securely  till  of  a  sudden  they 
became  a  prey  to  their  enemies.  The  Amalekites,  after  taking  Ziklag,  were  feasting 
and  making  merry  and  fearing  no  danger,  when  David  came  upon  them  and  smote 
them  from  the  twilight  even  unto  the  evening  of  the  next  day.  So  in  other  cases 
recorded  in  Old  Testament  history.  So  in  New  Testament  times,  as  the  apostle  warns 
OS  that  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  so  cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night.    For  when  they  shall 


OH.  xm.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  411 

say,  Peacu  and  safety ;  then  sadden  destruction  cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a 
woman  with  child ;  and  they  shall  not  escape." 

V.  Rbsemblancb  of  sinners'  sudden  and  bitter  sorrow  to  tbatail-pains. 
When  God  unlocks  his  treasury  of  wrath,  and  brings  forth  to  light  the  sins  now  shut 
up  and  sealed  and  safely  kept,  men's  security  and  God's  forbearance  shall  in  that  day 
issue  in  sudden  and  sore  sorrows.  These  sorrows  are  like  the  sorrows  of  a  parturient 
woman,  sharp  as  they  are  sudden.  Many  passages  of  Scripture  might  be  quoted  to 
prove  travail-pains  to  be  emblematical  of  acute  anguish  and  extreme  distress.  They 
are  at  the  same  time  unescapable. 

VL  Repentance  is  oloselt  connected  with  renewal  of  life.  Ab  the  travail- 
pains  of  the  mother  are  usually  associated  with  birth,  and  so  a  new  life  and  therefore 
joy ;  so  the  godly  sorrows  of  repentance  are  inseparably  conjoined  with  conversion  to 
God,  newness  of  life,  and  consequent  spiritual  joy.  The  unwisdom  of  Ephraim  is 
evidenced  by  his  staying  so  long  in  the  birth ;  in  other  words,  by  his  delaying  repentance. 
Ephraim  persists  in  his  sins,  obstinately  persists  in  them,  and  makes  no  effort  to  get 
out  of  them  by  repentance ;  he  endeavours  not,  by  aid  of  proffered  grace,  to  extricate 
himself  by  repentance  from  his  sin  and  misery  and  danger.  How  many  there  are,  like 
Ephraim,  who  are- content  to  lie  long  under  convictions,  but  never  think  of  agonizing  to 
attain  to  thorough  cunversion!  How  many  unwise  sons  there  arel  How  many  there 
are  with  strong  convictions  of  sin,  their  conscience  aroused,  their  understandings  more  or 
less  enlightened,  and  affections  much  moved,  and  yet  they  stay  there  !  They  are  brought 
to  the  birth,  but  they  stop  short — stay  where  they  ^re,  and  refuse  to  come  forth.  They 
are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  but  unhappily  they  delay  to  enter  into  it,  and 
that  delay  may  prove  fatal.  They  come  to  the  place  of  breaking  forth  of  children,  but 
they  stay  long,  alas  I  too  long,  in  that  perilous  position.  They  are  almost  persuaded  to 
become  Christians,  but  not  altogether ;  and  so  they  are  only  almost,  but  not  altogether 
saved.  How  sad  the  case  of  those  who  corne  within  a  mile  of  home,  yet  never  reach  it ! 
or  who  come  within  view  of  port,  yet  sink  to  rise  no  more 'before  they  reach  the  harbour ! 
How  lamentable  the  fate  of  those  Israelites  who  had  reached '  Kadesh-barnea,  within 
eleven  days'  journey  or  less  of  the  land  of  promise,  but  who  never  set  foot  in  that 
goodly  land,  their  carcases  having  fallen  in  the  wilderness  I 

Vers,  14 — 16. — The  humiliaiions  wrought  hy  the  sins  of  Israel.  The  prophet's 
representation  implies  that  they  were  dead — nationally,  politically,  and  spiritually 
dead.  They  were  like  dead  men ;  and  not  only  so,  they  were  like  men  dead  and  gone 
and  buried  out  of  sight — so  dreary  and  desperate  was  their  condition. 

I.  The  desperate  state  op  sinners.  They  are  spiritually  dead — dead,  through 
trespasses  and  sins.  Even  the  people  of  God  may  by  reason  of  their  sins  bring  upon 
themselves  such  calamities,  and  may  sink  so  low,  as  to  be  like  men  without  life  and 
lying  in  the  grave.  It  was  so  with  Israel  at  the  period  in  question.  They  had  come 
under  the  dominion  of  death,  and  had  become  subject  to  the  power  of  the  under  world. 
Their  condition  is  similarly  described  by  Ezekiel  in  his  thirty-seventh  chapter :  "  These 
bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel :  behold,  they  say.  Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our 
hope  is  lost :  we  are  cut  off  for  our  parts." 

II.  The  deliverance  promised.  The  deplorable  state  of  a  sinful  people  dead  and 
buried  under  calamities  is  no  proof  of  helplessness  when  God  undertakes  their  deliverance 
and  presents  no  impossibility  to  the  power  of  his  omnipotence.  1.  Israel  in  captivity 
were  politically  dead,  the  place  of  banishment  was  their  grave.  This  is  the  condition 
of  persons  in  exile,  for  in  a  civil  sense  they  are  spoken  of  as  dead.  Deliverance  from 
captivity  is  here  promised  to  that  people  primarily  and  partially  from  the  country  of 
Assyria,  but  fully  and  finally  from  the  lands  Of  their  long  dispersion  and  political  death. 
2.  But  Israel  in  all  their  remarkable  history  were  a  representative  people;  and  so 
their  restoration  from  a  state  so  hopeless  and  helpless  that  to  the  eye  of  sense  it 
seemed  death,  may  typify  the  renewal  of  life  in  souls  spiritually  dead  by  the  regene- 
rating power  of  God,  and  further  the  resurrection  of  bodies  long  dead  and  mouldered 
in  the  grave.  The  Septuagint  expresses  the  sense  of  the  original  with  perfect  plainness 
by  substituting  "  victory  "  for  "  plagues,"  and  "  sting  "  for  "  destruction."  Paul,  in  his 
quotation  of  the  passage,  employs  the  Septuagint ;  and  whether  he  employs  the  words 
allusively,  or  by  way  of  accommodation,  the  better  to  express  his  sense  of  the  mighty 


412  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiii.  1— 16. 

power  of  God,  or  as  an  exact  citation,  he  celebrates  the  greatest  of  all  deliverances, 
which  shall  be  consummated  in  that  day  when  the  destroyer  of  the  nations  shall  be 
himself  destroyed,  and  when  the  universal  conqueror  shall  himself  be  conquered,  his 
sting  being  wrested  from  him  and  his  power  to  hurt  annihilated.  3.  The  deliverance 
thus  effected  by  him  who  has  the  right  to  redeem,  as  having  become  our  Kinsman,  and 
who^  having  paid  the  ransom,  possesses  the  privilege  to  redeem,  both  by  price  and  by 
power,  is  extolled  not  only  as  a  victory,  but  a  triumph ;  while  language  of  exultation 
is  addressed  to  the  ghastly  tyrant  now  fallen  and  for  ever  prostrate.  4.  When  we  revert 
to  the  immediate  application  of  the  words,  we  find  the  substance  of  the  promise  to  Isiael 
to  be  that,  notwithstanding  Ephraim's  unwisdom  in  rebelling  auainst  and  delaying  to 
return  to  God,  and  notwithstanding  his  long  impenitence  and  fnlse  security,  God's 
faithfulness  shall  stand  fast,  and  the  truth  pledged  to  his  people  shall  not  be  dis- 
annulled. What  comfort  for  all  humble  penitents !  However  hopeless  and  helpless 
our  condition,  and  however  desperate  our  state,  we  have  no  reason  to  despair.  However 
gracious  the  promises  of  God,  and  however  mighty  the  power  required  for  their  accom- 
plishment, we  may  rest  assured  that  not  one  jot  or  tittle  shall  fail  through  fickleness 
or  fall  to  the  ground  through  lack  of  power,  for  he  has  solemnly  said,  "  Repentance 
is  hid  from  mine  eyes."  He  will  not  repent  of  mercy  to  his  friends,  nor  relent  in  his 
wrath  to  their  enemies. 

III.  The  dignity  and  downfall  op  Ephbaim.  Promise  and  threatening  frequently 
present  themselves  side  by  side  in  the  Word  of  revelation,  and  sometimes  alternate.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  one  is  a  guarantee  fur  the  fulfilment  of  the  other ;  the  accomplishment 
of  the  one  warrants  us  to  expect  the  accomplishment  of  the  other.  1.  Ephraim's  fruit- 
fulness  had  been  the  subject  of  promise,  apd  the  very  name  involved  a  prophecy.  That 
promise  had  been  realized  in  Ephraim's  great  superiority  over  the  other  tribes  in 
numbers,  in  power,  and  in  wealth.  The  fruitfulness  of  the  earth  and  the  fruitfulness 
of  the  womb  bad  been  his;  he  had  been  blessed  with  blessings  of  heaven  above, 
blessings  of  the  deep  that  lieth  under,  blessings  of  the  breasts  and  of  the  womb.  Like 
liis  father  Joseph,  he  had  been  a  fruitful  bough,  even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well,  whose 
branches  run  over  the  wall.  2.  But  as  the  promise  had  been  so  exactly  fulfilled,  so 
must  the  threatening.  And  notwithstanding  the  prosperity  of  this  highly  favoured 
people,  the  day  of  adversity  was  at  hand.  The  destructive  elements  that  were  com- 
missioned to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  Bphraim  are  figuratively  described ;  but  the 
figures  employed  set  forth  very  graphically  the  violence  of  the  enemy  who  was 
approaching,  the  Power  by  whom  he  was  sent,  the  quarter  from  which  he  came,  the 
ruin  he  would  accomplish,  and  the  robbery  he  would  effect.  The  figures  are  so  obvious 
and  applicable  that  they  only  need  to  be  indionted.  The  east  wind  is  the  fierce  Assyrian 
conqueror.  He  comes  not  by  chance,  but  is  commissioned  of  the  Lord ;  he  comes  from 
an  eastern  land,  but  more  particularly  with  the  vehemence  and  violence  of  a  wind  from 
the  wilderness,  such  as  that  great  wind  from  the  wilderness  that  demolished  the  dwelling 
where  Job's  children  were  feasting;  he  would  dry  up  and  destroy  all  that  lay  in  his 
way.  The  spring  would  become  dry,  and  thus  the  streams  soon  cease  to  fiow ;  the 
fountain  would  be  dried  up,  and  so  the  waters  must  fail.  Bi.t  to  ruin  he  would  add 
robbery,  plundering  the  treasures  of  precious  metals,  costly  garments,  precious  fruits — : 
everything  that  the  covetous,  or  avaricious,  or  voluptuous,  or  lascivious  could  desire. 

IV.  The  desolation  op  the  capital.  Not  only  would  the  country  be  ravaged  and 
laid  waste,  but  the  capital  would  be  desolated.  The  citizens  would  be  ruthlessly  slain ; 
the  present  population  would  be  swept  away,  and  the  hope  of  posterity  cut  off.  1. 
Consider  the  cause  of  all  these  calamities.  Why  did  all  this  desolation  come  upon 
Ephraim  and  their  beautiful  city  of  Samaria  ?  The  answer  is  plain  as  it  is  positive,  and 
is  given  by  the  prophet  in  the  ch  ising  verse :  "  Because  she  hath  rebelled  against  her  God." 
The  connection  may  be  traced  as  follows :  "  Though  Ephraim  be  high  and  mightily 
exalted  above  his  brethren,  yet,  since  he  has  not  exalted  my  Name  who  exalted  him,  nor 
made  my  benefits  and  my  mercies  motives  to  duty  and  obedience,  but  has  fought  against 
me  with  my  own  favours,  and  abused  my  blessings  to  my  dishonour,  therefore  I  will 
bring  the  Assyrian  upon  him,  who,  like  an  east  wind,  shall  blast  him,  utterly  dash  all 
his  hopes,  spoil  his  treasures,  and  carry  him  into  captivity."  2.  The /ate  of  Samaria, 
as  recorded  here  and  in  Micah  i.  6,  has  been  fully  realized.  Near  the  middle  oi 
Palestine,  and  deriving  its  name  from  Shomer,  the  owner  of  the  site  on  which  the  city 


OH.  xiiL  1— J.6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  413 

was  built,  and  not  from  Onui,  the  king  who  built  it,  b.o.  92S,  it  continued  to  b«  tha 
capital  of  the  ten  tribes  for  two  centuries  till  their  carrying  away  by  Shalmaneser, 
3.0.  720,  during  all  which  period  it  was  the  seat  of  idolatry.  The  site  of  this  celebrated 
capital  was  one  of  rare  attractiveness ;  it  combined  strength,  beauty,  and  fertility.  It 
is  "delightful,"  says  Thomson,  "  by  universal  consent.  It  is  a  very  large,  isolated  hill, 
rising  by  successive  terraces  at  least  six  hundred  feet  above  the  valleys  that  surround 
it.  In  shape  it  is  oval,  and  the  smaller  and  lower  end  unites  it  to  the  neighbouring 
mountain  on  the  east."  Rebuilt  by  Herod,  it  received  from  him  its  later  name  of 
Sebastia,  now  Sebusteyeh,  in  honour  of  Augustus.  "  During  the  twenty-five  centuries 
which  have  passed  since  the  Captivity,  its  fortunes  have  been  very  various;  often 
destroyed,  again  rebuilt,  growing  smaller  by  degrees,  though  not  beautifully  less,  until 
it  finally  subsided  into  the  insignificant  village  which  now  clings  to  the  name  and  the 
site."  Its  site  and  sin  are  similarly  described  by  Stanley :  "  On  that  beautiful  eminence, 
looking  far  over  the  plain  of  Sharon  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea  to  the  west,  and  over 
its  own  fertile  vale  to  the  east,  the  kings  of  Israel  reigned  in  a  luxury  which,  for  the 
very  reason  of  its  being  like  that  of  more  Eastern  sovereigns,  was  sure  not  to  bo  perma- 
nent in  a  race  destined  for  higher  purposes."  3.  The  ruinous  uatuie  of  sin.  Of  the 
ancient  capital  of  Ephraim,  long  "  the  nursery  of  idolatry  and  rebellion  against  God," 
not  even  a  wreck  remains,  nor  a  ruin  to  remind  one  of  its  ancient  glory.  See  what  ruin 
sin  has  wrought  1  "  All  the  evil  in  the  world  may  be  seen  in  sin.  .  .  .  Sin  dries  up  all 
our  springs,  stops  our  fountains,  spoils  our  treasures,  and  robs  us  of  all  our  pleasant 
things — our  pleasant  land,  our  pletisant  food,  our  pleasant  raiment,  our  pleasant  houses, 
pleasant  children  . . .  and  therefore,  when  anything  gues  amiss  with  us,  we  should  search 
for  the  sin  that  has  done  us  mischief;  find  out  the  Achan  that  has  caused  the  trouble  ; 
find  out  the  Jonah  that  has  raised  the  storm;  do  justice  on  the  one,  and  drown  the 
other,  and  we  shall  have  peace." 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Ephraim,  living  and  dead.  This  passage  portrays  anew  the  dreadful 
prevalence  of  apostasy  and  idolatry  throughout  the  nation.  "  The  same  strings,  though 
generally  unpleasing  ones,  are  harped  upon  in  this  chapter  that  were  in  those  before  " 
(Matthew  Henry).  Much  of  the  imagery  continues  to  be  anthropopathic ;  the  prophet 
exhibits  an  apparent  tumult  of  contending  passions  in  the  Divine  mind  towards  unfilial 
and  rebellious  Ephraim. 

I.  Epheaim  was  once  alite.  He  had  been  so,  both  spiritually  and  temporally. 
The  time  was  when  the  tribe  of  Ephraim,  and  the  other  nine  tribes  over  which  it  cast 
its  shadow,  contained  many  God-fearing  families.  Joshua,  the  illustrious  hero  who  led 
the  Hebrews  into  Palestine,  was  of  this  tribe ;  and  to  him,  doubtless,  it  owed  not  a 
little  of  its  subsequent  eminence.  The  "life"  which  once  dwelt  in  Ephraim  was 
reflected  in :  1.  God's  mercies  towards  him.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  The  Almighty  set  his  love 
upon  Israel ;  and  "  in  his  favour  is  life  "  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  God  had  manifested  himself  to 
his  people  in  the  Exodus  from  Egypt.  He  "did  know  Ephraim  in  ihe  wilderness;" 
he  visited  him  there  in  pity  and  love — revealing  his  will  at  Sinai,  feeding  the  neople 
with  manna,  bringing  them  water  out  of  the  rock,  leading  them  by  the  cloudy  pillar, 
and  delivering  them  from  their  enemies.  He  "led  Joseph  like  a  flock,"  and  at  last 
"  made  him  to  lie  down  in  the  green  pastures  "  of  Canaan — a  land  which  was  "  the 
glory  of  all  lands."  The  Lord  had  set  up  his  tabernacle  in  Ephraim ;  for  Shiloh  wag 
a  city  of  that  canton,  and  the  sacred  tent  remained  at  Shiloh  for  upwards  of  three 
centuries.  2.  Sis  oum  influence.  (Ver.  1.)  "  When  Ephraim  spake,  there  was 
trembling ;  he  was  exalted  in  Israel."  In  the  early  days  of  the  nation  Ephraim  had 
been  the  most  powerful  of  the  twelve  tribes.  Long  before  the  lamentable  disruption  of 
the  Hebrew  state,  it  had  exercised  a  sort  of  control  over  the  others.  It  had  a  high 
reputation,  and  commanded  unfeigned  respect.  At  length  Ephraim  became  itself  a 
kingdom,  and  as  such  seemed  for  a  time  strong  and  prosperous,  and  was  regarded  by 
Judah  as  a  formidable  rival. 

II.  Epheaim  is  now  dead  8PIBITDALLT.  Spiritual  life  consists  in  union  with 
Jehovah,  and  is  maintained  by  communion  with  him.    But  sin  separates  from  God, 


iU  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ch.  xm.  1— 16. 

and  gradually  kills  I  he  life  of  the  souL  Now,  Ephraimin  his  prosperity  had  apostatized 
from  God.  The  Divine  complaint  is,  "  They  have  forgotten  me  "  (ver.  6).  Although 
the  people  owed  everything  to  God,  they  allowed  the  very  abundance  of  his  ^ifts  to 
become  the  means  of  withdrawing  their  hearts  from  him.  In  the  time  of  Hugea  the 
nation  was  really  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Again,  in  this  passage,  the  prophet 
laments  the  manifestations  of  this  state  of  death.  1.  The  Baal-worship.  (Ver.  1.) 
"  When  he  offended  in  Baal,  he  died."  The  introduction  of  the  Phoenician  idolatiy 
involved  Israel  in  spiritual  ruin.  The  rites  of  that  idolatry  were  in  the  highest  degree 
obscene  and  cruel ;  and  by  the  Law  of  Moses  every  breach  of  the  first  commandment 
was  to  entail  terrible  penalties.  Yet,  notwithstanding  all,  Israel  went  aside  to  serve 
Baal  and  Ashtaroth,  and  thereby  became  morally  degraded  and  spiritually  destroyed. 

2.  The  image-worship.  (Ver.  2.)  Although  Jeroboam's  sin  (1  Kings  xii.  28)  was 
manifestly  distinct  from  that  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xvi.  31 — 33),  and  iu  itself  by  no  means 
so  heinous,  it  had  yet  been  the  beginning  of  the  evil  disease  which,  under  Ahab  and 
Jezebel,  culmiuated  in  the  spiritual  death  of  the  nation.  Image-worship  is  idolatry ; 
and  the  "  kissing  "  of  the  two  golden  calves  had  led  to  the  multiplication  of  idolatrous 
images  all  over  the  land.  The  people  in  tlieir  blindness  were  addicted  in  their  private 
life  to  all  manner  of  "will-worship."  How  melancholy  that  Ephraim  should  forsake 
Jehovah  to  bow  down  to  manufactured  gods — "all  of  them  the  work  of  artificers"! 

3.  The  self-worshi/p.  (Ver.  6.)  Ephraim  abused  his  prosperity  to  such  an  extent  that 
his  heart  became  at  once  steeped  in  materialism  and  elated  with  pride.  He  minded 
earthly  things.  His  "  pasture  "  became  everything  to  him  ;  he  was  greedy,  and  could, 
never  have  enough.  "Jeshurun' waxed  fat,  and  kicked  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  Selfish- 
ness and  insolence  and  tyranny  were  born  of  Ephraim's  abundance ;  he  became  puffed 
up  with  self-sufficiencyj  forgot  Jehovah  his  God,  and  "died." 

III.  Ephraim  will  soon  be  dead  outwabdlt.  As  the  dissolution  of  the  body 
follows  death,  so  the  temporal  ruin  of  a  state  is  the  natural  result  of  its  moral  decay. 
In  cherishing  his  pride  and  pursuing  his  idolatries,  Israel  was  busily  digging  his  own 
grave  As  his  wealth  and  power  increased,  he  steadily  deteriorated  in  moral  fibre,  and 
thus  gradually  lost  his  prestige  and  reputation.  So :  1.  His  destruction  shall  he  swift. 
(Ver,  3.)  This  part  of  the  prophecy  probably  belongs  to  the  time  of  Hoshea,  the  last 
oi  the  kings  of  Israel,  who  was  "  cut  off  as  the  foam  upon  the  water,"  and  in  whose 
day  the  unhappy  Ephraimitts  were  carried  away  into  Assyria.  The  captivity,  there- 
fore, was  now  at  hand.  The  suddenness  of  the  impending  transplantation  is  indicated 
bj  four  similitudes — "  the  morning  cloud,''  "  the  early  dew,"  "  the  chaff,"  and  "  the 
smoke."  Such  is  the  result  of  the  prospeiitj'  of  nations  which  continue  to  be  incurably 
wicked ;  the  time  comes  at  last  when  the  whole  fabric  of  the  commonwealth  suddenly 
faljE  tt)  pieces.  2.  It  shall  he  dreadful.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  Here  also  there  are  four  com- 
parisons—" a  lion,"  "  a  leopard,"  "  a  bear,"  and  "  the  wild  beast."  These  shall  come 
down  upon  the  flock  in  their  fat  "  pasture,"  and  devour  them.  It  is  remarkable  that 
the  same  four  beasts  reappear  iu  Daniel's  vision  of  the  lour  world-empires  (Dan.  vii.), 
and  that  they  are  combined  into  one  bestial  form  in  "  the  wild  beast "  of  the  Apocalypse 
(Kev.  xili.  1 — 3).  Alas !  Jehovah,  who  has  been  the  Shepherd  of  Israel,  is  now  com- 
pelled to  become  Israel's  Devourer !  He  will  send  the  Assyrian — strong  as  a  lion,  fierce 
as  a  leopard,  and  savage  as  a  bear — to  tear  the  very  heart  of  the  nation.  Thus  would 
Israel  "  destroy  himself "  (ver.  9),  being  carried  away  into  sudden  exile  and  total 
oblivion 

Lessons.  1.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  "  (ver.  1).  2.  "  The  Lord  is  a  jealous 
God  ; "  "  His  glory  he  will  not  give  to  another,  neither  his  praise  to  graven  images  " 
(vers.  2j  3).  3.  God  destroys  our  idols  that  we  may  learn  to  "  kiss  the  Son  ; "  for  he 
is  "  the  true  God  and  eternal  life,"  and  "  there  is  no  Saviour  beside  him"  (vers.  3,  4). 

4.  The  dangers  of  material  pros|ierity  to  all  who  neglect  those  means  of  grace  which 
make  prosperity  safe  (ver.  6).  5.  "  I'ride  goeth  before  destruction"  (ver.  6).  6.  The 
great  moral  evils  of  our  ago  (intemperance,  impurity,  profanity,  infidelity,  social  dis- 
orders, etc.)  constitute  a  call  to  God's  people  to  more  faith  and  t>rayer  and  Christian 
activity. — C.  J. 

Vers.  9 — 16. — Suin,  retribution,  and  resurrection.  Underlying  these  verses,  and 
interpenetrating  the  judgment  of  Jehovah's  anger  with  which  they  are  charged,  there 


CH.  xni.  1— 16.]  THE  bOOK  OF  HOSEA.  415 

is  a  deep  undertone  of  tenderness.  The  prophet  speaks,  ia  the  Lord's  Name, "  with  the 
labouring  voice,  interrupted  by  sobs,  of  a  judge  whose  duty  it  is  to  pronounce  the 
fioal  heavy  sentence  after  all  possible  pleadings  and  considerations  have  been  gone 
through  "  (Bwald). 

I.  Israel's  buih.  This  is  referred  to,  both  as  regards  its  origin  and  its  most  recent 
manifestations.  1.  Thtruinheganvjiththerevolt  from  the  house  of  David.  Ephraim's 
proud  determiiption  to  become  politically  independent  of  Judah  was  the  root-sin  from 
which  sprang  the  corruption  of  his  religion  and  the  immorality  of  his  whole  life.  In 
fullowing  Jeroboam,  Samaria  "rebelled  against  her  God"  (ver.  16),  and  entered  upon  a 
career  which  resulted  in  moral  suicide.  She  rejected  her  only  true  "  Help  "  when  she 
said,  "  Give  me  a  king  and  princes"  (ver.  10).  The  kings  of  the  ten  tribes  could  not 
save  the  people ;  for  Jehovah,  the  King  of  Israel,  did  not  acknowledge  their  royalty. 
Neither  Jeroboam  I.,  nor  any  of  the  princes  of  the  house  of  Umri,  or  of  the  dynasty  of 
Jehu — not  to  mention  the  military  usurpers  who  afterwards  snatched  the  crown  from 
one  another — had  fulfilled  the  true  function  of  a  king  as  being  a  shepherd  of  the  people. 
Despite  the  seemingly  splendid  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.,  the  history  of  the  northern 
kingdom  was  all  along  one  of  misfortune,  degradation,  and  self-destruction.  Israel 
"  destroyed  himself"  with  the  weapons  of  pride  and  idolatry,  sensuality  and  anarchy. 
2.  Tlie  ruin  was  perpetuated  through  his  refusal  to  repent.  This  seems  to  be  the  idea 
presented  in  ver.  13.  Hosea  had  ijophesied  for  upwards  of  half  a  century  during  the 
last  long  agony  of  his  country;  and  during  that  period  God  had  sent  many  calamities 
upon  Israel,  which  were  graciously  fitted,  like  labour-pains,  to  induce  the  new  birth. 
The  latest  of  these  travail-pangs  are  now  imminent ;  but  still  Ejihraim  delayed  thorough 
repentance,  cleaved  obstinately  to  his  sins,  and  refused  to  be  "  born  again."  The  Lord 
desired  that  Ephraim's  "sorrows"  should  suddenly  cease,  through  the  birth  of  a  new 
Israel ;  but  the  people  were  "joined  to  idols,"  and  thus — meantime  at  least — there  could 
be  no  recovery  from  the  ruin  into  which  they  had  fallen. 

II.  Israel's  betbibution.  The  sin  of  the  nation  accumulated  gradually.  And  the 
justice  of  God  "retained  "  it,  and  pronounced  punishment  on  it,  and  kept  the  punish- 
ment in  store  (ver.  12).  Notwithstanding  the  distresses  of  the  last  two  gen  rations, 
which  Husea  had  witnessed,  and  from  which  he  had  himself  suffered — ^including  now, 
it  may  be,  the  seizure  and  imprisonment  of  Hoshea,  the  last  unhappy  king  of  Israel 
(ver.  10;  2  Kings  xvii.  4) — there  was  still  a  load  of  stern  wrath  waiting  to  discharge 
itself  upon  the  guilty  commonwealth.  1.  Ephraim  has  been  punished  through  his  kings. 
(Vers.  10,  11.)  The  whole  nineteen  were  apostates  from  Jehovah,  and  under  them  the 
cup  of  the  nation's  iniquity  was  slowly  filled.  The  very  "  giving  "  of  each  monarch  in 
the  providence  of  God  was  a  mark  of  his  anger ;  indeed,  many  of  them  gained  the  throne 
as  the  result  of  n)ilitary  revolt  and  assassination  of  the  preceding  sovereign,  whom  God 
thus  "  took  away  in  his  wrath."  2.  The  kingdom  itself  is  now  to  be  destroyed.  (Vers.  15, 
16.)  The  once  "  fruitful "  Ephraim  is  about  to  suffer  an  irretrievable  blight.  The 
Assyrian  power,  like  the  hot  blast  of  the  simoom,  shall  blow  upon  his  land,  and  for  ever 
dry  up  the  springs  of  its  fertility.  Samaria,  its  capital  city,  after  a  protracted  death- 
struggle  of  three  years,  shall  be  subdued  and  devastated  by  Saigon,  the  successor  of 
Shalmaneser.  The  treasures  of  the  city  shall  be  plundered,  and  its  inhabitants  cruelly 
murdered  or  dispersed  among  the  heathen.  Scarcely  any  trace  will  be  left  of  the  once 
proud  and  luxurious  kingdom  of  Ephraim.  The  sentence  of  political  extinction  pro- 
nounced against  that  state  is  irreversible. 

III.  Isbael's  besubbeotion.  The  proper  names  "  Hosea "  and  "  Hoshea "  mean 
"  help  "  or  "  salvation."  In  King  Hoshea,  however,  there  was  "  no  help  "  during  the 
final  extremity  of  the  national  peril ;  but  the  venerable  Hosea  still  lived,  and  announced 
that  the  Lord,  whose  word  he  had  so  long  spoken  to  a  disobedient  nation,  was  still  ready 
to  become  Israel's  "  Help  "  (ver.  9),  notwithstanding  all  the  wretched  past.  Although 
constrained  passionately  to  denounce  the  sin  of  his  i)eople  and  to  forewarn  of  the  coming 
desolations,  the  prophet  intimates  that  these  dire  punishments  are  also  paternal  chastise- 
ments, sent  by  Jehovah  to  arouse  the  people,  aud  induce  them  to  return  to  his  service. 
The  Divine  heart  is  still  full  of  tender  compassion  for  Israel.  The  Lord  cannot  allow 
the  nation  utterly  to  perish.  On  the  other  Side  of  the  dreadful  judgments  and  the  long 
dispersion,  there  will  be  a  recovery  so  glorious  as  to  be  called  •  resurrection.  "  What 
Bhall  the  receiving  of  them  be,  but  life  from  the  dead?  "  (Bom.  xi.  16).    This  ultimate 


416  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xiii.  1—16. 

wstoration  is  announced  in  the  splendid  apostrophe  of  ver.  14— a  passage  which  the 
Apostle  Paul,  following  the  Septuagint,  quotes  towards  the  close  of  his  sublime  argu- 
ment for  the  certainty  of  the  resurrection  of  the  saints  (l  Cor.  xv.  55).  In  its  original 
sense,  however,  this  song  of  triumph  refers  to  the  deliverance  of  the  posterity  of  Ephraim 
from  their  national  doom.  The  ten  tribes  shall  be  carried  captive,  and  shall  become 
politically  dead  and  buried;  but  the  time  is  coming  when  God  will  raise  them  up 
spiritually,  and  restore  them  to  his  favour.  This  brilliant  promise  received  no  appre- 
ciable fulfilment  in  the  return  of  a  few  exiles  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  along  with  the 
first  colony  of  Jews  who  went  up  from  Babylon  at  the  close  of  the  seventy  years'  cap- 
tivity. The  oracle  clearly  refers  to  Messianic  times.  It  is  in  line  with  the  general  run 
of  those  Scripture  prophecies  which  anticipate  the  national  conversion  of  Israel,  an<i 
announce  the  Lord's  unchangeable  purpose  to  effect  it  (cf.  ver.  14,  last  clause,  with 
Eom.  xL  29).  And,  as  Israel  was  a  typical  nation,  this  paean  of  victory  might  well  be 
used,  as  Paul  uses  it,  to  celebrate  the  triumph  over  death  and  Hades  which  the  Messiah 
has  already  achieved  in  his  own  person,  and  which  he  will  by-and-by  repeat  in  the 
general  resurrection  of  his  people. 

Lessons.  1.  God  destroys  no  man ;  every  smner  is  self-murdered  (ver.  9).  2.  Ade- 
quate temporal  punishment  for  our  sins  often  consists  in  the  simple  granting  of  our 
desires  (vers.  10, 11 ;  Ps.  ovi.  15).  3.  When  God  leaves  a  man,  his  prosperity  withers 
(ver.  15).  4.  The  soul  that  forsakes  God  for  an  earthly  portion  shall  be  overwhelmed 
with  regrets  (vers.  13,  16).  5.  Even  while  the  Lord  must  denounce  severe  judgments, 
his  love  broods  over  the  sinner,  and  remains  invincible. — C.  J. 

Ver.  14. — Jehovah  the  Destroyer  qf  death.  This  sublime  promise  of  mercy  is  imbedded 
among  tbreatenings  of  judgment.  It  reminds  us,  both  as  it  occurs  here  and  in  the 
connection  in  whicli  the  Apostle  Paul  quotes  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  55),  that  although  in  our 
world  "  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,"  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Almighty  to  rescue 
from  the  grasp  of  the  grave,  and  even  to  abolish  death  itself.  We  may  profitably 
consider  some  of  the  spheres  within  which  the  Lord  has  chosen  to  exercise  this 
prerogative.     The  promise  of  our  text  applies  to — 

I.  Thb  bebtoration  of  Israel.  Ever  since  the  two  captivities  Israel  has  been,  as  it 
were,  a  dead  nation.  The  Jews  have  been  dispersed  over  the  world,  and  have  not  yet 
been  able  either  to  recover  their  national  independence  or  to  maintain  their  national 
worship.  But  Hosea  here  assures  his  countrymen  of  future  restoration  and  blessing, 
notwithstanding  the  final  ruin  of  the  kingdom  of  Ephraim.  "  The  only  meaniug  that 
the  promise  had  for  the  Israelites  of  the  prophet's  day  was  that  the  Lord  possessed  the 
power  even  to  redeem  from  death,  and  raise  Israel  from  destruction  into  newness  of  life; 
just  as  Ezekiel  (xxxvii.)  depicts  the  restoration  of  Israel  as  the  giving  of  life  to  the 
dry  bones  that  lny  scattered  about  the  field  "  (Keil).  But  the  future  thus  expressly 
predicted  for  Ephraim  is  more  blissful  than  even  Hosea,  to  whom  this  oracle  was  given, 
could  readily,  or  perhaps  possibly,  conceive.  Israel's  restoration  shall  be  spiritual.  The 
captive  Hebrews,  so  far  and  so  long  estranged  from  God,  shall  return  to  his  favour. 
The  very  people  who  at  last  crowned  their  sinful  career  by  "  crucifying  the  Lord  of 
glory  " — a  sin  still  more  heinous  than  all  the  wickedness  for  which  Hosea  rebukes  them 
— shall  be  made  the  subjects  of  a  glorious  future.  "They  shall  look  u[)on  him  whom 
they  have  pierced  "  (Zech.  xii.  10),  and  at  last  accept  him  as  the  Messiah.  They  shall 
become  zealous  and  successful  missionaries  of  the  cross,  and  shall  contribute  largely  to 
the  bringing  in  of  the  world's  jubilee  (Rom.  xi.  16). 

IL  The  bedemption-work  op  Christ.  Students  of  the  New  Testament  find  a 
larger  and  deeper  meaning  in  this  glowing  promise  than  that  which  would  limit  it  to 
the  resuscitation  of  Israel.  To  our  consciousness  the  Lord,  who  is  "the  Plague  of 
death,"  is  Jehovah-Jesus.  He  became  incarnate"  that  through  death  he  might  destroy 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  and  deliver  them  who  through  fear  of  death  were  all 
their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage"  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15).  As  the  great  Teacher,  he  pro- 
claimed himself  to  be  "  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  "  (John  xi.  25) ;  and  he  sealed 
this  testimony  by  rebuking  disease  of  every  kind,  and  even  raising  the  dead.  Most  of 
all,  he  was  himself  "  obedient  unto  death  ; "  and  by  his  own  decease  upon  the  cross  he 
has  "ransomed  his  people  from  the  power  of  the  grave."  Divine  justice  had  put  a  <Iart 
i[jto  death's  hand  to  slay  us  tiierewith  lor  our  sins;  but  Jesus,  in  dying  for  us,  satisfied 


CH.  XIII.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  417 

that  ]ustice,  made  adequate  atonement  for  guilt,  and  received  authority  to  take  the  dart 
away.  By  coming  himself  under  the  power  of  the  grave,  the  Lord  Jesus  has  "  abolished 
death,  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light '  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  Of  this  vietory  his 
own  resurrection  upon  the  third  day  is  an  iafallible  assurance.  In  emerging  from  the 
grave  as  the  risen  Saviour,  Jesus  revealed  himself  as  "  the  Plague  of  death,"  and  as  the 
Source  of  spiritual  life  and  Author  of  eternal  salvation  to  his  people.  "  Now  is  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  Pirstfruits  of  them  that  slept"  (1  Cor.  xv.  20). 

III.  The  resubbeotion  of  Christ's  people.  Jehovah-Jesus  is  the  Saviour  of  the 
soul,  and  of  the  body  also.  1.  He  redeems  the  gout  from  death.  Is  not  the  world  of 
mankind  like  a  vast  graveyard,  wliere  men  are  lying  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins"? 
Sinful  man  is  naturally  destitute  of  the  Spirit  of  life,  and  insensible  to  the  beauties  of 
holiness.  He  is  unable  to  raise  himself  from  the  unclean  tomb  of  his  own  evil  lusts  and 
passions.  But,  so  soon  as  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  speaks  the  word,  "  I  will  ransom 
theiii,"  the  same  almighty  energy  which  gave  life  to  Jesus  himself,  when  dead,  breathes 
new  spiritual  vitality  into  those  for  whom  he  died  (John  v.  21 — 27).  "  Because  he 
lives,  they  shall  live  also  "  (John  xiv.  19).  2.  He  shall  redeem  the  hodyfiom  death. 
The  final  ruin  of  the  soul  is  called  in  Scripture  "  the  second  death"  (Kev.  xxi.  8); 
and,  if  the  Lord  Jesus  can  deliver  from  that,  it  is  no  wonder  that  he  is  also  the  Saviour 
of  the  body.  The  order  of  redemption  is  that  he  redeems  from  the  "second  death " 
first ;  and  thus  the  abolition  of  temporal  death  at  the  end  of  the  world  shall  really  be 
the  destruction  of  "  the  last  enemy  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  26).  All  men  naturally  regard  "  the 
king  of  terrurs  "  as  the  most  formidable  and  cruel  oC  foes.  The  grave  seems  to  the  eye 
of  sense  only  a  despoiler  (Prov.  xxvii.  20).  But  it  is  the  glory  of  Christianity  that  the 
lledeemer  has  robbed  death  of  its  st  ng,  lighted  up  the  under-world  with  his  love,  and 
given  us  the  sure  and  ceitaiu  hope  of  a  blessed  reiurrection.  Faith  sees  hanging  at  the 
girdle  of  the  Son  of  man  "  tlie  keys  of  death  and  of  Hades  "  (flev.  L  18).  The  grave 
is  to  the  saints  only  an  underground  pathway  to  heaven,  and  "  death  is  swallowed  up 
in  victory  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  54 — 57). 

** Death,  thou  waat  once  an  uncouth,  hideous  thing: 
But  since  our  Saviour's  death 
Has  put  some  blood  into  thy  face. 
Thou  hast  growu  sure  a  thing  to  be  desired 
And  full  of  grace." 

(George  Herbert^ 

It  is  also  a  great  joy  to  know  that  the  Lord's  promise  to  redeem  his  people  from  death  ia 
certain  to  be  fulfilled.  He  has  passed  his  word  for  it ;  and,  as  he  here  assures  us, 
"  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  his  eyes."  Multitudes  of  believers  die  in  perfect  peace, 
and  some  even  in  triumph,  for  they  are  conscious  that  he  is  "  with  them." 

Lessons.  1.  The  harmony  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  in  teaching  that  "unto 
God  the  Lord  belong  the  issues  from  death."  2.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  who  by  his 
Spirit  exercises  this  prerogative,  both  as  regards  nations  and  individuals.  3.  The 
alienation  of  the  soul  Irom  God  is  a  state  of  death — the  most  awful  condition  possible  to 
man;  and  from  that  state  he  can  only  escape  by  being  "born  again."  4.  The  dissolu- 
tion of  the  body  is  not  death  to  the  believer,  but  simply  a  falling  asleep  in  Jesus. 
5.  The  doctrine  that  Christ  is  "  the  Rissurrection  and  the  Life  "  brings  solid  comfort  in 
the  hour  of  bereavement. — 0.  J. 

Ver.  9. — Self-destruction.  Hosea  more  than  once  sought  to  bring  this  solemn  truth  home 
to  the  conscience  of  the  people  (eh.  xiv.  1,  etc.).  They  saw  that  national  disasters  were 
impending,  but  attributed  these  to  any  other  cause  than  their  own  sin ;  e.g.  to  the  divided 
counsels  of  their  leading  statesmen,  to  neglect  of  the  army,  to  the  ambition  of  their  rulers, 
to  temporary  reverse  of  fortune.  The  prophet  says,  in  etiect, "  These  would  not  be  against 
you,  if  God  were  not ;  and  he  is  no  longer  your  Deliverer,  because  you  have  turned 
against  him.  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself  1  "  This  truth  may  be  seen  in  the 
fall  of  other  kingdoms — the  Assyrian,  Roman,  etc.  These  were  destroyed,  not  by  an 
isolated  deleat,  but  by  the  moral  deterioration  preceding  it  which  had  destroyed  all 
recuperative  power.  If  we  should  live  to  see  England's  decay— our  land  untUled,  our 
docks  empty,  our  mUli  and  factories  silent,  our  polonies  tprn  away,  our  people  crushed 
ROSEA*  ^  S 


418  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiii.  1—16. 

by  a  debt  too  heavy  for  tbem  to  bear — it  will  be  due,  not  to  this  mistake  of  policy  or  to 
that  unfortunate  war,  but  to  the  fact  that  as  a  people  we  had  forsalsen  righteousness 
and  mercy.  This  deterioration  will  precede  that  desolation.  It  is  true  of  individuals 
as  of  nations.  If  a  man  sinks  into  an  abyss  of  despair  or  of  vicious  indulgence,  it  will 
be,  not  through  the  force  of  his  circumstances,  but  through  the  worthlessness  of  his 
character.  To  such  a  one  Q-od  says,  "  Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself;  but  in  me  is  thine 
help."  In  treating  of  self-destruction  we  will  speak  of  (1)  its  causes;  (2)  its  delusions ; 
and  (3)  its  remedy. 

I.  Its  causes.  The  importance  of  the  subject  is  seen  from  the  frequency  with  which 
its  lamentable  issues  occur.  "  Wide  is  the  gate,  and  broad  is  the  road,  that  leadeth  to 
destruction,  ani  many  there  be  that  go  in  thereat."  1.  Neglect  of  the  means  of  grace. 
The  Word  which  reveals  God,  the  Son  who  declares  him,  etc.  "  This  is  life  eternal, 
that  they  may  know  thee,"  etc.  A  man  who  denies  himself  food  till  he  perishes  oi 
starvation,  or  refuses  medicine  till  the  disease  proves  fatal,  practically  "  destroys 
himself."  2.  Inward  iniquity.  The  passions,  the  worldly  sjarit,  the  self-will,  etc., 
which  unfit  for  fellowship  with  God  and  prevent  all  desire  for  it,  are  the  causes  of 
spiritual  ruin.  These,  and  not  death,  are  the  true  causes  of  destruction.  When  a  dead 
tree  is  cut  down  as  a  cumberer  of  the  ground,  it  is  not  the  gleaming  axe  which  we  can 
see  and  hear  that  destroys  it.  The  tree  is  destroyed  before  the  axe  is  laid  at  its  root, 
and  perhaps  only  after  its  fall  will  the  cause  of  death  be  revealed.  3.  Outward  trans- 
gression. Show  bow  sin  committed  leads  to  other  sins,  how  the  sense  of  shame  dies 
out  with  the  frequency  of  the  act,  how  habits  of  evil-doing  grow  till  there  seems  no 
escape,  and  to  aU  holy  influence  the  man  seems  dead.  Conscience  says,  "  Thou  hast 
destroyed  thyself." 

II.  Its  delusions.  Whatever,  in  a  moment  of  despair,  a  man  might  do  with  his 
natural  life,  he  would  surely  not  destroy  all  hope  of  spiritual  life  unless  the  words  were 
true,  "  The  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  eyes  of  them  that  believe  not."  Some 
justify  their  irreligiousness  to  their  own  consciences :  1.  By  referring  to  Qod's  perfec- 
tions ;  e.g.  to  his  sovereignty  ("  If  I  am  to  be  saved,  I  shall  be  "),  or  to  his  mercy  ("  God 
is  too  merciful  to  punish  ").  2.  By  referring  to  the  condition  of  th^r  fellow-men.  Ol 
the  godless,  they  urge  they  are  so  numerous  that  it  is  not  credible  that  they  should  all 
be  in  the  wrong ;  of  Christians,  they  say  that  they  are  too  scrupulous  for  ordinary 
society,  or  else  that  they  are  so  inconsistent  that  reli^^ion  cannot  be  of  great  worth. 
3.  By  referring  to  their  own  state.  If  they  are  moral,  tljey  "  thank  God  that  they  are 
not  as  other  men  are ;  "  if  licentious,  they  argue  that  they  are  "  comnjitted  to  do  all 
these  abominations ; "  if  ignorant,  they  declare  they  are  not  scholarly  enough  to  under- 
stand the  teaching  of  the  Church;  if  imellectiial,  they  maintain  that  they  require  no 
spiritual  illumination  ;  if  attentive  to  the  externals  of  religion,  their  spirit  is  that  of  the 
Pharisee  who  said,  "I  fast  twice  in  the  week,"  etc. 

III.  Its  behsdt.     "  In  me  is  thine  help."    The  Speaker  is  "  the  Lord  Jehovah,  in  ■ 
whom  is  everlasting  strength."     He  alone  can  save.     When  there  was  no  eye  to  pity, 
he  brought  to  men  salvation.     The  remedy  is  to  be  found :  1.  in  the  atonement  Christ 
has  made.  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,"  etc.;  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 

.  .  .  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  2.  In  the  intercessinn  he  presents.  "  ViTherefore  he  is  able 
to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us."  3.  In  the  grace  he  gives.  When  the  Holy  Spirii  is  come,  "  he  will 
convince  the  world  of  sin,"  etc.  The  Spirit  comes  to  cast  out  the  strong  man  armed. 
By  his  grace  he  vivifies,  purifies,  sanctifies,  until  at  last  we  shall  stand  faultless  before 
God's  throne.  "Thou  hast  destroyed  thyself;  but  in  me  is  thine  help."  "  Neither  is 
there  salvation  in  any  other,  for  there  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby 
we  can  be  saved." 

Conclusion.  In  the  text  there  are  (1)  enlightenment  for  the  ignorant ;  (2)  warning 
for  the  self-righteous;  (3)  hope  for  the  despondent;  and  (4)  a  song  for  the 
redeemed. — A.  B. 

Yer.  2.—"  27key  sin  more  and  more."  The  tribe  of  Ephraim  was  especially  upbraided 
by  the  prophet  on  account  of  their  addictedness  to  idol- worship.  Separating  themselves 
from  the  religious  observances  which  were  proper  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob,  the  members  of  this  powerful  and  central  tribe  had  distinguished  themselves 


CH.  xni.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  419 

by  their  defection  from  Jehovah,  and  by  their  zeal  in  the  service  of  Baal  and  other 
gods  of  the  nations.  One  sin  led  to  another ;  and  they  sinned  "  more  and  more."  In 
these  words  a  great  principle  is  enunciated.  There  is  a  tendency  on  the  part  of  sinners 
not  only  to  continue,  but  even  to  exceed,  in  sin.  To  understand  this,  it  must  be 
observed  that — 

I.  Temptations  become  orowinolt  numerous  and  powerful.  1.  Circumstances 
are  often  in  an  increasing  measure  favourable  to  sin.  Thesinner  puts  himself  in  the  way 
of  stronger  temptations.  2.  Wicked  companions  and  instigators  to  sin  gain  in  boldness 
and  persuasiveness.  They  learn  by  experience  that  no  resistance  need  be  anticipated. 
3.  Restraints  are  culpably  removed.  The  practice  of  sin  breaks  down  the  fences  which 
virtue  sets  up  around  the  law-abiding  and  obedient. 

II.  Besibtanoe  becomes  OBOWiNaLT  MORE  FEEBLE  AND  faiotC  1.  Desire  is  strengthened 
by  indulgence^  Unbridled  passion,  ungovemed  pride,  insatiable  selfishness,  have  every- 
thing as  they  would.  2.  Shame  is  lessened.  The  reproach  of  conscience  is  silenced. 
Pear  is  quieted  and  stifled.  The  blush  no  longer  rises  to  the  cheek ;  and  the  tongue 
is  habituated  to  falsehood,  or  profanity,  or  impurity,  without  any  check.  3.  Moral  power 
is  weakened.  At  first  there  is  a  contest  within  between  the  better  feelings  and  the 
worse ;  but  after  a  while  there  is  no  conflict,  and  the  vanquished  protest  dares  no  longer 
assert  itself. 

Application.  The  picture  thus  drawn  of  the  sinner's  progress  is  so  fearful,  that  the 
contemplation  of  it  may  well  lead  him  who  is  on  the  downward  road  to  pause.  Faeilis 
descensus  Auemi.  The  only  hope  lies  in  immediate  and  sincere  repentance,  and  (by 
Divine  grace)  an  urgent  application  for  forgiveness,  and  for  a  new  and  better  mind. — T. 

Ver.  3. — Driven  chaff  and  vanished  smoke.  The  imagery  here  employed  is  of  obvious 
interpretation.  When  the  blast  of  the  whirlwind  or  of  the  winnowing  fan  passes  over 
the  threshing-floor,  the  chaff  is  driven  away  and  dispersed.  When  the  fire  is  kindled 
upon  the  earth,  the  smoke  makes  its  escape  through  the  lattice-work  below  the  roof  into 
the  open  air.  Even  so,  those  who  wickedly  depart  from  Jehovah  and  addict  themselves 
to  the  worship  of  idols  shall,  says  the  prophet,  learn  by  bitter  experience  the  folly  of 
their  course  and  the  vanity  of  their  trust.  No  safety,  no  stability,  but  certain  ruin  and 
destruction  shall  be  their  lot. 

I.  Defection  from  true  religion  excites  the  displeasure  and  indionation  of 
THE  only  tbub  God.  There  are  many  who  refuse  to  admit  that  the  supreme  Buler 
concerns  himself  with  the  conduct  of  men.  And  others  consider  that  benevolence  is  so 
all-absorbing  an  attribute  of  Deity  that  they  will  not  hear  of  punishment  either  in  (his 
world  or  in  a  world  to  come.  The  declarations  of  the  prcphet  are  utterly  inconsistent 
with  such  views  as  these. 

II.  Retributive  justice  will  oebtainlt  assert  itselp  in  thb  condemnation  and 
PUNISHMENT  OF  THE  IRRELIGIOUS.  1.  There  is  national  retribution,  as  the  history  of 
Israel  and  of  every  nation  abundantly  proves.  2.  There  is  individual  chastisement,  as 
every  human  life  in  a  measure  may  convince  us.  3.  The  punishment  inflicted  upon  the 
ungodly  and  impenitent  is  not  limited  to  this  earthly  life,  to  this  transitory  scene  of 
probation. — ^T, 

Ver.  4. — The  onltf  Saviour.  The  prophets  were  in  the  habit  of  appealing  to  the  past 
history  of  Israel  as  a  nation  when  they  would  urge  the  people  to  repent  of  present  sin, 
and  would  encourage  them  to  seek  Divine  favour  and  acceptance.  Certainly  the  records 
of  the  past  proved  that  only  in  returning  and  in  rest  had  the  people  ever  been  saved, 
and  that  when  they  had  turned  elsewhere  than  to  Jehovah  they  had  only  met  with 
disappointment  and  misery. 

I.  The  vanitt  and  insuffigienot  of  all  eabthlt  helpers.  1.  As  Israel,  when 
seeking  help  and  deliverance  from  the  deiHes  of  the  heathen,  ever  found  such  a  refuge 
vain,  so  will  all  men  who  look  elsewhere  than  to  the  Most  High  experience  certain  and 
bitter  disappointment.  "  The  idols  of  the  heathen  have  ears,  but  they  hear  not ; . .  .  they 
that  make  them  are  like  unto  them ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them."  2.  Even 
the  best-intentioned  of  human  friends  and  counsellors  are  powerless  to  aid  and  save. 
The  lesson  has  to  be  learned  afresh  by  every  generation  that  the  help  of  man  is  vain. 
"  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  your  confidence  in  princes." 


*20  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [ofi.  xiu.  1— 16. 

II.  The  sole  sufficiency  op  God  ab  a  mighty  Savioub.  1.  He  has  wisdom  to 
devise  appropriate  means  of  deliverance.  Many  an  instance  'in  Israel's  history  might 
have  been  quoted,  in  order  to  produce  this  conviction.  And  we,  as  Christians,  have  the 
one  supreme  evidence  of  God's  infinite  wisdom  in  the  provision  of  spiritual  and  eternal 
salvation  in  the  gospel  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  is  the  wisdom  as  well  as  the 
power  of  God.  2.  The  heavenly  King  has  the  disposition  to  deliver.  Salvation  is  not 
only  his  prerogative ;  it  is  his  delight.  Mercy  and  compassion  animate  him  in  his 
treatment  of  the  children  of  men.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,"  etc.  There  is  no  pity 
like  Divine  pity.  3.  For  an  all-sufficient  authority  and  efficacious  power  to  rescue  man 
from  sin  and  death  we  must  look  above.  The  Eternal  is  "  mighty  to  save."  And  in 
appointing  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour,  he  has  laid  help  upon  One  who  is  mighty — 

"  So  strong  to  deliver,  So  good  to  ledeem, 
The  weakest  believer  That  hangs  upon  him." 

T. 

Ver.  h.—Bememhrance  in  the  wilderness.  No  more  signal  instance  of  Divine  inter- 
position is  recorded,  even  in  the  wonderful  history  of  Israel,  than  the  care  and  guidance 
and  protection  vouchsafed  to  the  chosen  people  in  their  deseit-wauderings.  No  wonder 
that  the  inspired  prophets  should  again  and  again  refer  to  this  marvellous  record  of 
Divine  regard,  remembrance,  and  assistance. 

L  The  occasion  op  Divinb  ebmsmbrakcb.  1.  To  Israel  and  to  humanity  (for  of  the 
race  at  large  was  the  chosen  people  a  type)  God  reveals  himself  when  help  is  sorely 
needed.  In  the  wilderness  the  people  hungered ;  they  thirsted ;  they  were  in  danger 
from  many  perils  of  the  way ;  they  were  opposed  and  harassed  by  many  foes ;  they  were 
beset  by  frequent  perplexities ;  they  were  cast  down  by  many  fears.  Similarly,  this 
race  of  mankind  was  without  any  supply  for  its  sorest  needs,  without  any  deliverance 
from  direst  dangers  and  mightiest  and  most  malignant  foes,  when  the  eternal  Father 
"  remembered  us  in  our  low  estate."  2.  It  was  an  occasion  when  all  other  resource  and 
hope  were  vain.  In  this  respect  the  tribes  in  the  desert  were  representative  of 
humanity.    "  I  looked,  and  there  was  no  helper." 

II.  The  fbuits  or  Divine  bemembbance.  1.  The  thoughtfulness  of  God  supplies 
his  people's  wants.  Israel's  hunger  was  met  by  manna;  Israel's  thirst  by  water  from 
the  rock,  etc.  So  "  the  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of  us,"  Every  spiritual  want  is  sup- 
plied in  the  gospel,  where  is  living  water,  heavenly  bread,  etc.  2.  Adversaries  are 
overcome  by  the  interposition  of  the  Most  High.  He  who  vanquished  Israel's  foes  led 
captivity  captive,  and  secured  salvation  for  all  who  trust  in  him.  3.  Difficulties  are 
removed  by  Divine  intervention.  4.  Courage  and  hope  are  inspired  in  the  breasts  of 
the  timid  and  downcast.  6.  Gratitude,  piety,  and  devotion  are  enkindled  in  the  souls 
of  those  who  are  set  free  and  rescued  by  the  interposition  of  a  merciful  and  mighty 
Saviour. 

Afflioation.  The  gracious  knowledge  and  remembrance  of  God,  leading  to  merciful 
interposition  on  our  behalf,  should  incite  us  to  think  upon  and  to  remember  him 
"  who  led  his  people  through  the  wilderness ;  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever."— T. 

Ver.  6. — Forgetting  Ood.  The  conduct  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  was  an  anticipa- 
tion and  prediction  of  their  national  history  generally.  The  parallelism  suggested  itself 
to  the  minds  of  the  prophets,  who  evidently  referred  to  the  books  of  Moses  to  find  there 
a  description  and  a  censure  of  their  own  contemporaries. 

I.  The  oause  op  FORasTFULNESs  OF  God.  1.  Generally  speaking,  this  sin  arises 
from  absorption  in  earthly  pursuits  and  pleasures.  2,  Particularly  it  may  be  learned 
from  this  passage — ^and  the  lesson  is  enforced  by  daily  observation — that  prosperity  is 
the  occasion  of  irreligion.  The  more  this  world's  good  is  sought  and  prized,  the  more 
it  often  proves  to  be  the  case  that  the  great  Giver  of  all  good  is  forgotten. 

II.  The  bin  and  goilt  of  foroetting  God.  1.  This  appears  from  human  d^end«tct 
upon  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of  all.  2.  And  from  the  consequent  indebtedness  of  the 
creature  to  the  Creator.  To  him  men  owe  all  they  have,  and  it  is  the  basest  ingratitude 
to  forget  the  one  Divine  Benefactor.  3.  And  from  their  responsibility  to  God.  Life 
has  to  be  accounted  for,  at  last,  before  him  who  gave  it  as  a  sacred  trust.  If  the  trust 
kw  been  abused,  such  abuse  is  sin,  and  sin  of  the  deepest  dye. 


OH.  ±111. 1—1^,]  *rit!  BOOS  of  flosiiA.  421 

III,  The  CON8EQUBNOE8  OF  FORGETTING  Goi>.  1.  MoTal  deterioration  will  certainly 
follow.  The  soul  from  which  God  is  banished  is  degraded  and  ruined  by  the  absence 
of  what  alone  can  dignify  and  bless.  2.  Judgment  cannot  be  escaped.  If  men  forget 
Qod  he  will  indeed  remember  them,  but  he  cannot  remember  them  "for  good." — T. 

Ver.  9. — Self-destruction.  This  is  language^  not  merely  of  reproach,  but  of  sorrow. 
After  all  that  Jehovah  had  done  for  his  favoured  people,  it  grieved  him  that  to  so  large 
an  extent  his  goodness  was  abased,  and  tbat  those  who  had  enjoyed  the  greatest 
advantages  had  made  the  worst  use  of  them.  At  the  same  time,  he  justly  cast  all  the 
blame  upon  Israel,  who,  against  the  Saviour  and  Helper,  had  resolved,  as  it  were,  upon 
spiritual  suicide. 

I.  In  tuenino  awat  from  Qod,  men  ttirw  away  from  their  true  Saviour  and 
THEiB  TRUE  SALTATION.  They  oftcu  look  upon  the  great  and  righteous  Judge  aa 
their  enemy,  hostile  to  their  pleasures  and  interests,  and  consequently  imagine  that 
they  will  secure  their  own  welfare  by  forgetting  and  forsaking  God.  That  this  is  a 
delusion  ia  certain.  In  setting  themselves  against  God,  men  set  themselves  agtunst 
their  Help. 

II.  In  seeking  theib  own  bblfish  ends,  men  accomplish  their  own  destruotioh. 
1.  Ungodliness  is  destructive  of  all  peace  of  mind.  2.  Ungodliness  is  destructive  of 
character.  They  who  live  without  God  in  the  world  deprive  themselves  o^  the  highest 
motives  to  obedience,  and  ensure  their  own  spiritual  deterioration.  3.  Ungodliness  is 
destructive  of  all  bright  and  blessed  prospects  for  the  future  life.  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Destruction,  ruin,  banishment  from  God,  such  is  the  doom  which 
sinners  work  out  for  themselves.  It  is  not  the  arbitrary  appointment  of  the  Supreme 
Judge ;  it  is  the  self-inflicted  fate. — T. 

Ver.  9, — "  Thy  help."  There  is  great  simplicity  and  great  beauty  in  this  designation 
of  the  Almighty.  It  is  indeed  wonderful  that  he  who  fashioned  and  who  rules  this 
mighty  universe  should  deign  to  reveal  himself  to  the  poor,  frail,  feeble  children  of  men 
as  their  Help  I 

I,  Man's  need  of  help.  We  need  help  from  one  another ;  and  there  is  no  member 
of  society  who  is  independent.  The  child  is  dependent  upon  the  help  of  the  parent, 
the  master  upon  the  help  of  the  servant,  etc.  But  all  stand  in  need  of  moral,  spiritual 
help,  which  none  but  God  can  bring.  And  there  are  special  occasions  and  circum- 
stances which  bring  home  to  us  our  need  of  help ;  e.g.  when  we  feel  our  weakness  in 
the  presence  of  difficult  duties,  sore  temptations,  crushing  sorrows. 

II.  God's  sufficienct  as  the  Help  of  man.  1.  We  perceive  this  from  the  con- 
sideration of  Divine  power  and  resources.  All  things  are  at  God's  command  and 
under  God's  control.  2.  His  pity  and  sympathy  assure  ns  of  effective  help.  There  are 
circumstances  in  which  power  and  even  liberality  are  of  little  avail.  The  heart  craves 
for  the  heart's  sympathy.  Of  God  we  know  that  "  in  all  our  a£3ictions  he  is  afflicted  ; " 
and  Christ  has  revealed  himself  as  "  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  Gkni 
makes  himself  known  to  men  as  their  Help,  and  his  assurance  must  be  unhesitatingly 
and  joyfully  accepted.  3.  The  experience  of  "all  saints"  witnesses  to  Gkid's  power  and 
willingness  to  help  in  time  of  need. — T. 

Vers.  10, 11. — The  vanity  of  earthly  kings.  The  historic  reference  of  this  passage 
is  obvious.  The  Hebrew  nation  was  properly  a  theocracy.  God  himself  was  their 
Lawgiver,  Ruler,  Leader,  and  Judge.  But  the  people  desired  a  king,  that  they  might 
resemble  the  nations  around  them ;  and  God,  in  condescension  to  their  infirmities  and 
in  answer  to  their  entreaties,  gave  them  a  king.  The  kings  proved  by  no  means  an 
unmixed  blessing.  Many  of  the  kings,  both  of  Judah  and  of  the  northern  dominion, 
led  the  people  astray.  Hosea  addressed  himself  especially  to  Israel ;  and  the  chronicles 
ot  that  nation  show  us  how  many  evils  followed  upon  the  reign  and  power  of  their 
monarchs.  Disasters  and  ruin  came  upon  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  the  inspired 
prophet  well  urged  upon  the  people  the  question,  "  Where  are  your  kings,  to  save 
and  deliver  you  ?  "    The  principle  involved  in  the  appeal  is  one  of  general  applicatioa. 

I.  MoRAt  maladies  abb  not  healed  by  political  remedies. 

IL  ThB  8FLEND0UB  OF  EINOS  IB  NO  COMPENSATION  FOB  THB  MISERY  OF  THE  PEOPU. 


422  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xm.  1—10 


III.  Earthly  aothobity  can  only  be  bxebcised  within  limits  appointed  at 
Divine  providence. 

IV.  A  COBEUPT  COUBT  is  an   evil  example  10  AN  UNSTABLE  POPULATION. 

V.  No  SECULAE — CIVIL  OB  MILITARY — FOWEB  CAN  AVEBT  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF 
APOSTASY   AND  DEBASEMENT. 

YI.  EiNOB  THISMSELVES  ABE  SUBJECT,  AS  WELL  AB  CITIZENS,  TO  THE  LAWS  OV  A 
BETBIBUTIVB    FbOVIDENCE. — T. 

Ver.  14. — Redemption  from  death.  Different  interpretations  are  possible  of  this 
majestic  language.  According  to  one  view,  these  words  express  the  resolution  of  the 
righteous  King  and  Judge  to  let  the  powers  of  death  and  destruction  loose  upon 
apostate  Israel.  According  to  another  view,  they  express  a  determination,  at  some 
future  time  and  upon  Israel's  repentance,  on  God's  part  to  destroy  the  powers  of 
destruction  and  to  secure  for  his  people  an  everlasting  salvation.  Kegard  the  great 
truths  common  to  both  interpretations. 

I.  Death  and  the  obave  abe  but  cbeatubes  and  ministebs  of  the  Eternal. 
There  is  apparent  among  men  a  tendency  to  attribute  to  the  forces  of  destruction  an 
independent  power,  to  regard  death  as  a  natural  and  necessary  law  of  being.  But  the 
fact  is  otherwise;  these  are  only  agents  used  for  a  temporary  and  governmental  purpose 
by  the  Lord  of  the  universe. 

II.  Death  and  the  gbave  abe  tebbible  only  to  the  enemies  of  God.  To 
such  as  resist  and  defy  Divine  authority  it  must  needs  be  a  depressing  and  terrible 
thought,  that  their  power  will  speedily  come  to  an  end,  and  they  levelled  in  the  dust. 
But  God's  people  need  have  no  fear  of  their  Father's  messengers. 

III.  JJBATH  and   the   GRAVE   HATK    JJEEN    ALREADY   POTENTIALLY  VANQUISHED    BY 

THE  Lord  Jesus  Chbist.  The  Apostle  Paul  makes  use  of  this  language  in  expound- 
ing the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Besurrection,  and  sanctions  the  application  of  the 
language  of  Hosea  to  the  triumph  of  the  Divine  Bedeemer,  when  he  arose  from  the 
dead  and  abolished  death,  and  became  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep.  The  words 
are  in  this  connection  precious  and  consolatory  to  the  Christian  mind. 

IV.  Death  and  the  grave,  when  they  have  fulfilled  their  divinbly 
APPOINTED  PURPOSE,  SHALL  FOB  EVfiR  CEASE  TO  BE.  "  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be 
destroyed  is  death."  The  destroyer's  turn  shall  come ;  the  grave  shall  itself  be  buried ; 
death  shall  itself  be  slain.  From  all  fear  of  mortality  the  glorilied  saints  shall  be 
eternally  delivered.  And  God  shall  be  for  ever  glorified  in  the  reign  of  imperishable 
life.— T. 

Ver.  16. — Rebellion  agaiiut  Ood.  Samaria  here  is  no  doubt  put  for  the  Israelitish 
kingdom,  of  which  that  city  was  the  capital.  The  seat  of  government  concentrates 
within  itself  the  various  elements  of  the  national  life.  If  there  be  profligacy,  ambition, 
cruelty,  treachery,  self-seeking,  in  a  nation,  these  qualities  will  be  pre-eminently 
apparent  in  the  capital.  Israel,  in  the  person  of  her  monarch  and  her  capital, 
"  rebelled  against  her  God." 

I.  The  symptoms  of  rebellion.  These  are :  1.  The  defiance  of  rightful  authority. 
When  God's  Name  is  profaned,  and  God's  laws  are  violated,  and  God's  threatenings  are 
despised,  tliis  is  a  sign  that  those  who  are  bound  to  be  loyal  subjects  are  so  far  from 
fulfilling  their  obligations  that  they  are  in  rebellion.  2.  The  substitution  of  another 
authority  for  that  of  the  Supreme.  Whether  this  be  an  idol,  or  a  hierarchy  of  pagan 
deities,  or  some  selfish,  carnal,  worldly  principle,  is  of  little  consequence ;  the  allegiance 
has  been  transferred. 

II.  The  wickedness  of  bebellion.  Samaria's  special  sin  was  in  rebelling  against 
her  God.  It  is  the  consideration  that  God  has  done  everything  for  us ;  that  he  has 
regarded  us  as  his  own,  and  treated  us  with  bounty,  forbearance ;  and  loving-kindness, 
that,  in  a  word,  he  has  every  claim  upon  us  ; — it  is  this  that  brings  home  the  charge 
of  rebellion,  and  exhibits  it  in  all  its  heinousness. 

III.  The  end  of  rbbkllion.  This  must  be  either  (1)  tuhmistion  with  true  repent- 
ance, or  (2)  conquest  and  destruction.  The  Lord  shall  have  the  defiant  rebels  in 
derision,  and  break  them  with  a  rod  of  iron. — T. 


OH.  xm.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  423 

Ver.  3.— Hie  life  of  the  wicked.  "  Therefore  they  shall  be  as  the  moming  cloud,  and 
as  the  early  d«w  that  passeth  away,  as  the  chaff  that  is  driven  with  the  whirlwind  out 
of  the  floor,  and  as  the  smoke  out  of  the  chimney."  This  verse  may  be  taken  as  a 
picture  of  a  human  life  unregenerate,  out  of  vital  sympathy  with  God  and  goodness. 

L  It  18  DEOEPTIVB.  "  Like  the  moming  cloud."  In  Palestine  and  countries  of  the 
same  latitude,  dense  clouds  often  appear  in  the  moming,  cover  the  heavens,  and  promise; 
fertilizing  showers  that  never  come.  The  farmer  whose  land  is  parched  by  drought 
looks  up  with  anxious  hope  as  he  sees  them  gather  and  float  over  his  head.  Bat  they 
often  pass  away  without  a  fertilizing  drop,  and  leave  him  with  a  disappointed  and 
anxious  heart.  A  life  without  moral  goodness  is  necessarily  deceptive.  It  walks  in  a 
vain  show,  it  deceives  itself  and  deceives  others ;  it  is  an  acted  lie  from  beginning  to 
end.  How  many  lives  seem. full  of  promise!  They  awaken  as  much  interest  and  as 
much  hope  as  clouds  that  float  over  parched  lands ;  but  they  result  in  nothing  but 
disappointment.     Oh,  what  lives  there  are  which  are  like  clouds  without  water  I 

IL  It  IS  EVANESCENT.  "  The  early  dew  that  passeth  away."  In  such  latitudes,  too, 
the  copious  dews  that  sparkle  on  the  hedges  and  the  fields  soon  evaporate  and  disappear. 
How  transient  is  life! — not  the  life  of  the  wicked  only,  but  the  life  of  the  righteous 
as  well ;  just  like  the  dew,  appearing  for  a  short  time,  then  gone  for  ever.  The  Bible 
abounds  with  figures  to  represent  the  ttansientness  of  human  life — the  grass,  the 
flower,  the  vapour,  the  dew,  the  shadow.  The  millions  that  make  up  this  generation 
are  only  as  dewdrops,  sparkling  for  an  hour  and  then  lost  and  gone ! 

III.  It  18  WORTHLESS.  "  As  chaff  that  is  driven  with  the  whirlwind  out  of  the 
floor."  Like  chaff  stowed  away  from  the  threshing-floor.  Chaff,  empty,  dead,  destined 
to  rot.  How  empty  the  life  of  an  ungodly  man !  The  life  of  the  righteous  is  grain — 
it  will  grow  and  flourish  ;  but  that  of  the  wicked  is  only  chaff.  It  is  destitute  of  moral 
vitality.  "  Driven  away."  "  The  wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wickedness,  whilst  the 
righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  The  wicked  die  reluctantly,  they  hold  on  to  the 
last ;  it  is  only  the  strong  storm  of  death  that  bears  them  off. 

IV.  It  is  offensive.  "  As  the  smoke  out  of  the  chimney."  The  ancient  houses  of 
Palestine  were  without  chimneys ;  the  smoke  filled  the  houses,  and  smoke  is  a  nuisance. 
A  corrupt  life  is  evermore  offensive  to  the  moral  sense  of  mankind.  To  what  conscience 
is  falsehood,  selfishness,  camality,  meanness,  and  such  elements  that  make  up  the 
character  of  the  wicked,  at  all  pleasing?  To  none.  The  aroma  of  a  corrupt  life  is  as 
offensive  to  the  moral  soul  as  "  smoke  out  of  the  chimney." 

*  Like  to  the  falling  of  a  star, 
Or  as  the  flight  of  eagles  are, 
Or  like  the  fresh  spring's  gaudy  hva. 
Or  diver  drops  of  moming  dew. 
Or  like  a  wind  that  chafes  the  flood, 
Or  bubbles  which  on  water  stood, 
E'en  such  is  man,  whose  borrowed  light 
Is  straight  called  in,  and  paid  to-night. 
The  wind  blows  out,  the  bubble  dies. 
The  spring  entombed  in  autumn  lies. 
The  dew  dries  up,  the  star  is  shot, 
The  flight  is  past—and  man  forgot." 

(Henry  King.) 

D.T. 

Vers.  6—8. — Mercy  in  hneflcent  action  and  in  retributive  displeasure.  "  I  did  know 
thee  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  land  of  great  drought,"  etc.  Mercy  is  the  subject  of  these 
words ;  and  mercy,  like  the  mystic  pillar  that  guided  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness, 
iias  two  sides — a  bright  one  to  guide  and  cheer,  and  a  dark  one  to  confound  and  destroy. 
In  these  two  aspects  the  text  presents  it. 

L  Here  is  mercy  in  beneficent  action.  "  I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,  in 
the  land  of  great  drought.  According  to  their  pasture,  so  were  they  filled."  What 
mercy  did  the  great  Father  show  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  1  The  wilderness  was 
a  trying  region  (Deut,  viii.  16 ;  Jer,  ii.  6).  How  constantly  the  Almighty  interposed  on 
behalf  of  his  people!    He  gave  them  water  from  the  rock  and  manna  from  the  clouds. 


424  TfiE  BOOK  OF  HOSfeA.  [oh.  tin.  1—16. 

He  fought  their  battles,  guided  them  through  perplexities,  and  helped  them  in  erery 
exigency  and  trial.  The  hand  of  mercy  was  ever  outstretched  on  their  behalf,  supplying 
them  with  all  that  they  required.  In  truth,  mercy  gave  them,  not  only  necessities,  bni 
luxuries.  "  Jeshurun  waxed  fat,  and  kicked."  Thus  mercy  is  treating  us  now,  giving 
us  "  all  things  richly  to  enjoy  "  in  nature,  and  offering  to  us  all  spiritual  blessings  in 
Christ  Jesus.  The  bright  side  of  mercy  gleams  on  us  in  thia  life,  lights  up  our  path 
and  cheers  us  on  the  way. 

II.  Here  is  mercy  in  biohteoub  dibfleasube.  "  They  were  filled,  and  their  heart 
was  exalted ;  therefore  have  they  forgotten  me."  Observe :  1.  The  cause  of  the  indig- 
nation. "  They  have  forgotten  me."  They  abu8e4  his  mercy.  His  mercy  led  them  to 
■elf-indulgence,  the  pampering  of  their  appetites,  the  gratification  of  their  lusts,  and 
the  fostering  of  indolence  and  pride.  Alas !  how  often  the  mercies  of  God  in  providence 
are  abused !  Whilst  they  should  lead  men  to  repentance  and  to  a  higher  life,  they  lead 
them  to  worldliness  and  impiety.  Because  of  tl^is,  mercy  becomes  indignant,  the  oil 
breaks  into  flame.  2.  The  severity  of  the  indignation.  "  Therefore  I  will  be  unto 
them  as  a  lion :  as  a  leopard  by  the  way  will  I  observe  them  :  I  will  meet  them  as  a 
bear  that  is  bereaved  of  her  whelps,  and  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart,  and  there  will 
I  devour  them  like  a  lion :  the  wild  beast  shall  tear  them."  What  terrible  words  are 
these !  As  a  lion,  savage  and  strong ;  a  "  leopard,"  crafty  and  vigilant,  watching  an 
opportunity  to  wreak  destruction  ;  a  "  bear,"  bereaved  of  her  whelps,  terribly  exasper- 
ated and  heartless  ; — he  "  will  rend  the  caul  of  their  heart."  It  is  said  the  lion  always 
aims  at  the  heart  of  the  beast  he  falls  upon.  "  Devour  them  like  a  lion ;  the  wild  beast 
shall  tear  them."  What  does  all  this  mean  ?  It  does  not  mean  that  the  Almighty  is 
carried  away  by  a  savage  impulse,  that  he  has,  in  fact,  aught  of  passion  in  him.  No,  but 
it  means  that  after  his  mercy  has  been  abused  it  will  assuredly  become  the  destroyer. 
Mercy  abused  becomes  a  determiued,  resistless  destroyer.  A  plant  that  is  not  strength- 
ened by  the  sunbeam  is  scorched ;  the  soul  that  is  not  saved  by  mercy  is  damned. 

"Thy  tneroy,  Lord,  is  like  the  morning  sun, 
TVbose  beams  undo  what  sable  night  had  dona; 
Or  like  a  stream,  the  onrrent  of  whose  course^ 
Restrained  awhile,  runs  with  a  swifter  force. 
Oh  I  let  me  glow  beneatli  those  sacred  beamtl 
After,  bathe  me  in  those  silver  streams. 
To  thee  alone  my  sorrows  shall  appeal ; 
Hath  earth  a  wonnd  too  hard  for  Heaven  to  heal  ?" 

(BVancis  Qnarlca.) 
D.T. 

Ter.  9.— iS^n  the  destroyer,  Ood  the  Bestorer.   "  O  Israel,  thoa  hast  destroyed  thysslf ; 

but  in  me  is  thine  help." 

I.  Sin  the  destroyer.  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself."  What  connected 
with  self  does  a  man  destroy  ?  Not  his  mental  faculties,  not  his  conscience,  not  his 
moral  responsibilities.  These  he  cannot  put  an  end  to.  But  he  destroys  the  liberty, 
the  peace,  the  blessedness  of  his  being.  He  can  destroy  all  connected  with  his  existence 
that  can  make  existence  tolerable  or  worth  having.  How  is  this  done  ?  By  tin.  Sin 
is  the  soul-destroyer.  Every  sin  is  destructive  of  something.  From  the  eternal  laws 
of  moral  mind  men  cannot  commit  a  wrong  act  without  the  infliction  of  an  injury  to 
the  soul,  without  blinding  the  judgment,  deadening  the  sensibility,  curtailing  the  liberty, 
drying  up  the  affection,  enfeebling  the  will.  Sin  is  suicidal.  "He  that  sinneth  i^inst 
me  wrongeth  his  own  soul."    What  is  a  sinner  doing?    Murdering  himself,    livery 


II.  God  the  Eestokeb.  "  Ih  me  is  thine  help."  Who  can  restore  a  destroyed  soul  ? 
God,  and  he  only.  He  restores  it :  (1)  By  extracting  the  poison  of  sin.  (2)  By  breath- 
ing into  it  a  new  life.  (3)  By  bringing  it  out  into  the  salubrious  atmosphere  of  truth. 
(4)  By  affording  it  the  most  wholesome  supplies  and  invigorating  exercises.  *  In  m* 
is  thy  help  found."     Yes,  thou  art  mighty  to  save. — D.  T. 


da  xm.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  426 

Ver.  14. — The  great  conqueror  of  the  world  conquered.  "  I  will  ransom  them  from 
the  power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from  death :  0  Death,  I  will  he  thy 
plagues ;  0  Grave,  I  will  be  thy  destruction :  repentance  shall  be  hid  from  mine  eyes." 
Delitzsch  translates  this,  "Out  of  the  hand  of  hell  will  I  redeem  them;,  from  death 
will  I  set  them  free.  Where  are  thy  plagues,  0  Death  ?  Where  thy  destruction,  O 
Hell?  Repentance  is  hidden  from  mine  eyes."  Primarily,  these  words  apply  to  God's 
restoration  of  Israel  from  Assyria — partially,  and  in  times  yet  future,  fully,  from  all 
the  lands  of  their  present  long-continued  dispersion  and  political  death.  But  Paul's 
reference  to  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  23)  authorizes  us  to  give  it  a  wider  application ;  and  we  may 
regard  it  as  referring  to  death  and  Christ. 

I.  Here  is  the  great  conquebob,  called  the  "  death  and  the  grave."  What  a  con- 
queror is  Death !  1.  Heartless,  dead  to  all  appeals.  2.  Resistless.  Bulwarks,  battalions, 
castles,  are  nothing  before  him.  3.  Universal,  his  eyes  fastened  on  the  world.  Young, 
old,  rich,  poor,  he  has  marked  them  all  as  victims.  4.  Ever  active.  He  does  not  pause 
a  moment.  Year  after  year,  month  after  month,  day  after  day,  minute  after  minute,  he 
works  without  a  pause.  Thousands  fall  before  him  every  hour.  This  is  the  conqueror 
keeping  the  world  in  awe,  filling  our  houses  with  mourning,  our  streets  with  funereal 
processions,  our  cemeteries  with  the  dead. 

II.  Here  is  the  great  conqueror  of  the  world  oonquered.  "  I  will  ransom  them  from 
the  power  of  the  grave ;  I  will  redeem  them  from-  death.  ...  I  will  be  thy  plagues,  I 
will  be  thy  destruction."  I.  Who?  "I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life:  whoso 
believeth  in  me  shall  never  die."  How  has  he  conquered  Death  ?  Not  by  weakening 
his  power  or  arresting  his  progress,  for  he  is  as  mighty  and  active  as  ever,  but  by 
stripping  him  of  his  terror.  Mentally  he  overcomes  him,  swallows  him  up.  He  fills 
the  souls  of  his  people  with  such  love  to  the  infinite  Father,  such  interest  in  the 
spiritual  universe,  such  desire  for  a  higher  life,  that  they  say,  "  For  to  me  to  live  is 
Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  A  few  weeks  hence,  ^and  spring  will  come  forth  as  a 
messenger  from  the  great  fountain  of  life,  and  look  abroad  over  the  earth  in  winter 
desolation  under  the  icy  reign  of  death ;  and  will  say  to  every  withered  plant  and 
buried  germ,  "  I  will  ransom  thee  from  the  power  of  the  grave."  This  Ohriat  (wya 
to  all  dead  souls. 

"  It  is  not  death,  to  die ; 

To  leave  this  weary  read. 
And  'midst  the  brotherhood  on  high 

To  be  at  home  with  God. 

"  It  is  not  death,  to  close 

The  eve  long  dinuued  by  tean, 
And  wake  in  glorions  repose 
To  spend  eternal  years. 

"It  is  not  death,  to  bear 

The  wrench  that  sets  us  fre« 
From  dungeon-ehain,  to  breathe  the  air 

Of  boundless  liberty. 

"It  is  not  death,  to  fling 
Aside  this  sinful  dust. 
And  rise  on  strong,  exulting  wing 
To  live  among  the  just. 

"Jesus,  thou  Prince  of  llfe^ 

Thy  chosen  cannot  die ; 
Like  thee,  they  conquer  in  the  sUi% 
To  reign  witii  thee  on  high." 

OlT. 

Ver.  16. — Severses  of/orttme  in  human  U/s,  "  Though  he  be  fruitful  among  his 
brethren,  an  east  wind  shall  come,  the  wind  of  the  Lord  shall  come  up  from  the 
wilderness,  and  his  spring  shall  become  dry,  and  his  fountain  shall  be  dried  up :  he 
shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant  vessels."    "  For  he  will  bear  fruit  among  brethren. 


42«  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [on.  xiri.  1— 18, 

East  wind  will  come — a  wind  of  Jehovah,  rising  up  from  the  desert ;  and  his  fountain 
will  dry  up,  and  his  spring  become  dried.  He  plunders  the  treasuries  of  all  splendid 
vessels"  (Delitzsch).  "This  and  the  following  verse  set  forth  the  devastation  and 
destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,  which  was  to  precede  the  deliverance 
promised  in  that  which  precedes.  While  the  promise  was  designed  to  afford  consolation 
to  the  pious  and  encouragement  to  the  penitent,  the  threatening  was  equally  necessary 
for  the  refractory  and  the  profane  "  (Henderson).  We  shall  take  the  words  as  suggest- 
ing a  few  remarks  on  the  reverses  of  fortune  in  human  life. 

I.  Reverses  in  human  fortune  are  sometimes  veet  strikino.  Ephraim  wa»  "  fruitful 
among  his  brethren."  The  very  name  signifies  fruitfulness.  Its  territory  was  most 
fertile,  its  people  the  most  numerous.  (1)  Its  riches  would  give  way  to  poverty. 
Ephraim  was  at  once  a  rich  and  a  populous  tribe;  but  see  the  change  predicted  :  "His 
spring  shall  become  dry.  ...  He  shall  spoil  the  treasure  of  all  pleasant  vessels."  The 
enemy  would  invade  the  country,  impoverish  husbandry,  clieck  merchandise.  (2)  Its 
populousness  would  give  way  to  paucity.  The  enemy  would  reduce  its  numbers  and 
almost  depopulate  it.  "  His  fountain  shall  be  dried  up."  How  great  the  reverse !  and 
yet  such  reverses  in  human  history  are  frequent.  Saul,  Herod,  Nebuchadnezzar, 
Napoleon,  are  a  few  amongst  millions  of  examples.  Constantly  do  we  see  men  hurled 
from  the  sunny  mountain  of  opulence  into  the  gloomy  valley  of  poverty.  Such 
reverses  should  teach  us:  1.  To  hold  all  worldly  good  with  a  very  light  hand.  2.  To 
settle  our  interests  on  the  good  that  is  permanent.  "  Labour  not  for  the  meat  that 
perisheth." 

II.  Reverses  in  human  fortune  are  genekallt  bbocqht  about  bt  becondabt 
INSTRUMENTALITY.  "An  cast  wind  shall  come,  shall  come  from  the  wilderness." 
Nations,  communities,  and  individuals  may  always  trace  their  calamities  to  certain 
natural  causes.  If  a  kingiiom  decays,  if  a  mercantile  transaction  breaks  down,  if  a 
fortune  is  lost,  man  can  generally  trace  the  dispensation  to  some  "east  wind" — some 
secondary  agent.  This  should  teach  us  (1)  to  study  natural  laws ;  (2)  to  be  diligent 
in  checking  all  elements  inimical  to  human  progress. 

III.  Reverses  in  human  fortune  are  under  the  direction  of  God.  The  change  in 
the  fortunes  of  Ephraim,  although  brought  about  by  a  variety  of  secondary  agencies, 
was  nevertheless  under  the  superintendence  of  the  Almighty.  Though  a  country  may 
be  ruined  by  civil  wars,  or  foreign  invasions,  or  pestilential  atmospheres,  or  unfruitful 
harvests  bringing  on  famine,  still  Divine  intelligence  foresees  all,  and  Divine  power 
overrules  all.  Both  true  philosophy  and  religion  teach  us  to  trace  all  the  events  of  life 
to  him.  Some  come  directly  from  him ;  all  are  directed  by  him.  Friendship  and 
bereavement,  prosperity  and  adversity,  sickness  and  health,  sorrow  and  joy — he  is  in  all. 
"  The  Lord  gave,  the  Lord  hath  taken  away."  Learn  (1)  to  acquiesce  in  his  dispensa- 
tions ;  (2)  to  look  to  him  for  all  that  is  good. — D.  T. 

Vers.  1—4. — Baal-excdtation.  The  first  clause  is  better  read,  "When  Ephraim 
spake,  there  was  trembling;  he  was  exalted  in  Israel."  The  contrast  is  between  what 
Ephraim  once  was,  and  what  his  offending  in  Baal  had  now  brought  him  to.  Once 
he  was  great  in  Israel.  He  had  authority,  influence,  power  to  inspire  terror.  Now  he 
was  but  the  wreck  of  his  former  self.  He  would  be  swept  away  like  chaff  before  the 
whirlwind. 

I.  The  first  false  step.  (Ver.  1.)  It  is  the  first  false  step  in  sin  which  needs 
specially  to  be  guarded  against.  Israel's  first  false  step  as  a  separate  kingdom  was  the 
denial  of  God's  spirituality,  and  the  breach  of  his  commandment,  in  the  setting  up 
of  the  worship  of  the  calves.  This  was :  1.  Trespass  in  a  fundamental  article.  It  was 
practically  the  denial  of  the  Godhead.  It  made  God  like — not  to  corruptible  man — 
but,  worse,  to  four-footed  beasts  (Rom.  i.  23).  They  called  their  worship  still  Jehovah- 
worship,  but  God  repudiates  it  as  in  no  sense  his.  It  was  really  Baal-worship.  God 
gives  the  sin  its  right  name.  2.  The  admission  of  a  wrong  principle.  The  principle 
was  that  of  self-will  in  religion.  Setting  aside  God's  commandment,  Ephraim  claimed 
to  organize  his  worship  after  his  own  he^rt.  He  would  have  no  law  but  his  own  will. 
It  was  to  gratify  himself  that  he  had  set  up  an  independent  kingdom.  It  was  to 
gratify  himself  that  he  now  set  up  the  golden  calves.  The  adoption  of  •  wrong 
principle  by  an  individual  or  nation  is  the  sowmg  of  a  seed  out  of  which  is  lure  to 


OH.  MI.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ROSEA.  427 

spring  ulterior  miscliief.  Inrael  reaped  from  this  seed  of  self-will,  sown  in  the  heart 
of  the  constitution,  an  unforeseen  harvest  of  evil  and  woe.  3.  A  fatal  step.  One 
false  step  is  often  decislTe  of  a  whole  future.  It  was  so  with  our  first  parents.  Adam'i 
sin  determined  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  race.  "  In  Adam  all  die  "  (1  Cor.  xt.  22). 
It  was  so  with  this  first  false  step  in  Israel.  "  When  he  offended  in  Baal,  he  died." 
He  died :  (1)  Morally.  We  die  morally  the  moment  we  determine  to  take  our  own  will 
rather  than  God's  as  the  law  of  our  life.  Self-will  is  the  seed-principle  of  sin.  It 
is  a  seed  of  death.  (2)  As  a  nation.  That  was  the  step  which  settled  Ephraim's 
future.  It  determined  the  direction  of  his  after-way.  Looking  hack  from  the  end,  it 
could  he  seen  that  this  was  the  time  when  the  fatal  course  was  entered  on.  Virtually, 
this  step  doomed  him.  As  Adam,  on  the  day  of  his  transgression,  became  a  dyin^; 
man,  though  he  did  not  actually  die  till  long  after,  so  Israel,  in  this  early  sin,  wrotp. 
out  their  sentence  of  death  as  a  people. 

IL  Sin's  fbogbesb.  (Ver.  2.)  Sin,  like  strife,  is  in  its  beginning  as  the  letting 
in  of  water.  Israel,  having  admitted  into  its  midst  a  wrong  principle,  went  on  from 
bad  to  worse.  Idolatry  spread  in  the  nation.  In  the  practice  of  this  idolatry  the 
people  were :  1.  Extravagant.  "  They  have  made  them  molten  images  of  their  silver." 
They  lavished  their  wealth  upon  their  idols.  People  are  generally  willing  to  spend 
extravagantly  upon  their  vices.  2.  Ingenious.  "Idols  according  to  their  under- 
standing ;  all  of  it  the  work  of  the  craftsmen."  Not  content  with  the  gods  of  their 
neighbours,  they  invented  new  forms  of  idolatry  for  themselves.  They  were  ingenious 
in  forming,  adorning,  and  diversifying  their  idols.  Nothing  they  could  do,  however, 
could  make  the  objects  of  their  ingenuity  aught  else  than  idols.  "  All  of  it  the  work 
of  the  craftsmen " — this  only.  And  to  this  product  of  their  own  crafts  they  bowed 
themselves  down.  Men  whose  hearts  are  too  proud  to  bow  to  God  are  ready  to  bow 
down  to  idols  of  their  own  making  (Isa.  ii.  9).  3.  Intohrant.  "  They  say  of  them, 
Let  the  men  that  sacrifice  ^s  the  calves.  The  world  will  brook  no  refusal  to 
worship  at  its  shrines.     B.g.  the  tyranny  of  codes  of  fashion. 

III.  Vanishing  pbospebitt.  (Ver.  3.)  •  Pour  images  are  employed  to  set  forth  the 
swiftness,  suddenness,  and  completeness  with  which  Ephraim's  once  lordly  prosperity 
would  vanish.  These  are  (1)  the  morning  cloud ;  (2)  the  early  dew ;  (3)  the  chaff 
driven  by  the  whirlwind ;  (4)  smoke  escaping  from  a  chimney  (or  window).  Some 
of  these  things  are :  1.  Beautiful  at  first.  The  cloud  hangs  gay  and  gilded  in  the 
morning  sky,  and  the  dewdrop  sparkles  with  a  heavenly  beauty  as  it  catches  the  sun's 
rays.  2.  Unsvhsiantial.  The  cloud,  though  fair,  is  a  mere  mass  of  vapour.  The  dew 
but  borrows  its  sparkle  firom  the  light.  The  chaff  is  husk  without  substance.  The 
smoke,  rising  at  first  in  a  solid-looking  column,  or  in  thick,  heavy  folds,  is  bodiless  and 
without  coherence.  3.  They  rapidly  vanish.  All  the  four  metaphors  represent  some- 
thing that  "appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away"  (Jas.  iv.  14:). 
The  cloud  is  gone  while  yet  we  gaze  on  it.  The  dew,  drenching  grass  and  flowers  at 
dawn,  soon  dries  up  with  the  beat.  The  wind  rapidly  bears  off  the  chaff.  The  smoke 
scatters,  or  is  dispersed  by  the  breeze,  and  vanishes.  In  combination,  the  figures  point 
to  different  causes  of  vanishing.  Internal  lightness  (chaff),  dissipation  of  parts 
(vapour,  smoke),  external  absorption  (sun  and  air),  strong  forces  of  destruction 
(whirlwind).  The  whole  show  the  short-lived  nature  of  the  sinner's  prosperity.  Its 
beauty  is  not  abiding.    It  is  substanceless.    It  is  soon  swept  away. 

IV.  God,  not  Baal.  (Ver.  4.)  The  end  of  this  judgment  was,  not  utterly  to 
destroy  the  people,  but  to  drive  them  out  of  false  confidences,  and  lead  them  to  the 
right  knowledge  of  God.  It  would  bring  them  to  see :  1.  That  Ood  had  heen  faithful 
to  them,  though  not  they  to  him.  "  Tet  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God  from  the  land  of 
Egypt"  2.  I'ltat  there  was  no  Ood  but  himself.  "  Thou  shalt  know  no  God  but 
me."  They  worshipped  Baal  as  God,  but  experience  only  showed  that  he  was  none. 
3.  That  Ood  was  the  only  Saviour.  "  There  is  no  Saviour  beside  me."  Yet  he  was 
a  Saviour.  He  had  sought  to  be  their  Saviour  all  through.  He  would  save  them  still, 
if  they  would  but  turn  to  him. — J.  0. 

Vers.  B—^.— Self-exaltation.  As  Moses  had  foretold  (Beut.  viii.  10 — 18;  zxxii.  15), 
when  Israel  became  prosperous,  he  forgot  God,  and  lightly  esteemed  the  rock  of  his 
salvation.    The  exaltation  of  Baal  was  itself  an  act  of  self-will—*  species  of  self- 


t28  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiii,  1— 16. 

exaltation.    The  egoistic  principle,  however,  had  more  direct  manifestations.    We  have 
in  these  verses — 

I.  God  known  ih  advebbitt.  "I  did  know  thee  in  the  wilderness,  In  the  land 
of  great  drought "  (ver.  5).  1.  Ood  knew  Israel,  in  the  great  care  he  exercised  over 
the  nation,  leading  it,  pvovirling  for  its  wants,  protecting  it,  and  showing  it  manifold 
tokens  of  bis  goodness.  2.  Israel  knew  Ood.  The  nation  was  never  nearer  to  its  God 
than  during  these  years  of  severe  trial  and  hourly  dependence.  It  believed  in  him, 
waited  on  him,  trusted  him,  and  was — at  least  latterly — willing  to  serve  him.  Adver- 
sity had  its  uses.  It  did  the  people  good.  It  made  a  strong  nation  of  them,  fit  to 
conquer  and  occupy  Canaan. 

II.  God  fokqotteh  in  PBOSFEEirr.  (Ver.  6.)  As  the  people  grew  prosperous,  they 
forgot  God.  The  stages  are:  1.  Sense  of  repletion.  "They  were  filled."  Satisfied 
with  the  good  things  of  earth,  they  did  not  feel  the  same  need  of  God's  blessing. 
They  had  not  the  same  sense  of  dependence.  2.  Uplifting  of  heart.  "  Their  heart 
was  exalted."  Prosperity  tends  in  this  direction.  It  uvilifts  the  heart.  It  makes  the 
possessor  of  wealth  proud,  self-sufiScient,  arrogant.  3.  Forgetfulness  of  Ood.  "  There- 
fore have  they  forgotten  me."  This  was  their  base  ingratitude.  Yet  the  sin  is 
common.  The  more  we  receive  from  God — so  perverse  and  prone  to  depart  are  we — 
the  more  ready  we  are  to  forget  him.  We  feel  as  if  we  were  independent.  We  are 
full.     We  reign  as  kings  without  him. 

III.  The  penalty  of  self-exaltation.  (Vers.  7,  8.)  Pride  in  the  creature  is 
the  sin  which  more  than  any  other  provokes  God  to  wrath.  The  Greeks,  with  just 
discrimination,  viewed  the  gods  as  specially  wroth  with  the  man  who  unduly  exalted 
himself.  "Tfipis  never  failed  to  bring  down  on  the  unhappy  mortal  who  was  guilty 
of  Ae  sin  "  swift  destruction."  God  here  likens  himself  to  the  wild  beasts  that  teai 
the  flock — so  fierce  and  unsparing  is  his  anger.  He  will  be  '.'  as  a  lion ,"  "  a  leopard," 
"a  bear  bereaved  of  her  whelps."  Strange  images  to  apply  to  him  whose  name 
is  Love  I  But  love,  outraged  and  grieved,  is  the  most  vehement  and  fierce  of  all 
passions.  God's  love,  because  it  is  intense  and  real,  is  not  to  be  trifled  with,  and,  when 
I'jused  to  anger,  is  terrible  to  encounter.  Better  meet  wild  beasts  of  the  forest  than 
Ml  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God. — J.  0. 

Vers.  9 — 14. — Ood-exaltation.  God  is  exalted,  negatively,  by  the  overthrow  ol 
whatever  is  opposed  to  him — in  Israel's  case,  by  the  humbling  of  their  pride,  the 
discovery  of  the  vanity  of  their  earthly  trusts,  and  the  overthrow  of  the  sinful 
kingdom;  and,  positively,  by  the  ultimate  triumph  of  his  purpose  of  salvation — a 
triumph  even  over  death. 

I.  IsBAEL  THE  AHTHOB  OF  HIS  ovTN  DBSTEUCTION.  (Ver.  9.)  It  was  a  destruction ; 
1.  For  which  he  only  was  responsible.  "  Destroyed  thyself."  It  was  entirely  the 
result  of  his  own  perverse  actings.  Had  he  taken  God's  way,  all  would  have  been 
well  with  him.  But — so  the  words  literally  run — he  was  against  Gnd.  He  chose  of  his 
own  will  the  way  which  God  told  him  was  the  way  of  death.  The  sinner's  ruin  is 
entirely  his  own  work.  God  refuses  all  responsibility  for  it.  He  has  no  pleasure 
in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  2.  Besulting  from  refusal  of  Divine 
help.  "  Thy  help."  This  aggravated  the  sin.  "  Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead ;  is  there 
no  physician  there?  why  then  is  not  the  health  of  the  daughter  of  my  people 
recovered?"  (Jer.  viii.  22).  God  wished  to  be  Israel's  helper,  but  Israel  would  not  let 
him.  Sinners  perish  though  salvation  is  within  reach.  "  This  is  the  condemnation, 
that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light,"  etc. 
(John  iii.  19) ;  /'  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life  "  (John  v.  40). 
3.  Which  his  self-sought  helpers  were  unable  to  avert.  Israel  found  in  his  hour  of 
need  the  vanity  of  trusting  to  his  earthly  helpers.  "  Where  is  thy  king,  that  he  may 
save  thee  in  all  thy  cities  ?  and  the  judges,  of  whom  thou  saidst,  Give  me  a  king  and 
princes?"  (ver.  10).  Baal  failed  him  (oh.  viii.  5;  x.  5);  the  Assyrian  failed  him 
(oh.  V.  13);  his  kings  failed  him(ch.  x.  3, 15).  Thus  it  was  demonstrated  that  God 
is  the  only  Helper,  that  there  is  no  Saviour  beside  him  (ver.  4).  God  in  Christ  is 
the  only  Hope  of  the  sinner.  He  is  an  all-sufficient  Hope,  if  the  sinner  will  only  be 
persuaded  to  apply  to  him.  Instead  of  this,  how  many  "  refuges  of  lie* "  do  meu 
report  t*l  ' 


OH.  xuL  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  429 

IL  laBAEI.  PUNISHED  BT  THE  GRANTING  TO  HIM  OP  HIS  OWN  DESIKE.      (Vers.  10 — 12.) 

Often  nothing  will  please  the  sinner  but  to  get  his  own  way.  God,  in  wrath,  some- 
times grants  the  sinner  his  own  way.  When  he  gets  it,  he  finds  it  to  be  to  his  hurt. 
This  is  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Israel.  1.  The  desire  for  a  king,  "Thy  judges 
of  whom  thou  saidst.  Give  me  a  king  and  princes."  The  kingdom  of  Israel  had  its 
origin  in  self-will — was  an  embodiment  of  that  principle.  Kehoboam's  rough  answer 
afforded  the  occasion  of  revolt,  but  the  desire  of  the  northern  tribes  to  have  a  kin^ 
of  their  own  was  the  real  soul  of  the  movement.  It  was  a  rebellion  against  the  house 
of  David.  The  people  set  up  kings,  but  not  by  God  (ch.  viii.  4).  2.  The  desire 
granted.  "I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine  anger."  Partly  as  a  punishment  of  the  sins 
of  David's  house,  and  partly  as  a  punishment  of  the  tribes  themselves,  God  granted 
the  wish  for  a  king.  The  rebellious  spirit  in  which  the  separate  kingdom  was  set  up 
was  chastised  by  the  calamities  brought  upon  the  nation  by  its  self-chosen  rulers. 
There  ia  a  difference  between  granting  a  desire  and  approving  of  it.  It  does  not  imply 
approval  that  Jeroboam  was  designated  beforehand  by  the  prophet  as  the  person  to 
whom  God  would  give  the  kingdom.  God  did  give  Israel  its  king,  but  it  was  "  in 
anger."  Doubtless  had  Jeroboam,  on  receiving  the  kingdom,  walk^  in  God's  ways, 
his  rule,  as  having  a  relative  sanction  from  Heaven,  would  have  been  established 
(1  Kings  xi.  38).  But  it  was  obvious,  both  from  the  spirit  of  the  man,  and  from  the 
motives  of  the  rebellion,  and  the  temper  in  which  it  was  carried  out,  that  nothing 
of  this  kind  could  bo  expected.  3.  The  king  given  in  tmger  taken  away  in  vrrath. 
"  I  took  him  away  in  my  wrath."  The  northern  monarchy  brought  only  evil  on  the 
nation.  The  principle  of  self-will  in  which  it  originated  wrought  itself  out  further 
into  state-idolatry,  Baal-worship,  frequent  revolutions,  intestine  conflicts,  alliances  with 
Assyria  and  Egypt,  sins  and  crimes  of  every  description.  The  kings  vied  with  each 
other  in  their  wickedness.  They  set  an  example  which  their  subjects  were  only  too 
ready  to  follow.  Thus  wrath  was  prepared  which  at  length  swept  them  away  like  the 
whirlwind.  Their  king  perished  with  them.  The  monarchy  fell,  never  to  rise  again. 
4.  In  the  wrath  which  overtook  the  kingdom,-hidden  iniquity  was  brought  to  mind. 
"  The  iniquity  of  Ephraim  is  bound  up  ;  his  sin  is  hid."  His  whole  career  was 
remembered  against  him.  Like  a  thing  treasured  up,  put  past,  but  not  forgotten, 
Kt  was  brought  forth  at  the  appointed  time  for  punishment.  No  sin  escapes  the 
remembrance  of  God.    Unrepented  of,  it  will  have  to  be  reckoned  for  in  the  judgment. 

III.  ISBAEI.  UNDULY  DELAYiNa  HIS  CONVERSION.  (Ver.  13.)  The  pangs  of  distress 
which  came  on  Israel  were,  had  he  understood  their  end,  meant  for  his  salvation, 
They  ought  to  have  issued  in  a  change  of  heart,  and  in  "newness  of  life."  While, 
however,  he  felt  alarms,  convictions,  and  compunctions  for  what  he  had  done,  Israel 
fitiled  to  come  to  the  birth  of  a  genuine  conversion.  He  was  an  unwise  son,  who 
prolonged  the  birth-labour  by  refusal  to  come  forth.  1.  The  delay  of  conversion  is  a 
cause  of  needless  pain.  How  much  better  had  Ephraim  come  forth  at  once,  instead 
of  thus,  as  it  were,  lingering  in  the  womb !  Many  delay  their  conversion  by  indecision, 
by  unwillingness  to  part  with  some  darling  sin,  by  slowness  of  heart  to  believe  God's 
promise,  by  the  thought  of  what  the  world  will  say,  what  friends  will  say,  etc.,  thus 
unnecessarily  prolonging  their  distress,  fear,  and  pains  of  conscience,  and  shutting 
themselves  out  from  the  peace,  joy,  and  comfort  of  the  new  life  of  grace.  2.  To  delay 
conversion  ie  to  risk  the  loss  of  life.  The  infant,  delaying  to  come  forth,  dies  in  the 
womb.  Israelj  because  it  reftised  to  be  taught  by  the  sorrows  which  had  come  upon  it, 
was,  as  regards  the  nation  at  large,  to  be  destroyed.  It  would  perish  through  its 
delay  of  conversion.  Procrastination  in  spiritual  child-birth  is  a  cause  of  spiritual 
death.  Compunctions  die  away,  the  Spirit  ceases  to  strive,  anxiety  disappears,  the 
crisis  passes  and  never  comes  back.  3.  Israel's  conversion,  though  long  delayed,  mil 
ye<  take  place.  A  remnant  of  the  people  will  be  preserved,  and  these — though  the 
process  is  slow  and  tedious — will  yet  be  reborn  to  God.  The  nation  will  be  recovered 
u  from  death  (ver.  14). 

IV.  Gk)D  THK  Bansoueb  even  from  death.  (Yer.  14.)  Gbd's  grocioiu  purpose 
in  the  case  of  Israel,  of  the  elect  soul,  of  humanity,  cannot  be  defeated.  The  words 
contain  a  pledge :  1.  Of  national  restoration.  Israel,  though  now  cast  away,  will  yet 
be  recovered  as  from  death  (ch.  vi.  2 ;  Rom.  xi.  15).  God  had  promised  to  be  the 
God  of  this  people,  and  his  '.ove  would  triumph  even  over  their  unbejief  and  sin. 


430 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oa.  xiT.  1 — 9. 


Their  recovery  will  have  in  it  all  the  marvel  of  •  resurrection.  2.  0/  spiritual 
renewal.  There  ia  a  spiritual  death  from  which  recovery  is  more  difficult  than  from 
national  death,  or  even  from  the  death  of  the  hody.  A  nation,  having  played  its  part 
in  liistory,  and  perishing,  rarely  recovers  the  life  it  has  thus  lost.  It  needs  the  power 
of  God  to  restore  national  life  to  Israel.  It  needs  a  yet  higher  exercise  of  God's 
power  to  restore  life  to  their  souls,  dead  in  long-continued  unbelief.  But  every  soul 
by  nature  is  "dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  needs  a  moral  miracle  to  be  wi'ought 
upon  it  to  give  it  life.  God  alone  can  ransom  it  from  death.  Each  conversion  is 
a  new  triumph  over  him  that  hath  the  power  of  death.  3.  Of  bodily  resurrection. 
Salvation  would  be  incomplete  if  it  left  its  subjects  still  under  the  power  of  physical 
death.  This  is  clearer  under  the  New  Testament  than  it  was  under  the  Old,  but  it 
underlay  the  promiae  of  salvation  there  also.  Christ  has  made  the  truth  perfectly 
distinct.  He  has,  by  his  own  resurrection,  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  " 
(2  Tim.  i.  10).  "The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death"  (1  Cor.  xv.  26). 
Death  meanwhile  claims  all  as  his  prey.  He  reigns  over  all.  He  comes  to  men  in 
innumerable  forms  of  horror  and  anguish.  His  plagues  are  terrible.  But  Christ  will 
rescue  his  own  even  from  the  power  of  this  inexorable  destroyer.  Then,  in  their  full 
sense,  the  words  of  the  prophet  will  be  fulfilled  (1  Cor.  xv.  55). — J.  O. 

Yers,  15,  16. — Figure  and  fact.  The  end  of  the  kingdom  is  first  described  in 
expressive  figure;  it  is  then  foretold  in  plain  terms,  which  give  a  fearful  idea  of  its 
horrors. 

L  The  figure  anbwebs  to  thb  facts.  (Yer.  15.)  Ephraim  was  as  a  fruitful  tree 
among  his  brethren.  But :  1.  TTte  east  wind  would  blight  him.  To  this  answers  the 
statement  that  Samaria  would  become  desolate.  Ephraim  fed  on  wind,  and  pursued 
the  east  wind ;  now  its  hot,  scorching  breath  was  his  destruction.  2,  His  spring  would 
become  dry.  To  this  answers  the  statement  that  mothers  and  children  would  be 
destroyed.  These  were  the  spring,  the  fountains  of  his  fruitfalness.  He  would  be  dried 
up  at  his  roots.  The  hope  of  revival  through  offspring  would  be  cut  off  from  him. 
3.  His  treasures  of  goodly  vessels  would  he  plundered.  This  leaves  the  image  of  the 
tree.  It  returns  to  realism.  Plundering  would  succeed  victory.  We  may  apply  to 
sin.  It  blights  the  soul ;  robs  it  of  its  bloom  and  fruitfulness ;  dries  up  the  springs 
uf  its  life,  which  are  in  God ;  despoils  it  of  its  costly  treasures  of  goodness,  truth, 
holiness,  affection,  etc. 

II.  The  fact  is  not  lkss  tebbiblb  thah  thb  fioubb.  (Yer.  16.)  We  are  apt, 
in  reading  figurative  descriptions  of  the  doom  of  the  sinner— the  worm,  the  fire, 
weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  etc. — to  break  their  force  to  our  minds  by  the  secret 
reflection  that  they  are  "  only  figures."  "  Only  figures  I "  But  the  figures  surely  mean 
something.  And  is  the  reality  likely  to  be  less  terrible  than  the  figures  of  it?  The 
verse  before  us  should  warn  us  against  this  delusion.  We  have  in  ver.  16  the  figure ; 
we  have  the  reality  in  plain  terms  here.  Which  is  the  more  awful  1  The  naked 
description  of  what  will  happen  to  Samaria  greatly  surpasses  in  terribleness  all  the 
figures  that  are  employed  to  image  iU    And  what  was  predicted  actiudly  occurred. 

—i.  Ot 


EXPOSITION. 


OHAPTEB  XIV. 

Ver.  1. — ^The  foregoing  part  of  this  book 
abounds  with  denunciations  of  punishment ; 
this  closing  chapter  superabounds  with 
promises  of  pardon.  Wave  after  wave  of 
threatened  wrath  had  rolled  over  Israel  and 
come  in  unto  their  soul;  now  offer  after 
offer  of  grace  is  made  to  them.  0  Israel, 
return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God.  The  invita- 
tion to  return  implies  previous  departure, 
or  distance,  or  wandering  from  God.    The 


return  to  which  they  are  Invited  Is  ex- 
pressed, not  by  ^N^,  to  or  towards,  but  by  nj) 
quite  up  to,  or  as  fiu  as  right  home ;  the 
penitent,  therefore,  is  not  merely  to  turn 
his  mind  or  his  face  toward  God,  but  to 
turn  his  face  and  his  feet  home  to  God ;  he 
is  not  to  go  half  the  way  and  then  turn 
aside,  or  part  of  the  way  and  then  turn 
back,  but  the  whole  way ;  in  other  woids, 
his  repentance  is  to  be  complete  and  entire, 
wanting  nothing,  according  to  the  state 
ment  of  the  psalmist,  "  It  is  good  for  me  to 


CB.  XtT.  1— •.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


481 


draw  near  to  God."  As  pnniihment  was 
threatened  in  case  of  obstinate  impenitence, 
80  mercy  is  promised  on  condition  of 
thorough  repentance.  For  thou  hast  fallen 
by  thine  imquity.  A  reason  is  here  as- 
signed for  the  preceding  invitation ;  ka- 
shalta  i»  properly  "thou  hast  stumbled," 
"made  a  false  step,"  fallen,  yet  so  that 
recovery  was  among  future  possibilities, 
Tlie  same  thought  may  be  included  in  the 
fact  that  Jehovedi  continues  to  call  his  erring 
people  by  the  honoured  and  honourable 
name  of  Israel,  and  to  acknowledge  himself 
their  God.  Further,  many  and  grievous 
were  the  calamities  into  which  by  their  fall 
they  had  been  precipitated;  neither  were 
any  to  blame  but  themselves — their  iniquity 
or  their  folly  was  the  cause,  nor  was  there 
any  one  to  lift  them  up,  now  that  they  lay 
prostrate,  save  Jehovah.  After  referring  to 
the  desolation  of  Samaria  and  the  ruthless 
destruction  of  its  inhabitants,  as  portrayed 
in  the  last  verse  of  the  previous  chapter, 
Jerome  adds,  "  All  Israel  is  invited  to  re- 
pentance, that  he  who  has  been  debilitated, 
or  has  fallen  headlung  in  his  iniquities, 
may  return  to  the  physician  and  recover 
health,  or  that  be  who  had  fallen  headlong 
may  begin  to  stand."  The  penitent  is  to 
direct  his  thoughts  to  Jehovah ;  to  him  as 
Centre  he  is  attracted,  and  in  him  he  finds 
his  place  of  rest ;  nor  is  there  other  means 
of  recovery  or  source  of  help.  Thus  Eimchi 
says,  "For  thou  seest  that  throu^^h  thine 
iniquity  thou  hast  fallen,  therefore  it  behoves 
thee  to  return  to  Jehovah,  as  notliing  besides 
'«an  raise  thee  from  thy  fall  but  thy  return 
to  him."  "  There  is  none,"  suys  Aben  Ezra, 
"  can  raise  thee  from  thy  fall  but  the  Eternal 
alone." 

Yer.  2. — ^lake  with  yon  words,  and  tun 
to  the  Lord.  (1)  Some  render  this  clause, 
"Take  with  you  [i.e.  forget  not,  neglect 
not,  but  receive  with  obedient  spirit]  my 
words."  This  rendering  is  obviously  erro- 
neous. (2)  The  correct  translation  is  that 
of  Qie  Authorized  Version,  and  the  words 
referred  to  are  such  as  express  prayer  for 
pardon  and  confession  of  sin — the  audible 
sound  of  the  heart's  desires.  There  is  an 
allusion,  perhaps,  to  the  requirement  of  the 
Law:  "None  shall  appear  before  me 
empty."  Not  outward  sacrifices,  but  words 
of  confession,  were  the  offering  to  be  pre- 
sented. Thus  Cyril  eloquently  explains  it: 
"Ye  shall  propitiate  the  Deity,  not  by 
making  offerings  of  riches,  not  by  dedi- 
cating gold,  not  by  honouring  him  witil 
silver  resseis,  not  gladdening  him  by  sacri- 
fices of  oxen,  not  by  slaughtering  of  birds ; 
but  ye  shall  give  him  discoiirses  and 
wiah  to  praise  the  Lord  of  the  universe, 
appeasing  him."  To  the  same  purport  ia 
the  exposition  of  Aben  Eua :  "  He  desirea   I 


not  from  yon,  when  ye  go  to  seek  his  favour, 
treasures  or  burnt  offerings,  only  words  with 
which  je  are  to  confess; "  bo  also  Eimchi: 
"  He  does  not  require  of  you  on  your  return 
to  him  silver  or  gold  or  offering,  which  the 
Israelites  lavished  at  great  expense  on  their 
idols,  but  good  works  with  wiiich  ye  are  to 
confess  your  iniquities."  Say  onto  him, 
Take  away  all  iniquity,  and  receive  us  gra- 
ciously. On  turning  to  the  Lord  with  their 
whole  heart,  not  with  their  lips  only,  they 
ore  furnished  with  a  form  of  sound  words 
which  God  by  his  prophet  puts  into  their 
mouth.  Elsewhere  a  formula  is  prescribed, 
thus :  "  Publish  ye,  praise  ye,  and  say,  O 
Lord,  save  thy  people,  the  remnant  of 
Israel"  (Jer.  xxxi.  7);  compare  also  Iia. 
xlviii.  20;  Fs.  Ixvi.  3;  1  Chron.  xvi.  35. 

The  position  of  hs  before  the  verb  creates  a 
difficulty  and  causes  diversity  of  rendering  ; 
for  example,  (1)  besides  the  ordinary  ren- 
dering, which  takes  kol  as  holding  its  pecu- 
liar position  by  an  hypallage,  there  is  a 
modification  of  it :"  All  take  away  of  ini- 
quity." (2)  Some  supply  mem,  and  translate 
accordingly:  "From  all  take  away  ini- 
quity." Kimchi  explains  it  as  a  trans- 
position: "All  iniquity  forgive,"  and 
compares  Ezek.  xxxix.  11 ;  or,  uuderstanding 
U,  "Forgive  to  every  one  iniquity."  The 
object  of  the  separation  may  be  for  greater 
emphasis.  In  like  manner,  the  following 
clause  is  also  subject  to  diversity  of  trans- 
lation and  interpretalion.  There  is  (1)  the 
rendering  of  the  Authorized  Version,  wliicli 
appears  to  supply  U  before  tov :  "  Keoeive  us 
for  good,"  viz.  tn  boruum  partem,  or  gra- 
ciously ;  or, "  receive  our  prayer  graciously." 
(2)  Another  rendering  or  exposition  is : 
"  Take  what  is  good  (of  thine  own  to  bestow 
it  on  us);"  thus  in  the  sixty-eighth  psalm  at 
the  nineteenth  verse  God  is  said  to  receive 
gifts  among  men,  i.e.  for  distribution  among 
men,  and  hence  tlie  apostle,  in  Eph  iv.  8,  sub- 
stitutes eSwkc  for  ^Kaffe,  and  thus  expresses 
the  sense.  The  literal  sense  (3)  is  the  cor- 
rect sense,  namely,  "  and  receive  good  :  " 
"And  receive  good,"  says  Jerome,  "for 
unless  thou  hadst  borne  away  our  evil 
things  we  could  not  possibly  have  any  good 
thing  to  offer  thee,  according  to  that  which 
is  written,  '  Cease  from  evil  and  do  good.' " 
Thus  also  the  words  are  translated  and 
interpreted  by  Pusey:  "When  then  Israel 
and,  in  him,  the  penitent  soul,  is  taught  to 
say,  receive  good,  it  can  mean  only  the 
good  which  thou  thyself  hast  given;  as 
Uavid  says,  '  Of  thine  own  we  have  given 
thee ; ' "  while  he  adds  in  a  note  on  these 
words,  "No  one  would  have  doubted  that 
a  >p  meanii'ieceive  good,'  as  just  before^  n  'p 
means  'take  words,'  but  for  the  seeming  diffi- 
culty—What good  had  they  7  "    So  will  wa 


az 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


[oh.  xit.  1—9, 


render  the  calves  of  onr  lipa.  This  is  more 
accurately  rendered,  (1)  "  So  will  we  render 
young  bullocks,  even  our  lips."  The  word 
shillem,  to  render,  or  repay,  is  almost 
technical  in  iU  application  to  thank  offer- 
ings or  sacrifices  in  fulfilment  of  a  tow; 
the  best  animals  for  thank  offerings  were 
parim,  or  young  oxen ;  but  the  lips,  that  is, 
the  utterances  of  the  lips,  consisting  of 
prayers  or  praises,  or  both,  are  to  take  the 
place  of  the  animal  sacrifices  offered  Id 
thanksgiving.  Thus  the  psalmist  says, "  I 
will  praise  the  Name  of  God  with  a  song, 
and  will  magnify  him  with  thanksgiving. 
This  also  shall  please  the  Lord  better  than 
an  oz  or  bullock  that  hath  horns  and  hoofs." 
(2)  The  Septuagint,  reading  ns  instead  of 
D<'ia,  renders  by  Kopirhy  x*^^^""''  ^  which 
the  inspired  author  of  Hebrews  alludes, 
"  By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice 
of  praise  to  God  continually,  that  is,  the 
fruit  of  our  lips,  giving  thanks  [margin, 
■  confessing ']  to  his  Name ; "  or  perliaps  the 
reference  in  Hebrews  is  to  Isa.  Ivii.  19,  "I 
create  the  fruit  of  the  lips."  Further,  as 
words  of  confession  in  ver.  2  take  the 
place  of  sacrifices  of  sin  offerings,  so  here 
words  of  thanksgiving  replace  sacrifices  of 
thanksgiving. 

Yer.  3. — Asshar  shall  not  save  ub:  we 
will  not  ride  npon  horses :  neither  will  vre 
Bay  any  more  to  the  work  of  onr  hands, 
Ye  are  our  gods :  for  in  thee  the  fatherless 
findeth  meroy.  This  was  the  practical  side 
of  Israel's  repentance;  this  was  bringing 
forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  Here  was 
a  renunciation  of  all  hope  of  safety  from  the 
world-porwers — both  Assyria  and  Egypt. 
They  would  never  again  have  recourse  to 
Assyria  for  help,  nor  to  Egypt  for  horses ; 
nor  confide  in  their  own  unaided  power  or 
prowess ;  while  this  renunciation  of  worldly 
power  and  carnal  confidences  implied,  as  its 
opposite,  unfaltering  faith  in  the  protect- 
ing power  and  saving  strength  of  Jehovah. 
All  this  was  much,  and  yet  more  was  re- 
quired ;  next  to  such  renunciation  of  merely 
human  aid,  as  indicated,  and  its  contrary, 
the  recognition  of  Divine  assistance,  cumes 
the  absolute  and  complete  abandonment  of 
their  national  and  besetting  sin  of  idolatry. 
The^  have  so  far  come  to  themselves  and 
received  the  right  use  of  reason  as  to  con- 
fess that  the  manufacture  of  man's  hands 
cannot  be  man's  god,  thus  giving  up  with 
feelings  of  contempt  and  disgust  me  grovel- 
ling sin  of  idolatry  with  its  attendant  vices. 
Still  more,  they  are  penetrated  with  the 
conviction  that  man  without  &od  is  a  poor 
fatherless  creature,  in  no  better,  if  not  in  a 
worse,  condition  than  that  of  a  weak  orphan 
child.  They  have  the  consolation  at  the 
lame  time  that  for  all  such,  on  their  return 
to  him,  the  father  of  the  fatherless  and  the 


God  of  the  orphan  has  bowels  of  tenderost 
compassion.  To  the  presumed  prayer  ot 
the  penitent  an  answer  overflowing  with 
meroy  is  promised  at  once,  and  by  God 
himself  in  the  next  section,  consisting  of — 
Vers,  i — 7. — I  will  heal  their  backsliding, 
I  will  love  them  freely :  for  mine  anger  ia 
turned  away  from  him.  The  penitential 
prayer  put  in  the  mouth  of  the  people 
receives  in  this  verse  a  gracious  response; 
words  of  contrite  confession  are  echoed  back 
in  accents  of  compassion  and  consolation. 
When  thus  penitent  and  prayerful  they 
returned  to  the  Lord,  he  promises  them 
favour  as  well  as  forgiveness,  so  as  to  h(  al 
the  moral  malady  under  which  they  had 
long  laboured,  remedy  the  evil  effects  of 
their  apostasy,  ami  withhold  the  stripes  he 
was  going  to  inflict  M'ehubhatham  means 
(1)  their  turning  away  from  God  and  all 
included  therein — defection,  rebellion,  idol- 
atry, and  other  sins.  The  disease  would  be 
healed,  and  its  consequences  averted.  (2) 
Some,  however,  understand  the  word,  in  a 
good  sense,  to  mean  "  conversion  "  or  "  the 
converted,"  the  abstract  being  put  for  the 
concrete;  the  blessing  is  thus  promised 
them  when  they  turned  or  returned  to 
God.  Thus  the  Syriac  version.  (3)  The 
LXX.  again,  connecting  m'uhubhah  with 
yashav,  to  sit  or  dwell,  render  it  by  KaroMiar, 
that  is,  "I  will  heal  their  dwelling."  There 
is  little  doubt  that  (1)  is  the  correct  trans- 
lation, and  it  is  generally  accepted  as  such. 
They  are  next  assured  of  God's  love,  and 
that  spontaneously  {p^J},  the  preposition  2' 
understood)  with  ready  vrUlinghood  and  un- 
feignedly.  God's  love  is  (a)  free,  antici- 
pating its  objects,  not  waiting  to  be  merited 
or  piirchased,  without  money  and  without 
price ;  it  is  (6)  also  purest  and  most  sincere 
affection,  altogether  unlike  that  feigned 
affection  sometimes  found  among  men,  who 
profess  much  love  while  their  heart  goeth 
after  their  covetousness,  or  after  some  other 
and  different  object  from  that  pretended. 
Then  follows  an  assurance  that  there  is  no 
barrier  to  the  exercise  and  no  obstacle  to 
the  outgoing  of  God's  love;  the  turning 
away  of  God's  anger  from  Israel  is  the 
ground  of  such  assurance.  Some  copies 
read  mimmeni,  my  anger  is  turned  away 
from  me,  instead  of  mimmena  ;  this,  however, 
is  erroneous,  though  the  sense  is  not  much 
affected  by  it.  The  error  may  have  arisen 
from  a  misunderstanding  of  Jer.  ii.  35. 
Bashi  explains  the  verse  correctly:  "After 
they  have  thus  spoken  before  me:  I  will 
heal  them  of  tlieir  apostasy,  and  luve  then 
of  my  own  free  will;  although  they  them- 
selves are  not  worthy  of  love,  yet  will 
I  love  them  freely,  for  mine  anger  has 
turned  away .  from  them."  Aben  Ezra 
says,    "Backsliding    is   in  the   soul   what 


CH,  XIV.  1 — 9.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA. 


433 


disease  is  In  tlie  body,  therefore  lie  uses  the 
word  '  heal.'  But  God  proceeds  to  perform 
what  he  has  promised ;  he  does  not  confine 
hia  goodness  to  words,  he  exhibits  it  in 
works,  as  the  following  verses  show."  I  will 
be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel.  "  The  Jussive 
assumes  different  shades  of  meaning,  varying 
with  the  situation  or  authority  of  the 
speaker. . . .  Sometimes,  from  the  circum- 
stanoes  of  the  case,  the  command  becomes 
a  permission :  Hosea  ziv.  6,  '  I  will  be  as 
the  dew  to  Israel:  let  him  flourish,  i|*i,  and 

ilrihe  forth  hia  roots  as  Lebanon ' "  (Driver). 
In  lauds  where  there  is  little  rain,  the  dew, 
falling  copiously,  fertilizes  the  earth,  re- 
freshes the  languid  plants,  revives  the  face 
of  natnre,  and  makes  all  things  grow.  Thus 
the  dew  becomes  the  source  of  fruitfulness. 
So  God,  by  his  Spirit's  grace,  is  the  Source 
of  Israel's  spiritual  froitfulness.  He  shall 
grow  (margin,  bloasowi)  as  the  lily.  This 
comparison  suggests  many  qualities,  any 
one  of  which  may  characterize,  or  all  of 
which  may  combine  in,  the  spiritual  growth 
thus  pictured.  There  is  the  purity  of  the 
lily,  the  beauty  of  the  lUy,  the  fecundity  of 
the  lily,  the  perfume  of  the  lily,  the  rapidity 
of  ita  growth,  the  stately  slightness  of  its 
stem.  We  may  combine  the  rapidity  of  its 
growth ;  its  fecundity,  with  regard  to  which' 
Pliny  informs  us  that  a  single  root  produces 
fifty  bulbs;  its  beauty,  to  which  our  Lord 
refers  in  contrast  with  the  glory  of  Solomon. 
But  its  root  is  weak,  and  he,  on  that  account 
perhaps,  subjoins  :'  And  oast  forth  (margin, 
strike)  his  roots  as  Lebanon.  Whether  it 
mean  that  the  roots  are  as  the  trees  of  Le- 
banon or  the  mountain  of  Lebanon  itself, 
the  thought  expressed  by  this  comparison  is 
stability.  "  As  the  trees  of  Lebanon,"  says 
Jerome, "  which  strike  their  roots  as  far 
down  into  the  depths  as  they  lift  their 
heads  up  into  the  air,  so  that  they  can  be 
shaken  by  no  storm,  but  by  their  stable 
massiveuess  maintain  ttieir  position."  His 
branches  shall  spread ;  margin,  go ;  rather, 
go  on.  This  feature  in  the  representation 
denotes  enlargement  or  expansion.  The 
tender  branches  (suckers)  spreading  out  in 
all  directions  very  aptly  set  forth  the  mul- 
tiplication of  Israel  or  their  growth  and 
increase  numerically.  But  branches  strag- 
gling, crooked,  and  ill-shaped  would  rather 
be  a  blemish  than  a  beauty.  It  is,  therefore, 
added :  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree. 
The  olive  has  been  called  the  crown  of 
the  fruit  trees  of  Palestine,  but  besides,  its 
fruitage  so  plentiful  and  useful,  the  splen- 
dour of  its  green,  and  the  enduring  fresh- 
ness of  its  foliage,  make  it  a  vivid  picture  of 
that  ieavty  of  holiness  or  spiritual  graces 
which  it  is  here  employed  to  represent. 
There  is  still  an  eidditional  element  of 
interest  pertaining    to    this    goodly  tree. 


namely.  And  his  smell  as  lebanon.  This 
signifies  the  fragrance  of  this  beautiful  tree 
of  righteousness.  The  smell  of  Lebanon  is 
referred  to  in  Cant.  iv.  11,  "  And  the  smell 
of  thy  garments  is  like  the  smell  of  Le- 
banon." What  with  its  cedars,  and  spices, 
and  fruit,  and  flowers,  and  aromatio  sbmbs, 
and  fragrant  vines,  Lebanon  must  perfume 
the  air  with  the  most  delightful  odours. 
Thus  acceptable  to  God  and  pleasing  to 
man  shall  Israel  become.  The  commen- 
tators quote  with  commendation  Bosen- 
miiller's  explanation  of  the  individual 
features  of  this  inimitable  picture :  "  The 
rooting  indicates  stability;  the  spreading 
of  the  branches,  propagation  and  the  mul- 
titude of  inhabitants ;  the  splendour  of  the 
olive,  beauty  and  glory,  and  that  constant 
and  lasting;  the  fragrance,  hilarity  and 
loveliness."  The  simUe  changes  into  the 
metaphor;  Israel,  from  being  likened  to  a 
tree,  becomes  the  tree.  They  that  dwell 
under  his  shadow  shall  return;  they  shall 
revive  as  the  com,  and  grow  (margin, 
blossom')  as  the  vine:  the  stent  (rather, 
renown)  thereof  shall  be  as  the  wine  of 
Lebanon.  There  is  some  difSculty  and 
consequent  diversity  of  rendering  and  ex- 
planation in  connection  with  thie  verse.  If 
the  tree  be  Israel  in  ita  collective  or  national 
capacity,  the  dwellers  under  its  shadow  are 
the  members  of  the  nation,  separately  and 
severally,  flourishing  under  the  widespread 
branches  of  this  umbrageous  tree.  The 
word  yashubhu  is  explained :  (1)  (o)  return, 
»'.«.  betake  themselves  to  his  shadow,  which 
is  incongruous,  for  how  could  they  be  said 
to  return  to  their  own  shadow  or  dwell 
securely  under  it  ?  (6)  return  to  their  native 
land,  so  the  Chaldee, — this  is  somewhat 
better ;  (c)  return  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
said  of  Israelites  who  had  abandoned  it, 
not  properly  of  Gentiles  turning  to  that 
worship ;  (d)  EoaenmuUer,  comparing  Judg. 
XV.  19  and  1  Sam.  xxx.  12,  explains  it  in 
the  aenae  of  coming  to  themselves,  reviving. 
(2)  Keil  constructs  yashubhu  adverbially  by 
a  common  idiom  with  ychayyu,  and  (a) 
translates  "  shall  give  life  to  come  again," 
that  is,  "  Those  who  sit  beneath  the  shade 
of  Israel,  the  free  that  is  bursting  into  leaf, 
will  revive  com,  cause  it  to  return  to  life,  or 
produce  it  for  nourishment,  satiety,  and 
strengthening."  Similarly  the  Vulgate,  "sus- 
tain life  by  corn."  This,  however,  must 
appear  tame  after  the  splendid  promises 
that  went  before,  (b)  Vivify ;  i.e.  produce 
seed  like  com,  and  rejoice  in  a  numerous 
offspring  as  from  a  seed  of  com  many 
proceed ;  according  to  this, "  seed"  (y^)  most 
be  supplied,  and  eaph  of  comparison.  The 
added  clause  agrees  with  this,  for  the 
flourishing  of  the  vine  also  symbolizes  pix)- 
lific  persons  Ccomp.  Ps.  oxxviii.  3).  Further, 

2  r 


IM 


THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA. 


[oh.  xit.  1—9. 


the  Tine  doea  not  always  flourish,  yet,  not 
like  the  corn  which  after  harvest  ceases 
and  is  no  more  seen,  its  root  remains,  and 
next  year  grows  green  and  yields  its  fruit 
anew.  The  fame  of  the  wine  of  Lebanon 
is  celebrated  for  its  taste  and  fragrance. 
Eimclii  cites  Asaph,  a  physician,  as  writing 
that  the  wine  of  Lebanon,  of  Harmon,  of 
Carmel,  of  the  mountains  of  Israel  and 
Jerusalem  and  Caphtor,  surpass  all  others 
iu  flavour,  taste,  and  for  medicinal  purposes. 
Ver.  8. — Ephraim  shall  say,  What  have  I 
to  do  any  more  with  idols?  This  is  full, 
final,  and  for  ever  a  renunciation  of  idolatry 
on  the  part  of  Israel.  I  have  heard  him, 
and  observed  him:  I  am  like  a  green  fir 
tree.  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found.  This  is 
God's  promise,  that  his  eye  is  fixed  on 
Israel  in  order  to  look  after  him,  care  for 
liim,  and  provide  for  him,  and  to  protect 
and  prosper  him;  while  the  figure  of  a 
green  fir  tree  is  the  pledge  of  shelter  and 
security.    But,  though  the  fir  tree  is  ever 


green,  it  is  fruitless;  and  therefore  it  is 
added  that  God  will  prove  the  Source  of 
fruitfulness,  and  supply  all  that  his  people 
shall  or  can  ever  need. 

Ver.  9. — ^Who  is  wise,  and  he  shall  under 
■tand  these  things?  prudent,  and  he  shall 
Imow  them  1  for  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are 
right,  and  the  just  shall  walk  in  them: 
but  the  trangressors  shall  fall  therein.  This 
verse  demands  attention  to  all  the  prophet 
has  written,  whether  for  warning,  or  reproof, 
or  correction  in  righteousness,  or  encourage- 
ment to  piety  and  virtue,  and  evidently 
alludes  to  Deut.  xxxii.  4.  The  ways  of  the 
Lord  are  those  he  prescribes  for  them  to 
walk  in,  as  also  the  ways  he  takes  in 
guiding,  guarding,  and  governing  men. 
Like  the  dictates  of  the  Word,  so  the  dis- 
pensations of  his  providence  are  to  some  the 
savour  of  life,  to  others  the  savour  of  deatii ; 
therefore  it  is  added  that,  while  the  righteous 
walk  therein,  the  wicked  stumble  in  them 
(comp.  Deut  xxx.  19,  20). 


H0MILETIC8. 

Yen,  1—3. — The  fallen  invited  to  return.  The  history  of  Israel  is  the  moral  history 
of  the  world,  at  least  in  miniature. 

I.  HiSTOBY  REPEATS  ITSELF.  The  history  of  Israel  repeats  itself  in  the  history  of 
mankind  in  general.  Their  history  is  the  history  of  sin  and  of  salvation,  of  ruin  and  of 
recovery,  of  the  mercy  of  God  and  of  the  backsliding  of  man.  Their  bondage  in  Egypt 
represents  the  slavery  of  sin ;  their  rescue  out  of  the  hand  of  the  oppressor,  our  redemp 
tiun;  their  sojourn  in  the  wilderness,  our  strangership  on  earth;  their  entrance  into 
Canaan,  our  admission  into  the  better  country,  even  the  heavenly ;  their  backsliding 
from  time  to  time,  our  own  wanderings  of  heart  and  life  from  the  living  God ;  their 
return  to  the  path  of  obedience,  our  repentance. 

IL  God's  beadiness  to  beceite  the  penitent.  The  reproofs  for  sin  and  threaten- 
ing! of  wrath  scattered  over  the  preceding  chapters  of  this  book  now  give  place  to 
invitations  to  repentance  and  promises  of  mercy.  The  former  were  a  preparation  for  the 
hitter.  Not  only  so,  even  interspersed  with  reproofs  for  sin  we  find  most  gracious  calls 
to  repentance ;  alongside  the  threatenings  of  wrath  are  the  most  precious  promises.  It 
is  in  this  way  that  God  wounds  in  order  to  make  whole  ;  when  he  convinces  us  of  sin, 
his  object  is  to  comfort  us ;  when  he  brings  to  mind  our  sin,  it  is  that  he  may  lead  us 
to  the  Saviour ;  when  he  proves  to  us  our  ruin  by  sin,  he  is  at  pains  to  point  us  to  the 
remedy  and  provide  for  our  restoration ;  having  warned  us  of  our  danger,  he  urges  ua  to 
the  discharge  of  duty.  He  deals  with  us  as  with  Israel  at  the  time  to  whick  the 
prophet  refers,  showing  us  our  fall  and  how  we  are  to  rise  again;  he  urges  Ma  to 
repentance,  instructing  us  what  to  do  and  what  to  say,  and  encouraging  as  withal  by 
God's  willingness  to  receive  us  on  repentance. 

III.  Man's  fall  and  its  cause.  In  the  passage  before  us  the  words  apply  in  the 
first  instance  to  Israel ;  they  had  stumbled,  such  being  the  meaning  of  the  original  word. 
Their  stumbling-blocks  were  their  idols ;  they  had  forgotten  the  living  and  true  God ; 
they  had  proved  ungrateful  for  his  benefits  and  unmindful  of  his  favours.  Despising 
the  riches  of  his  goodness  and  forbearance,  they  had  lapsed  into  gross  idolatry;  they  had 
sunk  deep  into  that  degrading  sin,  making  molten  images  of  their  silver  and  idols 
according  to  their  own  understanding, — all  of  it  the  work  of  the  craftsman.  Their 
ingratitude  for  the  Divine  goodness  made  their  iniquity  still  less  excusable,  for  accord- 
ing to  the  multitude  of  his  fruit  they  increased  the  altars,  according  to  the  goodness  of 
his  land  he  made  goodly  images.  1^9  wonder  the  Majesty  of  heaven  was  provoked  with 
that  itifihecked  and  rebellious  people.    But  the  fall  of  Israel  reminds  ua  of  tine/cUl  cf 


OH.XIT.  1— »,]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  486 

man,  and  leads  us  naturally  to  revert  to  the  infancy  of  our  race.  1.  Before  the  Fall. 
When  we  picture  to  ourselves,  as  far  as  the  Scripture  record  enables  ns,  the  ploAx  of  our 
fii-st  parents  in  the  state  of  pristine  innocence,  we  think  of  that  lovely  gardea  "  planted 
eastward  in  Eden  ; "  of  its  trees  and  sh  rubs  ;  of  its  fruits  and  flowers ;  of  the  rivers  that 
watered  it;  of  its  unclouded  sky;  of  the  genial  warmth  of  the  glorious  sun  fructifying 
and  beautifying  it;  of  the  dews  that  refreshed  it;  of  man  its  caretaker  and  cultivator ; 
of  his  pleasant  position  in  that  paradise,  placed  there  as  he  was  to  dress  it  and  to  keep 
it.  To  this  must  be  added  the  communion  of  the  creature  with  the  Creator,  so  close,  so 
cordial,  and  so  confidential  as  that  communion  then  must  have  been.  If  Enoch,  after 
•in  and  Satan  had  done  their  worst,  still  walked  with  God ;  if  Abraham  was  called,  not 
only  the  father  of  the  faithful,  but  the  friend  of  God ;  if  God  spake  face  to  face  with 
Moses,  as  a  man  speaketh  with  his  friend  ; — we  may  form  snme  faint  idea,  and  it  is  only 
a  faint  idea,  of  that  heavenly  communion  wliich  man  there  enjoyed  with  his  Maker  as 
he  walked  in  the  gartlen  in  the  cool  of  the  day.  2.  After  the  Fall,  We  know  how  the 
scene  was  changed — suddenly  and  shockingly  changed.  We  have  seen  a  picture 
designed  to  represent  the  change  whicli  sin  introduced  into  Paradise,  and  the  wreck 
which  iniquity  wrought.  In  one  part  of  the  picture  all  is  beauty,  all  is  loveliness  ;  the 
sky  is  clear,  earth  beneath  is  charming;  above,  below,  around,  everything  appears 
inexpressibly  gay  and  grand  and  gorgeous.  Man  is  the  monarch  of  all ;  every  bird  of 
every  wing  is  subject  to  him,  every  animal  of  every  species  is  submissive  to  his  sway, 
even  the  most  savage  beast  of  prey  owns  his  sovereignty.  The  lion  crouches  at  his  feet, 
he  strokes  the  tiger  with  his  hand.  But  no  sooner  has  he  tasted  the  forbidden  fruit 
than  the  sky  is  clouded,  lightning  flashes  with  fearful  fury,  the  elements  are  at  war 
with  him.  The  animals,  lately  so  meek  and  mild,  rise  in  rebellion  against  him — ^the 
lion  opens  his  mouth  in  wrath,  the  tiger  is  wild  with  fury.  Our  first  parents  themselves, 
shivering  with  horror,  shuddering  with  fright,  are  hurried  out  of  Paradise.  A  flaming 
Bword  prevents  their  return,  and  guards  on  every  side  the  tree  of  life.  Such  is  the 
painting  referred  to,  and  it  pictures  a  dread  reality.  It  points  out  how  man  fell,  and 
liow  far  he  fell  from  his  state  of  primeval  bliss,  of  fellowship  with  the  Holy  One,  and  of 
Divine  favour.  3.  T/ie  cause  of  such  a  fall.  Iniquity  was  the  cause,  as  we  here  read 
of  Israel,  "  Thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  In  that  iniquity  there  were  various 
elements ;  when  analyzed  it  is  found  to  be  made  up  of  several  component  parts.  There 
was  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  for  the  tree  was  good  for  food ;  there  was  the  lust  of  the  eyes, 
for  that  tree  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes ;  there  was  the  pride  of  life,  it  was  a  tree  to  be 
desired  to  make  one  wise — "  Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  eviU"  There  was, 
in  short,  rebellion  against  the  mildest  authority ;  there  was  disobedience  to  the  most 
reasonable  command.  4.  Consequences  of  the  Fall  are  seen  in  posterity.  Wlien  we  read 
the  records  of  the  ancient  nations  of  heathendom,  even  the  most  enlightened  and 
polished,  we  cannot  fail  to  be  convinced  of  the  deep  degradation  into  which  man  by 
iniquity  hiad  fallen.  In  Egypt,  the  cradle  of  civilization,  men  worshipped  animals  and 
plants,  and  even  reptiles.  In  Greece,  with  all  its  boasted  intellectual  superiority, 
jesthetio  tastes,  and  fine  arts,  men  worshipped  a  host  of  false  gods,  deified  men,  and 
even  impersonations  of  the  lowest  passions  and  worst  vices  that  agitate  the  human 
heart ;  while  of  Athens  itself  it  was  said  that  you  could  as  easily  find  a  god  as  a  man  in 
that  celebrated  city.  In  Rome  men  multiplied  gods,  for,  in  addition  to  the  national 
divinities,  they  readily  admitted  into  their  pantheon  the  gods,  however  monstrous  and 
motley,  of  the  nations  which  they  conquered.  Among  the  people  of  Iwael  in  the 
prophet's  time  the  great  besetting  sin  was  idolatry  with  all  its  foul  accompaniments. 
In  heathen  lands  at  the  present  day  it  is  still  the  same  ;  multitudes  bow  down  to  stocks 
and  stones,  and  call  these  vanities  gods.  Can  anything  afford  clearer  evidence  of  the 
fearful  fall  of  our  race  than  this  sottish  idolatry  of  ancient  and  modern  heathen,  ai 
also  of  the  Hebrew  people,  though  so  highly  favoured  with  the  written  Law,  besides  that 
which  they  had  in  common  with  their  heathen  neighbours?.  We  forbear  to  speak  of 
the  gross  impurities  and  shocking  immoralities  that  go  hand-in-hand  with  idolatry. 
5;  Illustration  of  the  FaU.  Of  manifold  illustrations  which  the  subject  admits  taka 
that  of  a  stately  tree.  Its  dimensions  are  mighty  and  magnificent— its  top  waves  high 
In  air,  its  branches  spread  far  around,  its  leafy  honours  are  luxuriant,  its  foliag* 
umbrageous;  it  claims  or  seems  to  claim  supremacy  over  all  the  forest  trees.  But  the 
axe  is  laid  to  its  root.   You  beg  the  woodman  to  spare  that  tree.  It  ii  Tain,  however ;  he 


4M  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSSA.  [ch.xit.1— «L 

has  madenp  hit  mind,  and  U  is  doomed  to  fall.  Blow  after  blow  is  struck ;  the  ftnrdy 
■trokea  are  redoubled ;  at  length  the  root  is  giving  way,  the  top  is  nodding,  the  tree 
topples  to  its  falL  One  creak,  one  crash,  and  the  goodly  tree  is  prostrate ;  ruin  spreads 
the  ground.  Ere  long  the  branches  wither  and  the  leaves  decay.  What  a  contrast 
between  that  tree  flourishing  in  the  stateliness  of  its  strength  and  the  loveliness  of  its  life, 
and  that  same  tree  felled  to  the  earth,  its  leaves  stripped  off,  its  branches  lopped,  the  whole 
a  sad  emblnm  of  decay,  a  solemn  memorial  of  destruction  1  Such  is  the  contrast  between 
man  in  his  original  purity,  while  standing  by  faith,  and  man  at  the  present  day  fallen 
by  iniquity.  6.  Oreatness  of  the  Fall.  When  the  great  Roman  dictator  had  usurped 
the  liberties  of  his  country  and  changed  the  repubUcan  form  of  government  to  the 
imperial ;  when  he  had  overcome  all  opposition,  conquered  all  enemies,  and  fully  gained 
the  mastery ;  when  he  had  reached  the  summit  of  popularity  and  power ; — just  then  the 
daggers  of  the  conspirators  smote  him  to  the  earth.  He  fell  at  the  foot  of  his  great 
rival's  statue.  The  friend  who  spoke  his  funeral  oration  and  improved  the  occasion  did 
justly  magnify  that  fall,  exclaiming,  as  well  he  might,  "  What  a  fall  was  there,  my 
countrymen  I "  But  what,  after  all,  is  the  fall  of  the  warrior,  or  hero,  or  emperor,  even 
from  the  pinnacle  of  his  fame  and  of  his  fortune,  compared  with  the  fall  of  an  immortal 
soul  by  sin,  dragged  down  into  the  deep  pit  of  perdition  ?  The  sight  of  the  fallen 
warrior,  as  he  sat  amid  the  ruins  of  Carthage,  has  furnished  a  subject  for  men  to 
moralize  on,  while  historians  have  commented  on  the  fact;  and  it  is  indeed  sufficiently 
impressive.  The  harmony  that  existed  between  the  person  and  the  place  was  neces- 
sarily striking  and  even  startling;  the  fate  of  the  one  was  so  like  that  of  the  other,  the 
downfall  of  the  one  was  so  similar  to  the  desolation  of  the  other,  that  we  scarcely  know 
which  of  the  two  is  more  entitled  to  the  tear  of  pity  or  sigh  of  sympathy — the  degra- 
dation of  the  chieftain  or  the  destruction  of  the  city.  Yet  greater  far  are  the 
degradation  and  desolation  which  the  blight  of  sin  brings  upon  person  or  place. 

7.  Praelioat  consideration!.  We  need  not  travel  far  for  proof  of  our  fallen  state ;  we 
do  not  need  to  go  back  to  our  first  parents  except  for  the  purpose  of  tracing  the  evil  to 
its  fountain-head ;  we  need  not  visit  pagan  lands,  whether  past  or  present ;  we  do  not 
require  to  quit  the  lands  of  Christendom.  The  condition  of  the  Hebrew  people  as  set 
forth  by  the  Prophet  Hosea  is  one  th^t  often  repeats  itself  in  the  experiences — some  of 
them  sad  enough — of  everyday  life.  How  many  have  fallen  by  iniquity  around  us  I 
How  many  are  falling  by  iniquity  at  our  very  doors,  on  this  side  and  on  thatl  How 
many  have  we  known  to  begin  life  well,  but  they  fell  by  iniquity  I  The  wrecks  of  the 
fallen  are  strewn  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left.  Some  fall  by  drunkenness,  some 
by  lewdness,  some  by  want  of  rectitude  and  right  principle,  some  by  what  the  world 
calls  unsteadiness.    If  the  sword  slays  its  thousands,  iniquity  slays  its  tens  of  thousands. 

8.  Personal  duties.  Several  personal  duties  of  much  importance  may  be  learnt  from 
this  part  of  the  subject ;  these  may  be  expressed  in  Scripture  language  as  follows :  "  Let 
him  that  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall ; "  "  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 
election  sure ;  for  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall ; "  "  Beware  lest  ye  also, 
being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  steadfastness."  Also 
pity  the  fallen ;  try  to  lift  them  up ;  pray  for  the  backslider  who  has  fallen  back  from 
the  position  he  seemed  to  have  attained,  and  seek  to  restore  such  a  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness.  ' 

IV.  The  betubn  of  the  penitent.  Many  motives,  and  those  of  the  most  powerful 
kind,  urge  the  sinner  to  return  to  God.  1.  There  is  the  character  of  the  invitation.  It 
is  an  earnest  one,  a  precious  one,  and  a  glorious  one.  It  is  the  gospel  re-echoing  through 
the  past  and  resounding  about  us  at  the  present.  This  invitation  proves  the  he^ht, 
and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth  of  the  Divine  goodness.  2.  There  is  the  Author  o( 
the  invitation.  It  proceeds  from  the  Friend  whom  we  have  treated  so  ungratefully  and 
so  ungraciously ;  he  comes  after  us,  as  it  were,  calling  and  entreating  ns  to  return ;  h« 
piomises  us  a  hearty  welcome  when  we  do  return ;  he  assures  us  that  his  heart  and 
hearth  and  home  stand  open  to  receive  us ;  his  arms  are  stretched  out  to  embrace  us. 
8.  There  are  the  persons  invited.  The  vilest  are  subjects  of  this  invitation;  the  oldest, 
the  worst,  the  most  wicked,  are  comprehended  ;  they  are  offered  present  pardon,  they 
are  assured  of  instant  forgiveness,  and  all  without  money  and  without  price:  "Th« 
Si^rit  and  the  bride  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come.  And  1st  him 
that  la  athirst  ooma    Aod  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  wator  o(  life  freelj."   Oh, 


cH.  xiT.  1—9.1  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE  A.  437 


then,  since  God  is  waiting  and  willing  to  be  gracious,  let  not  the  sinner  ignore  that  good- 
ness, nor  regard  it  with  insensibility,  nor  trample  underfoot  his  great  mercy,  nor  treat 
his  gracious  overtures  as  the  idle  wind  that  passeth  by ;  but  allow  himself  to  be  led  by 
the  goodness  of  God  to  repentance. 

V.  The  hodr  of  beturnino  to  God.  We  are  to  take  with  us  words,  as  the 
worshipper  in  the  olden  time  did  not  go  empty-handed,  but  brought  with  him  an 
offering  when  he  went  to  worship  God.  1.  The  words  we  are  required  to  bring  are 
words  of  confession,  like  the  poor  prodigal  when  he  said, "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against 
Heaven,  and  before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son ;  "  like  the  contrite 
publican  when  he  cried, "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  If  we  thus  confess  our  sins, 
he  "  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous- 
ness." 2.  There  must  he  petition  as  well  as  confession;  our  words  must  be  words  of  earnest 
pleading.  Nor  are  we  left  without  instruction  on  this  head ;  suitable  petitions  are 
suggested,  and  the  very  words  put  in  our  lips.  There  is,  according  to  the  Authorized 
Version,  a  petition  for  forgiveness  and  one  for  favour.  The  former  is,  "  Take  away  all 
iniquity ;  "  for  it  is  iniquity  that  has  wrought  our  ruin,  it  is  sin  that  is  the  source  of  all 
our  sorrows  ;  take  it  away,  for  by  it  we  have  fallen.  Take  it  all  away — the  guilt  of  it, 
the  defilement  of  it,  the  dominion  of  it,  the  love  of  it,  and  the  practice  of  it.  Take  it  all 
away  and /or  ever,  for  it  is  only  thus  we  can  be  saved;  only  thus  our  souls  are  washed 
and  justified  and  sanctified  in  the  Kame  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our 
God.  The  second  part  of  the  petition  pleads  for  favour ;  it  is,  "  Receive  us  graciously ; " 
that  is,  receive  us  into  thy  favour,  thy  family,  and  thy  service.  '  Receive  us  graciously, 
that  is,  gratuitously,  of  thy  free  favour  and  sovereign  grace;  not  on  the  ground  of 
innocence,  for— 

"  Not  In  our  innocence  we  trust — 
We  Ixjw  before  thee  in  the  dust ; 
And  through  our  Saviour's  blood  alone 
We  seek  acceptance  at  thy  throne." 

Not  on  the  ground  of  merit,  for  we  have  sinned  and  merit  only  wrath ;  not  on  th« 
ground  of  price,  for  we  have  nothing  to  pay- — 

"  Nothing  in  our  hand  we  bring, 
Bimply  to  thy  oroBS  we  cling." 

Not  on  the  ground  of  works,  for  we  are  saved  solely  of  the  Divine  mercy,  according  to 
the  riches  of  his  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  There  are  words  of  thanksgiving.  The 
calves,  even  the  lips,  are  the  thank  offerings  and  service  of  the  lips  in  general ;  nor  do 
these  differ  aught  from  the  fruiit  of  the  lips.  Thanksgiving,  praise,  prayer,  self-dedica- 
tion, and  self-surrender  are  all  expressed  by  the  lips,  and  are  thus  their  offerings  or 
theii  fruit. 

"Nay,  rather  unto  me,  thy  God, 
Thanksgiving  offer  thou  j 
To  the  Most  High  perform  thj"  woid, 

And  fully  pay  thy  vow : 
And  in  the  day  of  thy  distresi 

Do  thou  unto  me  cry ; 
I  will  deliver  thee,  and  then 
My  Name  shalt  glorify." 

VL  Fbuits  meet  fob  bepentanoe.  These  in  the  present  instance  consist  In  the 
complete  rejection  of  carnal  confidences  and  sole  dependence  on  God.  The  penitent 
[sraelite  renounces  all  confidence  in  worldly  policy,  and  worldly  allies  as  secured  by 
such  policy — the  Assyrian  and  the  Egyptian  alike.  He  renounces  his  idolatrous 
practices  and  superstitious  devotions ;  and,  depending  no  longer  on  foreign  help,  or 
objects  and  observances  of  idol-worship,  or  domestic  resources,  he  places  his  entire  and 
undivided  trust  in  the  living  God,  Henceforth  the  rule  of  his  conduct  and  motto  of 
his  life  may  be  conceived  as  summed  up  in  the  wotds  of  the  psalmist :  "  Some  trust  in 
chariots,  and  some  in  horses  :  but  we  will  remember  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God." 
It  has  been  well  said  that  "  there  ia  no  sin  more  usual  among  men  than  carnal  confi- 


438  THK  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xit.  1—9. 

denca ;  to  lean  on  our  own  wisdom,  or  wealth,  or  power,  or  supplies  from  others ;  to  deify 
counsels  and  armies,  or  horses  and  treasures,  and  to  let  our  hearts  rise  or  fall,  sink  or 
bear  up  within  us,  according  as  the  creature  is  helpful  or  useless,  nearer  or  further  from 
lis ;  as  if  God  were  not  a  Q-od  afar  off,  as  well  as  near  at  hand."  This  was  one  of  Israel's 
great  sins,  and  which  on  repentance  is  renounced.  This  is  a  common  sin,  and  one  which 
all  must  renounce,  trusting,  not  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  but  sanctifying  the  Lord  alone  in  our 
hearts.  It  is  when  we  feel  our  condition  in  this  world  to  be  one  of  orphanage,  of 
weakness,  destitution,  desolateness,  and  distress,  that  we  repose  trustfully  and  securely 
in  the  Divine  mercy  and  gracious  fatherhood  of  God. 

Vers.  4—7. — These  verses  describe  the  happy  result  of  ItraeP$  penitenei  and  (lit 
merciful  response  to  IsraeVs  prayer.  1.  The  pardon  sought  is  secured,  and  that  for  the 
greatest  sin — that  of  backsliding,  and  so  for  all  minor  trespasses.  The  acceptance  prayed 
for  is  presently  and  plentifully  vouchsafed.  The  dark  storm-cloud  of  God's  wrath  is 
dispersed  aud  dispelled  for  ever.  2.  We  next  learn  the  fulness  of  God's  forgiving  love 
and  bis  superabundant  mercy  to  them  that  trust  in  him.  By  the  most  pleasing  figures 
we  are  taught  what  God  promises  to  be  to  his  {ieople;  what  they  themselves  become; 
and  what  a  blessing  they  prove  to  others. 

I.  Pictorial  charaotsb  of  Divink  teachiko.  We  find  great  variety  at  well  as 
great  beauty  in  the  lessons  of  the  Bible.  There  is  great  variety,  for  all  nature,  animate 
and  inanimate,  is  laid  under  contribution  to  supply  fit  illustrations  of  Divine  things ; 
there  is  great  beauty,  for  the  loveliest  objects  above  us,  aronnd  us,  and  beneath  ui  are 
employed  for  this  purpose.  In  the  passage  before  us  there  is  a  cluster  of  lovely  natural 
objects  employed  in  this  manner  to  set  forth  spiritual  truths  with  all  the  reality  of 
nature  and  all  the  vividness  of  life.  Here  we  read  of  the  dew,  the  deep-rooted  and 
everlasting  hill,  the  lily,  the  tall  tree  with  umbrageous  foliage,  the  olive  ever  green,  and 
Lebanon  ever  fragrant.  We  read  also  of  the  springing  com,  the  blooming  vine,  and  wine 
of  aromatic  odour.  These,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  are  beautiful  figures,  and  the  facts 
which  they  are  intended  to  convey  are  equally  blessed.  But  what  enhances  the  beauty 
and  the  blessedness  is  the  circumstance  that  the  persons  to  whom  these  facts  and 
figures  have  reference  are  those  very  persons  who  ha!d  erred  and  strayed  from  the  Lord 
their  God — even  Israel  who  had  fallen  by  their  iniquity,  Israel  who  had  sadly  back- 
slidden, Israel  who  had  grievously  provoked  the  just  anger  of  the  Almighty ;  but  Israel 
repenting  and  returning,  praying  and  pleading,  giving  up  their  false  refuges  and  casting 
aside  their  false  gods.  Oh  how  cheering  and  encouraging  that  God  welcomes  hii  erring 
children  to  return  1  Like  the  father  in  the  parable,  he  runs  to  meet  the  prodigal,  he  casts 
the  arms  of  his  love  around  him;  he  receives  the  penitent  to  his  fond  embrace,  laying 
aside  the  wrath  that  had  been  provoked ;  he  bestows  the  love  that  had  been  undeserved ; 
he  forgives  the  sins  that  had  been  committed ;  he  foregbes  the  punishment  that  had 
been  incurred ;  and,  physician-like,  he  heals  the  backslidings  great  and  manifold. 

II.  Scriptural  applications  of  the  dew.  Figurative  applications  of  dew  are 
frequent  in  Scripture.  Sometimes  it  signifies  temporal  benefits,  as  when  Isaac  blessed 
his  son  Jacob,  saying,  "  God  give  thee  of  the  dew  of  heaven,  and  the  fatness  of  the  earth, 
and  plenty  of  corn  and  wine."  Sometimes  it  denotes  spiritual  blessings,  as  in  the  case  of 
Israel,  of  whom  we  read, "  His  heavens  shall  dropdown  dew.  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel ; 
who  is  like  unto  thee,  0  people  saved  by  the  Lord,  the  Shield  of  thy  help,  and  who  is 
the  Sword  of  thy  excellency  I  "  Sometimes  it  implies  the  reviving  power  and  refreshing 
nature  of  the  Divine  Word,  as  when  Moses  the  man  of  God,  before  he  went  up  to  the 
top  of  Pisgah  and  closed  his  eyes  in  death,  addressed  the  people  in  that  lovely  song  in 
which  he  says,  "  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain,  my  speech  shall  distil  as  the  dew." 
Solomon  compares  the  king's  favour  to  "  dew  upon  the  grass."  The  psalmist  compares 
brotherly  love  and  union  and  peace  to  dew. 

"  As  Hermon'i  dew,  the  dew  that  doth 
On  Zion  hills  descend ; 
For  there  the  blessing  God  command*— 
Life  that  shall  never  end." 

Re  also  speaks  of  the  children  of  God  who  have  been  born  of  the  Spirit — ysatn  from 
above  as  dew,  because  Divine  light  shines  in  upon  them,  the  Divine  image  ii  reflected 


OH.XIT.  1— ».]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  439 

in  them,  and,  like  the  morning  dewdrops,  they  deck  and  ornament  the  wide  field  of 
humanity;  thus:  "Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the  beauties 
of  holiness  from  the  womb  of  the  morning :  thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth."  In  like 
manner  the  Prophet  Micah,  speaking  of  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  and  of  the  benefit 
which  they  shall  in  that  day  confer  upon  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  of  their  blessing  to 
the  peoples  among  whom  they  have  been  long  scattered,  says,  "  The  remnant  of  Israel 
simll  be  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as  a  dew  from  the  Lonl."  So  also  Isaiah,  in  a 
beautiful  and  highly  poetic  passage  in  which  he  refers  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 
sayi,  "  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust :  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs." 
Here  God,  speaking  of  himself,  says,  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel." 

IIL  Pbopebties  of  the  dew  as  illustrative  of  this  promise.  The  first  and 
perhaps  most  obvious  property  of  the  dew  is  its  refreshing  quality.  1.  This  refreshing 
property  is  experienced  most  in  the  summer  months,  and  especially  during  a  season  of 
drought,  like  that  with  which  the  land  of  Israel  was  visited,  when,  for  three  years  and 
a  half,  there  was  neither  rain  nor  dew.  At  such  a  time  the  ground  is  dry  and  parched ; 
vegetation  languishes;  gardens  and  meadows  and  corn-lands  are  scorched;  fields  of 
giain,  blades  of  grass,  and  leaves  of  trees  wither ;  fruits  and  flowers  droop.  The  ■howers 
of  the  sky  have  been  withheld ;  rain-clouds,  it  may  be,  have  gathered  and  darkened  and 
promised  much;  but  they  have  passed  over  without  the  hmg-hoped-for  and  much- 
required  rain.  Oh,  how  refreshing  at  such  a  juncture  is  the  dew  wlien  it  comes  down 
copiously  on  the  bosom  of  the  thirsty  earth  1  There  it  lies  like  a  shower  of  gems  upon 
the  ground,  shimmering  in  the  morning  sunrise ;  it  covers  the  surface  with  pearly  beauty. 

**  As  Morn,  ber  rosy  steps  in  tV  Eastern  olime 
Advancing,  sows  the  earth  with  Orient  pearl." 

But  those  dewdrops  are  as  refreshing  ns  they  are  beautiful :  they  water  to  some  extent 
the  fields;  they  invigorate  the -languishing  herbs;  they  refresh  every  green  thing; 
they  revive  the  plants  and  shrubs,  the  grasses,  herbs,  and  flowers,  and  lift  up  their 
drooping  heads ;  they  gladden  all  nature.  The  transition  from  the  soil  to  the  soul  is 
easy  and  not  unnatural.  What  the  dew  is  to  the  soil,  grace  is  to  the  souL  In  the 
natural  world,  where  all  erewhile  was  parched  and  scorched,  dry  and  hard,  waste  and 
withered,  consequently  bleak  and  bare  and  barren,  abundant  dews,  largely  supplying 
in  Eastern  lands  the  place  of  rain,  descend ;  soon  new  life  springs  up  and  revives 
the  half-withered  plants  and  exhausted  herbage,  new  loveliness  appears  in  the  leaves 
of  trees  and  flower-petals.  Just  so  when  the  grace  of  G-od  is  vouchsafed  to  the  soul, 
and  when  the  Spirit  of  God  communicates  it  in  rich  abundance,  new  life  is  imparted  to 
the  soul,  new  energies  are  awakened,  new  spiritual  vigour  manifests  itself,  and  new 
holy  sympathies  are  developed.  Sometimes,  too,  after  the  first  bestowal  of  grace  and 
Impartation  of  life,  believers  may  droop  and  their  graces  languish ;  the  winds  of  the 
wilderness  may  blow  upon  us,  the  drought  of  the  desert  may  scorch  or  wither  us ;  in 
other  words,  the  world,  with  its  trials  and  temptations,  Satan  and  his  snares,  sin  and 
its  enticements,  the  flesh  and  its  lusts,  all  tend  to  dry  up  the  spiritual  affections  of  the 
soul,  exhaust  its  energies,  and  check  the  heavenly  flow  of  its  feelings.  Again  a  fresh 
communication  of  the  dew  of  Divine  grace  is  granted,  and  spiritual  greenness  springs 
up  afresh  and  spreads  throughout  the  soul,  a  renewal  of  spiritual  life  ensues,  so  that  we 
live  no  longer  to  self  and  sin,  but  to  him  who  died  for  us ;  no  longer  to  the  world,  but 
are  crucified  to  it ;  no  longer  to  the  flesh  to  serve  it  in  the  lusts  thereof.  2,  Dew  has  a 
fertilizing  and  fructifying  property.  Hence  the  dew  is  indispensable  to  germination 
f  and  growth.  Without  it  the  husbandman  would  labour  in  vain  and  spend  his  strength 
'  for  nought.  He  might  industriously  break  up  the  fallow  ground  and  carefully  scatter 
the  seed,  but  without  the  moisture  of  rain  or  dew  the  seed  sown  would  neither  bnd 
nor  grow ;  so  in  spiritual  husbandry,  men  may  plough  and  sow,  but  without  the  dew  of 
Divine  grace  there  will  be  no  increase.  How  difierent  when  the  dew  of  God's  graoe 
is  abundantly  bestowed!  Then  hard  hearts  are  softened,  stubborn  wills  renewed,  invi- 
tation! of  the  gospel  accepted,  the  warnings  of  the  Divine  Word  touch  the  conscience, 
its  instructions  impress  the  heart,  awakenings  take  place  in  Churches,  revivals  occur 
throughout  the  land.  Nay,  more,  the  weakest  means  become  effectual,  the  simplest 
instrumentalities  powerful ;  while  in  individual  life  the  weak  Christian  is  strengthened, 
the  weary  is  refreshed,  the  fainting  revived,  the  unlovely  spiritually  beautified,  and  the 


440  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.  xir.  I— 9. 

spiritual  fruitfulnesB  or  virtues  of  all  developed  or  revived.  8.  Oodf»  wiie  economy  oj 
tiM  dew.  There  is  not  a  single  drop  of  dew  formed  by  the  rude  hand  of  chance  or 
made  in  vain.  Neither  is  there  a  shrub,  or  herb,  or  leaf,  or  flower,  or  blade  of  grass 
that  does  not  collect  as  much  dew  as  is  needed  for  its  peculiar  wants.  Grass-lands  and 
cultivated  soils  radiate  very  freely  by  night  the  heat  which  they  absorb  by  day ;  con- 
sequently they  cool  down  speedily  and  condense  plentifully  into  dew  the  vapour  of  the 
air  as  it  passes  over  them.  Gravel,  rocks,  barren  lands,  on  the  contrary,  radiate  very 
slowly  and  very  little  heat,  so  that  very  little  dew  forms  upon  them.  Thus  there  are 
places  where  little  or  no  dew  falls  and  which  no  dew  refreshes.  There  is  the  barren 
rook — no  dew  refreshes  it ;  there  are  the  gravel  walk  and  the  sandy  desert — little  or  no 
dew  is  formed,  collected,  or  needed  thereon ;  there  is  the  stone-paved  street — no  dew  is 
needed  to  moisten  it.  Exactly  so  there  are  hearts  so  hardened  by  unbelief  that  no 
dew  of  grace  either  settles  on  them  or  softens  them.  The  seed  of  Divine  truth  may  be 
scattered  on  them  from  sabbath  to  sabbath,  but  it  makes  no  impression  on  them,  and 
takes  no  root  in  them ;  it  lies,  it  may  be,  for  a  little  on  the  surface,  then  Cometh  the 
wicked  one  and  catcheth  away  that  which  was  sown  thereon.  It  is  not  for  want  of 
willingness  in  God  to  bestow  the  dew  of  his  grace,  or  for  want  of  sufficiency  in  Divine 
grace,  that  such  is  the  case ;  but  because  the  heart  has  been  so  hardened  by  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin,  the  conscience  so  seared  by  iniquity,  and  the  whole  man  so  alienated 
from  the  life  of  God,  that  there  is  no  disposition  to  receive  or  profit  by  the  heavenly  boon. 
IV.  Effects  produced  by  the  dew  op  God's  obaoe.  The  first  effect  is  growth  as 
of  the  lily.  1.  The  growth  of  the  lily  is  rapid  as  it  is  heautifid.  Here  we  may  con- 
sider it  as  an  emblem  of  beauty.  Thus  our  Lord  says,  "  Consider  the  lilies  of  the  field, 
how  they  grow ;  they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin :  and  yet  I  say  unto  you.  That 
even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these."  In  a  passage  in 
Ezekiel  God  says  to.  his 'people,  "Thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  heathen  for  thy 
beauty :  for  it  was  perfect  through  my  comeliness,  which  I  had  put  upon  thee,  saith  the 
Lord  God."  The  comeliness  to  which  the  prophet  refers  is  the  comeliness  of  the  soul. 
There  is  nothing  so  beautiful  as  holiness;  there  is  no  ornament  like  piety.  The  earth 
is  beautiful  when  God  adorns  it  with  the  bounties  of  his  providence;  when  he 
replenishes  it  with  fruit  and  flower,  with  grass  for  the  cattle  and  herb  for  the  service 
of  man ;  when  he  carpets  its  surface  with  living  green,  clothing  the  fields  with  verdure, 
and  covering  the  hills  with  com.  There  is  beauty  in  the  over-canopying  sky,  in  the 
bright  orbs  that  sparkle  like  gems  in  the  firmament.  There  is  beauty  in  the  wide- 
spread world  of  waters,  and  in  the  waves  that  dimple  ocean's  cheek.  There  is  beauty 
twinkling  in  every  star  above  us,  sparkling  in  the  dewdrops  at  our  feet,  and  shining  in 
every  shimmer  of  noonday  splendour.  All  these  testify  how  beautiful  this  world  once 
was,  and  how  beautiful  it  would  still  be  but  for  sin.  There  is  beauty  in  the  human 
face  divine :  there  is  beauty  in  the  face  of  fair  woman,  and  beauty  of  a  rougher  cast  in 
the  countenance  of  man,  and  beauty,  playful,  cheerful  beauty,  in  the  pretty  countenance 
of  childhood.  But  all  the  varied  beauties  of  a  lovely  world  are  not  to  be  compared 
with  the  beauty  of  holiness.  It  is  a  beauty  that  reflects  God's  own  image,  and  by 
which  we  resemble  Ohrist. 

"  Come,  then,  O  honse  of  Jaoobt  oon% 
To  worship  at  his  shrine ; 
And,  walking  in  the  light  of  God, 
With  holy  beauties  shine." 

There  may  be  beauty  in  the  adorning  of  the  person,  in  the  plaiting  of  tha  hair,  the 
wearing  of  gold,  and  the  putting  on  of  apparel ;  but  the  true  beauty  is  the  hidden  man 
of  the  heart  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible,  even  the  beauty  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit,  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price.  2.  The  next  characteristic  of  this 
growth  is  stability.  The  growth  of  the  lily  may  be  fair  or  fast,  but  it  soon  £ides ;  it 
may  ba  easily  plucked  up,  and  so  another  figure  is  added  to  show  the  firmness  of  the 
believer.  He  is  firmly  rooted  as  well  as  spiritually  fair.  Some  colours  are  venr  beauti- 
ful and  veiy  showy,  but  they  are  not  fast  colours;  they  soon  fade,  they  soon  lose  their 
vividness.  Some  plants  are  very  beautiful  in  their  bloom,  but  weak  in  their  root  and 
soon  uptorn.  Kot  so  the  Christian.  He  casts  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon-*— either  as 
the  mountain  itself,  one  of  earth's  deep  foundations  j  or  as  the  forest  trees  those  cedars 


OH.  xiv.l— d.]  THE  BOOK  0?  H0815A.  441 

of  Ood,  deeply  rooted  therein.  Thus,  with  the  flower  of  the  lily,  the  heliever  has  the 
root  of  the  mountain  or  of  the  cedar  tree,  over  which  the  winds  of  heaven  have  swept 
for  centuries.  He  is  fair  as  the  one  and  firm  as  the  other,  for  Christ  dwells  in  his  heart 
hy  faith  ;  he  is  rooted  and  grounded  in  love ;  he  is  rooted  in  Christ  and  established  in 
the  faith,  abounding  therein  with  thanksgiving.  He  is,  moreover, "  steadfast,  immovable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,"  forasmuch  as  he  knows  that  his  labour  is 
not  in  vain  in  the  Lord.  Besides,  as  the  root  of  trees  draws  up  nourishment  from  the 
ground,  so  the  Christian  derives  nourishment  and  strength  from  Christ ;  while  the  anion 
is  so  close  and  so  constant  that  nothing  can  separate  him  from  Christ,  nothing  can 
wrench  him  from  that  rock  in  which  he  is  rooted,  nothing  can  detach  him  from  the 
foundation  on. which  he  rests.  3.  The  next  characteristic  is  expantiveness,  as  expressed 
by  the  words,  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  While  his  roots  spread  far  and  sink  deeply 
into  the  soil,  his  branches  spread.  The  application  of  this  promise  is  to  Israel  literally, 
and  so  to  the  Church  in  general,  as  well  as  to  the  individual  Christian.  The  Church  of 
God  is  destined  to  grow  to  a  great  extent,  and  to  spread  her  bianches  widely  on  every 
side,  sending  out  "  her  boughs  into  the  sea,  and  her  branches  unto  the  river,"  and 
ultimately  to  fill  the  whole  earth.  The  Christian's  growth  likewise  is  expansive.  He 
grows  inwardly  in  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  outwardly  in  good  works,  upward  in  heavenly 
mindedness,  and  downward  in  humility.  He  adds  to  his  fikith  virtue,  and  to  virtue 
knowledge,  and  to  knowledge  temperance,  and  to  temperance  patience,  and  to  patience 
godliness,  and  to  godliness  brotherly  kindness,  and  to  brotherly  kindness  charity. 
These  things  are  in  him  and  abound,  and  thus  he  is  neither  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  in  the  doing  of  the  Divine  will.  Whatsoever  things  are  true, 
honest,  just,  pure,  lovely,  of  good  report,  virtuous,  and  praiseworthy,  he  thinks  on  and 
practises  these  things.  His  profiting  appears  to  all,  and  his  holy  demeanoor  is  so  mani- 
fested that  he  promotes  the,  growth  of  grace  in  others,  and  consequently  the  progress 
of  the  gospel  in  the  world.  He  resembles  the  shining  light,  which  continues  to  spread 
more  widely  and  to  shine  more  brightly  until  the  perfect  day.  i.  The  next  element 
of  this  growth  is  permanence  of  beauty  and  abundance  of  frmt.  In  addition  to  the 
beauty  or  glory  of  the  lily,  the  stability  of  the  cedar  rooted  in  Lebanon,  or  of  Lebanon 
itself,  the  expansiveness  of  numerous  and  magnificent  branches,  we  have  also  the 
abiding  beauty  and  rich  fruitage  of  the  olive.  The  beauty  of  the  lily  is  irail  and  its 
glory  fading ;  but  the  greenness  of  the  olive  is  perpetual ;  and  as  abundance  of  branches 
and  plenty  of  leaves  may  make  a  show  for  a  time,  and  suggest  the  idea  of  a  sort  of 
empty  ostentatiousness,  the  prophet  gives  a  fresh  touch  to  his  picture  by  adding  the 
greenery  of  the  olive,  which  is  lasting,  and  the  fruitfulness  of  the  olive,  which  is  so 
profitable  and  for  many  purposes  serviceable — enlightenment,  nourishment,  and  embel- 
lishment. Thus  the  psalmist  says, "  I  am  like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of.God :  I 
trust  in  the  mercy  of  God  for  ever  and  ever."  So  also  in  Jer.  xi.  8  God  calls  his  people 
a  green  olive  tree,  fair  and  of  goodly  fruit ;  such  too  is  the  individual  believer — ^planted 
in  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  watered  by  the  dew  of  heaven,  his  leaf  is  ever  fresh  and  his 
fruit  ever  seasonable.  Even  in  the  winter  of  adversity  the  leaf  of  the  righteous  is 
green ;  in  the  winter  of  age  they  still  bear  fruit ;  in  the  wintry  storms  of  the  world 
their  beauty  remains  like  that  of  the  olive  tree,  ever  green,  ever  fresh,  and  ever  flourish- 
ing. The  beauty  of  an  evergreen  is  enhanced,  like  most  other  things,  by  contrast;  it 
appears  most  when  other  shrubs  and  trees  are  stripped  and  bared  by  the  wintry  blast ; 
it  is  seen  to  most  advantage  when  deadness  and  desolation  reign  around.  In  like 
manner,  when  the  storms  of  life,  when  the  decrepitude  of  age,  when  the  languor  of 
decay,  has  stripped  the  mere  worldly  professor  of  the  leaves  of  a  merely  assumed  and 
temporary  profession,  a  profession  without  reality,  then  true  Christians  stand  out  in 
striking  contrast. 

"  Those  that  within  the  house  of  Ood 

Are  planted  by  his  grace, 
They  shall  grow  up  and  flourish  all 

In  our  God's  holy  place : 
And  in  old  age,  when  others  fade, 

Tliey  fruit  still  forth  shall  bring; 
They  shall  be  fat  and  full  of  sup, 

Aud  aye  be  flouiishing." 


442  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xiv.  1— 9. 

5.  By  the  smell  of  Lebanon  is  set  forth  the  fragrance  of  holiness.  There  is  nothing  so 
pleasing  to  God  as  holiness  proceeding  from  faith  in  Olirist  and  love  to  God.  The 
believers'  efforts  in  the  cause  of  God  have  a  rich  perfume ;  their  zeal  and  devotedness 
are  like  ointment  poured  forth ;  their  spiritual  sacrifices  send  forth  the  savour  of  a 
sweet  smell.  Thus  the  children  of  God  are  trees  of  righteousness,  God's  own  planting, 
precious  in  his  sight,  pleasant  and  pleasing  to  God,  and  to  all  who  love  God  and  are 
like  God.  Ood  compares  his  Church  to  a  garden  of  spices :  "  A  garden  enclosed  is  my 
sister,  my  spouse ;  a  spring  shut  up,  a  fountain  sealed.  Thy  plants  are  an  orchard  of 
pomegranates,  with  pleasant  fruits ;  camphire,  with  spikenard,  spikenard  and  saffron  ; 
calamus  and  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  frankincense ;  myrrh  and  aloes,  with  all  the 
chief  spices."  6.  The  people  or  Church  of  God  become  a  blessing  to  others.  Not  only 
are  they  blessed  themselves,  but  are  made  a  blessing  to  others ;  they  benefit  all  around. 
Like  the  pebble  dropped  into  a  pool  and  seiiding  out  wavelets  to  the  furthest  shore,  so 
the  people  of  God  communicate  benefits  that  may  reach  to  the  utmost  bound  of  earth 
and  to  the  very  end  of  time.  Such  as  are  converted  throuch  their  influence,  repenting 
of  sin  and  returning  to  God,  will  join  themselves  to  God's  peo'ple  and  rest  under  the 
shadow  of  God's  Chnrch — shall  be  spiritually  fruitful,'roviving  like  the  com,  of  which 
a  grain  when  it  dies  in  the  earth  brings  forth  many  more;  and  prolific  as  the  vine, 
which,  when  pruned,  produces  many  clusters,  and  each  cluster  many  grapes ;  while 
their  persons  and  their  services  are  fragrant  and  even  medicinal  spiritually,  as  the  scent 
of  the  far-famed  wine  of  Lebanon  physically.  So  with  the  Church  of  the  old  dis- 
pensation ;  so  with  that  of  the  new ;  so  with  God's  Church  still. 

Vers.  8,  9. — A  call  to  understanding.  The  former  verse  exhibits  Ephraim  bringing 
forth  the  fruits  of  repentance,  abandoning  idolatry  for  ever.  God  on  his  part  hears  his 
prayers,  grants  his  petitions,  and  makes  him  the  object  of  his  paternal  care  and  kind 
providence.  Nor  is  that  all ;  he  becomes  to  him  refreshment  in  every  time  of  need, 
and  the  source  of  fruitfulness  at  all  times.  It  is  the  part  of  understanding  and  the 
privilege  of  the  prudent  to  devote  due  attention  to  and  to  attain  to  proper  discernment 
of  such  things.  By  the  judicious  exercise  of  their  natural  powers,  quickened  and 
strengthened  by  grace,  they  convince  themselves  of  the  rightness  and  justness  of  God's 
ways,  and  continue,  to  their  own  unspeakable  comfort,  to  walk  therein ;  but  trans- 
gressors stumble  at  God's  dealings  and  fall  into  the  perdition  of  ungodly  men. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Return  to  Ood:  its  beginnings.  The  long  and  terrible  storm  of  denun- 
ciation is  now  at  last  over;  the  wrath-clouds  roll  away,  and  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine 
love  bursts  forth  with  healing  in  its  wings.  Beyond  all  the  hurly-burly  of  the  tempest 
gent  as  the  punishment  of  sin,  the  prophet  discerns  the  paternal  tenderness  and  the 
loving  patience  of  the  God  of  Israel.  So  he  begins  this  closing  chapter  of  his  book  with 
a  last  tender  entreaty  to  return  to  him  who  "  sitteth  upon  the  flood,"  and  who  "  will 
bless  his  people  with  peace."  How  changed  the  prophet's  style,  in  this  final  strophe, 
from  what  it  is  in  most  of  the  preceding !  When  denouncing  Ephraira's  sin  and  doom 
Hosea  is  obscure,  abrupt,  rugged,  and  volcanic;  but  in  cb.  xiv.  all  is  pellucid  and 
restful  and  full  of  beauty.  The  whirlwind  and  the  earthquake  and  the  fire  have  given 
place  to  the  still  small  voice.  The  subject  in  these  opening  verses  is — ^The  beginnings 
of  spiritual  revival.     In  its  rise  there  are  three  stages. 

I.  The  Lord  beseeching.  (Ver.  1.)  As  applied  to  Israel,  the  exhortation  has  for 
its  background  all  the  judgments  which  have  been  threatened  throughout  the  Book. 
And  since  these  words  were  written  Israel  "  has  fallen  "  indeed.  The  ten  tribes  were 
soon  carried  into  Assyria;  Judah  was  by-and-by  driven  away  to  weep  beside  the  rivers 
of  Babylon ;  regained  Jerusalem  was  at  length  fiercely  overthrown  by  the  Romans ; 
and  for  eighteen  centuries  now  the  Jews  have  been  dispersed  over  the  wide  world,  and 
exposed  to  reproach  and  persecution  and  cruelty.  All  this  has  been  the  punishment 
of  Israel's  own  "  iniquity " — the  political  schism,  the  calf-worship,  the  Baalism,  the 
godless  pride,  the  unblushing  immorality,  and  at  last  the  rejection  and  murder  of  the 
Bon  of  (tod.    Jehovah  could  not  avoid  punishing ;  he  could  not  bat  allow  the  apostate 


OH.XIT.  1— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  443 

nation  to  lie  under  its  doom  during  centuries  and  millenniums ;  but  all  tho  while  the 
Divine  heart  is  saying, "  O  Israel,  return  I "  How  wonderful  that  the  eternal  Qod  should 
condescend  to  entreat  men  to  repent!  But  "  the  Lord  is  good;  his  mercy  is  everlast- 
ing ;  and  his  truth  endureth  to  all  generations  "  (Ps.  c.  6).  If,  however,  there  is  to  be 
salvation,  there  must  be  repentance,  and  all  true  repentance  takes  its  rise  in  the  call  of 
God's  Spirit.  The  Lord  seeks  the  sinner  with  his  grace  before  the  sinner  can  seek  him. 
And  thus  "  Return  unto  the  Lord  "  is  the  burden  of  the  entire  revelation  of  the  Bible ; 
it  is  the  key-note  of  all  Hebrew  prophecy,  as  of  all  New  Testament  gospel.  Not  only 
so,  but  in  this  passage  God  also  condescends  to  direct  the  people  as  to  the  thoughts  and 
*'  words  "  with  which  they  may  acceptably  approach  him  in  complying  with  his  urgent 
entreaty  (vers.  2,  3).     How  different  all  this  from  "  the  manner  of  man  "  I 

II.  Thk  penitent  pbayino.  (Ver.  2.)  This  verse  and  ver.  3  form  *  sort  of 
'  Lord's  Prayer "  for  backsliders.  God  desires  no  lonc;er  the  animal  sacrifices  of  the 
Law;  indeed,  the  twelve  tribes  cannot  in  their  exile  offer  any,  for  the  temple-worship 
has  now  ceased.  But  he  requires  "  words"  which  shall  be  the  evidence  of  "a  brolien 
and  a  contrite  heart."  .  Even  these,  however,  he  here  provides  fur  his  penitent  ohiKlrcu. 
"  What  need  God  words?  He  knows  our  hearts  before  we  speak  unto  him.  It  is  true, 
God  needs  no  words ;  but  we  do,  to  stir  up  our  hearts  and  affections  "  (Sibbes). 
Although  the  Lord  does  not  now  demand  sacrifices,  the  kind  of  "  words  "  which  he  asks 
recalls  to  our  minds  the  three  principal  forms  of  sacrifice  ordained  by  the  Levitical 
Law,  viz.  the  propitiatory,  the  dedicatory,  and  the  eucharistic,  represented  respectively 
by  the  siu  offering,  the  burnt  offering,  and  the  peace  offering.  In  a  true  return  to 
God  there  will  be :  1.  Words  of  confession.  "  Take  away  all  iniquity."  A  child  who 
lias  done  wrong  recovers  his  father's  favour  so  soon  as  he  confesses  his  fault;  so  Jeho- 
vah's children,  who  have  made  themselves  "  fatherless  "  by  their  apostasy,  take  the  first 
step  in  the  direction  of  "  finding  mercy  "  when  tliey  "  return  up  to  "  (ver.  1)  him  wiin 
words  of  repentance.  The  penitent  draws  near  with  the  leper's  confession,  "Unclean  ! 
unclean ! "  and  with  the  publican's  prayer,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  His 
first  and  deepest  need  is  pardon ;  he  wants  mercy  for  the  past,  and  grace  to  help  for  the 
future.  He  prays  to  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  evil ;  and  pleads,  in  doing  so,  the 
merit  of  Jesus  Christ  as  his  Sin  Offering.  2.  Words  of  dedication.  "  Receive  us 
graciously ; "  literally,  "  receive  good."  The  barrier  of  sin  being  removed  through  faith 
in  the  atonement,  the  next  step  in  revival  is  the  presentation  of  the  person  "a  living 
sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God  "  (Bom.  zii.  1).  It  is  true  that  of  ourselves  we 
have  no  good  which  we  can  offer ;  but  we  are  to  give  to  the  Lord  of  his  own.  The 
grace  which  he  bestows  upon  us  we  are  to  employ  in  his  service  and  for  his  glory.  The 
Christian  dedicates  his  renewed  humanity,  in  body  and  soul,  to  his  Redeemer  (Micah 
vi.  6 — 8).  3.  Words  of  thanksgiving.  "  So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips,"  i.e. 
we  shall  offer  our  lips  as  a  peace  ofi'ering,  instead  of  calves.  The  piaise  of  a  redeemed 
hi. art  is  an  acceptable  sacrifice,  and  "shall  please  the  Lord  better  than  a  bullock  that 
hath  horns  and  hool's  "  (Ps.  Ixix.  31).  The  soul  that  has  been  forgiven  much  loves  much, 
and  should  therefore  overflow  with  thanksgiving  and  praise  (Heb.  xiii.  15).  Such  are 
the  three  sorts  of  "  words  "  which  God  expects  from  all  who  "  return  "  to  him.  He 
wants  words  of  confession  like  those  of  Ps.  IL ;  of  self-dedication,  like  those  of  Ps.  cxvi. ; 
of  thanksgiving,  like  those  of  Ps.  ciii.  And,  now  that  Christ  Ijas  come,  these  are  "  the 
sacrifices  of  God,"  alike  for  the  sons  of  Israel  and  for  sinners  of  the  Gentiles. 

III.  The  penitent  HENOUNciNft  creatuke-confidences.  (Ver.  3.)  After  the  three- 
fold word-sacrifice,  comes  the  promise  of  practical  amendment  and  reformation.  Israel 
resolves  to  forsake  his  great  national  sins,  viz.  his  habit  of  looking  for  help  to  Assyria,  his 
I  eliance  upon  the  cavalry  of  Egypt  or  other  warlike  strength,  and  his  idolatry  of  Baal  and 
the  calves.  The  people  will  show  the  sincerity  of  their  conversion  by  endeavours  after 
new  obedience.  They  will  realize  that  away  from  God  they  are  helpless  orphans;  and, 
in  all  their  approaches  to  him,  appeal  to  bis  "  mercy  "as  the  "  Father  of  the  fatherless." 
This  is  just  what  every  sinner  must  do  in  returning  to  the  Lord.  We  all  have  Asshurs 
and  horses  and  idols  which  we  must  abjure.  If  we  will  "return  quite  up  to  Jehovah 
our  God  "  (ver.  1)  we  must  put  away  confidence  in  every  creature-help,  tud  in  any 
defence  which  is  our  own  handiwork.  We  may  have  been  "  glued  to  idols"  (ch.  iv.  17); 
but  we  must  at  any  cost  tear  them  out  of  our  hearts,  even  although  the  soul  should 
scum  to  be  rent  asunder  in  the  process.    For  true  conversion  impUu  perfect  union  to 


444  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  re"*  xit.  1— 9. 

the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  perpetual  communion  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  kxA  persevering 
progress  in  the  ways  of  holiness.  We  ohey  "  the  first  and  great  commandment,"  and 
fulfil  the  chief  end  of  our  being,  when  we  choose  Jehovah  as  the  Portion  of  our  souls, 
and  give  him  our  supreme  and  constant  and  most  tender  love. 

Lessons.  1.  The  mercy  of  God  to  sinners  is  untiring  and  indestructible  (ver.  1). 
2.  Now  that  Christ  has  died  as  our  Sin  Oflering,  we  plead  his  atonement  as  the  ground 
on  which  we  ask  the  Lord  to  "  take  away  all  iniquity  "  (ver.  2).  3.  "  The  sacrifices  of 
Ghjd  are  a  broken  spirit,"  and  contrition  always  manifests  itself  in  prayer  (ver,  2).  4. 
"  To  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice  "  (ver.  3).  5.  The  penitent  sinner  and  the  backsliding 
believer  have  this  assuring  motive  to  induce  them  to  return  to  God,  that,  however  they 
may  be  scorned  by  their  fellow-men,  they  are  sure  of  a  warm  welcome  from  him  who  is 
the  "Father  of  the  fatherless."— C.  J. 

Vers.  4,  6. — Eeiurn  to  Qod :  its  immediate  effects.  So  soon  as  Israel  shall  return  to 
Jehovah  and  offer  the  foregoing  words  of  self-condemning  supplication  (vers.  2,  3), 
they  shall  receive  a  glad  welcome  from  him  "  who  delighteth  in  mercy,"  and  who  will 
not  "keep  his  anger  for  ever."  The  first  clauses  of  this  answer  of  blessing  remind  us 
that  there  are  three  results  of  religious  revival  which  begin  to  be  experienced  at  once. 
These  are  "  the  srrace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  in  tiie  form  of  healing;  "  the  love  of 
God,"  in  the  gift  of  positive  aud  full  salvation ;  "  and  the  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,"  as  manifested  in  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  influence.  The  answer  corresponds 
to  the  prayer  of  the  penitents,  only  that  the  blessings  promised  are  even  larger  and 
richer  than  those  which  have  been  asked. 

I.  Spikitual  healiko.  "  I  will  heal  their  backsliding  "  (ver,  4) ;  or  rather,  "  their 
foiling  away ; "  "  their  apostasy."  The  Lord  will  remove  the  injuries  which  his  people's 
apostasy  has  brought  upon  them,  and  will  cure  them  of  the  malignant  disease  itself. 
This  blessing  of  healing  includes  (1)  the  forgiveness  of  sin ;  (2)  deliverance  from  its 
pollution  ;  (3)  the  cure  of  the  tendency  to  backslide ;  and  (4)  removal  of  the  chastise- 
ments and  sorrows  which  past  guilt  has  entailed.  How  does  God  heal  all  these  wounds? 
He  does  so  by  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  That  blood  is  the  one  unfailing 
■alve  for  the  sinner's  conscience  and  heart,  and  it  procures  also  his  redemption  from  all 
future  evil.  All  men,  Jew  and  Gentile  alike,  who  accept  the  gospel  message,  receive 
such  healing  in  our  time ;  and  in  "  the  latter  days "  this  gracious  promise  shall  be 
completely  nilfilled  in  the  national  conversion  of  Israel,  as  well  as  in  the  "  coming  in  " 
of  "  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles," 

n.  Full  salvation.  "  I  will  love  them  freely :  for  mine  anger  is  turned  away  from 
him"  (ver.  4).  Jehovah's  wrath  being  gone,  and  his  peo])le's  apostasy  healed,  his 
generous  love  is  now  free  to  go  forth  without  restraint.  He  finds  in  his  people  them- 
selves, it  is  true,  no  cause  why  he  should  love  them.  In  himself  the  backsliding  sinner 
is  repulsire  and  unlovely ;  and  the  only  acceptable  gift  which  he  can  bring  when  he 
returns  is  merely  feelings  and  "  words  "  (ver.  2),  But,  as  a  mother's  love  for  her  child 
is  not  based  upon  the  child's  character,  or  upon  the  return  which  he  makes  for  her 
goodness,  so  also  love  is  instinctive  and  natural  to  the  Divine  heart.  He  loves  "  freely," 
or  spontaneously,  just  because  he  himself  "is  love."  The  Lord  htals  his  people's 
baokslidings  by  discovering  anew  to  their  souls  the  greatness  of  his  tender  mercy 
towaids  them.  His  wonderful  love  leads  him  first  to  be  the  soul's  Physician,  and  then 
to  become  its  Husband.  His  free  favour  bestows  upon  the  healed  one  the  health  ol 
holiness,  and  continues  to  be  the  springing  well-head  of  the  believer's  salvation. 

ni.  Divine  influence.  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel "  (ver.  5).  This  promise 
announces  the  reversal  of  the  curse  of  barrenness  recorded  in  ch.  xiii.  15.  We  think 
of  Jehovah  as  being  "the  dew"  in  connection  with  the  gracious  operations  of  his 
Spirit.  He  rewards  the  prayer  and  the  life  of  penitence,  and  evinces  his  free  love 
to  his  people,  by  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter.  There  are  many  points  of 
analogy  between  the  descent  of  the  dew  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  The  Divine  dew, 
like  the  natural,  is  :  1.  Mysterious  and  heavenly.  It  has  its  source  high  above  us. 
The  falling  of  the  dew  is  independent  of  man's  skill  and  power  (Micah  v.  7 ;  Job 
xzxviiL  28) ;  much  less  are  the  workings  of  grace  the  result  of  any  human  process 
(John  iii.  3 — 8).  2.  Oentle  and  silent.  No  one  sees  or  hears  the  dew  falling,  and 
experience  alone  has  taught  man  that  it  is  really  an  important  force  of  nature. 


OH.  XIV.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  445 

Similarly  the  grace  of  the  Spirit ' '  cometh  not  with  observation  "  (Luke  xvii.  30).  It 
works  on  in  secrecy,  and  becomes  visible  only  in  its  beneficent  results  upon  character 
and  life.  3.  Abundant.  In  Palestine  the  dew  is  so  copious  as  to  compensate  to  some 
extent  for  the  absence  of  rain.  The  Divine  dew,  in  like  manner,  is  often  seen  to  be 
most  abundant,  especially  in  a  time  of  religious  revival.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  may 
influence  for  much  good  an  entire  Church,  or  even  a  whole  nation,  so  as  to  enricli 
its  life  as  a  Christian  community.  4.  Penetrative.  The  dew  pierces  the  soil,  and 
insinuates  itself  into  the  fibres  of  every  herb  and  plant ;  so  the  Holy  Ghost,  using  the 
Divine  Word,  "  pierces  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and  spirit"  (Heb.  iv.  13), 
and  searches  through  the  whole  nature  of  man,  to  purify  and  bless  it.  5.  Oiven  daily. 
"  The  grace  of  God,  like  the  dew,  is  not  given  once  for  all,  but  is  day  by  day  waited 
for,  and  day  by  day  renewed.  Yet  doth  it  not  pass  away,  like  the  fitful  goodness  of 
God's  former  people  (ch.  vi.  4),  but  turns  into  the  growth  and  spiritual  substance  of 
those  on  whom  it  descends  "  (Pusey).  6.  Refreshing  aTid  fertilizing.  The  dew  pro- 
duces verdure  and  fruitfulness.  So  the  constant  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within 
the  soul  and  in  the  Church  is  essential  to  spiritual  freshness  and  usefulness.  The 
clauses  that  follow  (vers.  5—8)  show  that  this  is  the  main  point  of  the  emblem 
as  employed  here,  and  trace  with  exceeding  beauty  of  poetic  diction  the  results  of  the 
Lord's  gracious  activity  when  he  comes  "  as  the  dew."  He  shall  so  come  in  ' '  the  last 
days" — blessed  be  h'S  Name! — "  unto  Israel," ».«.  to  his  ancient  people;  and  not  to 
them  only,  but  to  the  whole  Israel  of  God,  of  every  nation,  who  follow  spiritually 
in  the  footsteps  of  Abraham. 

Lessons.  1.  Apostasy  is  a  malignant  soul-malady,  which,  if  not  arrested  by  the 
great  Healer,  will  lead  to  final  perdition.  If  we  would  be  preserved  from  it,  we  must 
avoid  habits  of  backsliding.  2.  What  a  ground  of  hope  to  the  penitent,  and  of  comfort 
to  the  believer,  is  the  "  freeness  "  or  spontaneity  of  the  Divine  love  I  3.  The  absolute 
dependence  of  the  individual  and  the  Church  upon  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. — C.  J. 

Vers.  5 — 8. — Return  to  God;  its  ultimate  results.  These  are  like  the  effects  of  the 
dew  of  heaven  upon  gardenand  landscape.  They  are,  in  fact,  the  results  of  the  Divine 
influence  which  God  the  Holy  Spirit  bestows  upon  returning  penitents.  The  imagery 
of  the  passage  is  borrowed  from  the  vegetable  kingdom ,  and  remindsus  of  that  of  the 
Song  of  Solomon.  The  prophet  employs  a  combination  of  emblems— the  lily,  the 
cedar,  the  olive,  the  corn-field,  the  vineyard,  because  it  requires  them  all  to  furnish  an 
adequate  picture  of  the  blessed  outcome  of  religious  revival.  Tliis  representation  sh  all 
yet  berealized  in  the  spiritual  future  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  ' '  Ephraim,"  now  so  sadly 
blighted,  shall  be  dowered  with  "double  fruitfulness,"  and  thus  verify  the  presage  of 
his  ancient  name  (Gen.  xli.  58).  The  promise  is  fulfilled  also,  even  now,  in  the  case  of 
every  Christian  Church,  and  of  every  graciousheart,  which  "  returns  unto  Jehovah," 
and  receives  a  fresh  baptism  of  his  Spirit.  The  rich  and  blessed  results  of  revival  are-- 

I.  Geowth.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily  "  (ver.  5).  There  are  various  plants  of  the 
lily  species  found  in  Palestine  which  are  remarkable,  not  only  for  their  beauty,  but  for 
their  rapid  and  luxuriant  growth.  The  tall  lilies,  to  whose  brilliant  colours  the  Lord 
Jesus  pointed  bis  disciples  (Matt.  vi.  38,  39),  possess  also  much  vitality  and  pro- 
ductiveness. So  is  it  with  the  Church  that  has  been  watered  with  the  copious  dews  of 
God's  good  Spirit.  How  rapidly  the  infant  Church  grew  after  the  outpouring  on  i  he 
day  of  Pentecost  I  What  multitudes  turned  to  the  Lord  in  the  times  of  the  Refoiina- 
tion  1  What  numbers  do  still  in  every  season  of  revival !  And  also  is  it  with  the  indi- 
vidual soul  when  the  garden  of  its  graces  is  daily  wetted  with  the  heavy  heavenly 
dew.  It  makes  rapid  progress  in  its  upward  growth.  Each  of  us  may  profitably  ask 
himself,"  Am  I  growini;  in  grace  ?  Are  my  Christian  faith,  and  love,  and  patience, 
diligence,  and  holy  zeal  larger  than  they  were  ten  or  twenty  years  ago  ?  " 

II.  Steength.  He  shall  "  strike  his  roots  as  Lebanon :  his  branches  shall  spread  " 
(vers.  5,  6).  The  lily  both  grows  and  multiplies  rapidly ;  but  it  is  not  an  emblem  of 
stability,  for  its  stalk  is  frail  and  its  root  slender.  To  find  an  image  of  fixedness  and 
forceful  reserve,  the  prophet  goes  to  the  cedar  of  Lebanon.  This  tree  is  far-famed  for 
its  strength  and  stateliness.  It  is  very  deeply  rooted ;  and  from  its  main  trunk 
numerous  branches  spread  out  horizontally,  tier  upon  tier,  until  the  diameter  of  the 
compass  of  ground  which  the  tree  covers  is  even  greater  than  its  height.    In  like 


446  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSEA.  [oh.  xit.  1—9. 

manner,  spiritual  solidity  and  expansiveness  are  secured  by  strikine  our  roots  -well 
down  into  the  bidden  life  of  faith,  and  prayer,  and  communion  with  God,  and  fidelity 
to  conscience.  The  moral  robustness  which  is  proof  against  whatever ' '  tribulation  or 
persecution  ariseth  because  of  the  Word  "  (Matt.  xiii.  21)  is  always  the  result  of  a  deep 
sense  of  sin,  a  thorough  appreheosion  of  the  gospel,  and  a  profound  love  to  the  Saviour. 

in.  Beauty  and  frageanob.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree  "  (ver.  6). 
There  is  doubtless  a  natural  glory  of  its  own  in  the  slender  grey-green  foliage  of  the 
olive ;  but  to  the  Oriental  the  attractiveness  of  this  tree  consists  largely  in  its 
capacity  of  yielding  that  oily  matter  ("  fatness,"  Judg.  ix.  9)  which  is  so  essential  to 
health  in  the  dry  and  hut  climate  of  the  East.  ' '  His  smell  as  Lebanon  "  (ver.  6) ; 
the  reference  being  to  the  fresh  breezes  of  the  mountain,  laden  in  early  summer  with 
the  fragrance  of  the  vines  and  the  balsamic  odour  of  the  cedars  and  aromatic  plants. 
"  The  scent  thereof  shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon  "  (ver.  7),  which  was  celebrated 
for  its  fine  flavour  and  its  rich  aroma.  These  emblems  are  suggestive  of  the  beauty 
of  holiness,  and  the  fragrance  which  proceeds  from  the  renewed  heart  and  life.  The 
Divine  dew  is  sent  to  make  one  nature  bloom  as  the  lily,  and  to  clothe  another  with 
verdure  1  ke  the  ever-green  olive.  It  should  impart  to  every  child  of  God  some 
healthful  fragrance  or  sweetness  of  disposition  which  shall  lead  others  to  "  take 
kno  wledge  of  him,  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus  "  (Ps.  xlv.  8).  How  many  Christians, 
unhappily,  lack  this  blessed  aroma  !  How  many  are  morose  and  moody,  rather  than 
sunny  and  jovful ;  thereby  giving  countenance  to  the  impression  that  religion  is  a 
melancholy  thing,  instead  of  being  "  cheerful  as  the  day  "! 

IV.  Fbuitftjlnbsb.  This  is  the  most  important  of  the  results,  and  Hosea's  mind 
dwells  on  it  in  vers.  7  and  8  as  the  prevailing  thought  (f  the  passage.  Fruitfulness 
is  the  ultimate  test  and  the  final  end  of  every  revival.  In  ver.  7  the  restored 
Israelitish  nation  is  spoken  of  as  a  widespreading  tree,  under  whose  grateful  shadow 
its  people  also  shall  be  individually  restored  from  their  backslidings.  The  corn  "  falls 
into  the  ground  and  dies,"  and  may  seem  to  be  killed  a  second  time  by  the  storms  of 
winter ;  but  when  spring  comes  it  revives,  and  at  length  yields  an  abundant  harvest. 
The  vine,  when  its  fruit-bearing  branches  have  been  carefully  pruned,  sprouts  again 
with  new  vigour  and  bears  choicer  fruit.  So  is  it  with  a  Church  or  with  an  individual 
believer  at  the  close  of  along  winter  of  declension,and  after  experience  of  the  pruning- 
knife  of  affliction.  With  the  blessed  consciousness  of  sin  forgiven,  and  of  the  restored 
favour  of  God,  and  under  the  fertilizing  influence  of  the  dew  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the 
revived  Church  ripens  like  a  waving  harvest-fi<  Id,  and  hangs  with  luscious  clusters 
like  a  fragrant  vineyard.  The  purpose  of  the  gift  of  Divine  grace  is  fruit-bearing. 
The  dew  of  the  Spirit  i><  sent  with  a  view  to  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  23,  23). 
The  scheme  of  redemption  is  God's  plan  for  the  promotion  of  morality.  The  Saviour 
says  to  his  disciples,"  I  have  chosen  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and 
that  your  fruit  should  remain."  "  Herein  is  my  Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much 
fruit"  (John  xv.  8,  16 J.  It  is  true,  of  course,  that  in  different  lives  spiritual  fruit- 
fulness  varies  in  character.  One  believer  has  the  beauty  of  the  lily ;  another,  the 
stability  of  the  cedar  ;  a  third,  the  fatness  of  the  olive.  But  in  the  communion 
of  the  saints,  and  even  within  each  separate  Christian  congregation,  all  the  forms  of 
strength,  beauty,  and  usefulness  should  meet.  A  revived  Church,  watered  with  the 
Divine  dew,  should  be  garden,  orchard,  vineyard,  fruitful  field,  and  forest,  all  in  one. 

Conclusion.  In  ver.  8  Jehovah  joyfully  anticipates  the  permanence  of  Ephraim's 
reformation.  He  "  hears  "  him  resolving  to  put  away  idols  for  ever,  and  "  observes" 
him  bringing  forth  fruit  meet  for  repentance.  The  backsliders  have  returned,  and 
have  repented /riwi  sin  as  well  as /or  it.  Those  who  were  "  joined  to  idols"  are  now 
joined  to  the  Lord.  And  the  Lord  reminds  them,  in  a  closing  word,  that  all  their 
■'  springs"  are  in  himself.  Jehovah  is  "like  a  green  cypress  tree ;  "  he  is  "the  Tree 
of  life,"  and  the  Giver  of  "fruit"  to  all  who  dwell  under  his  shadow.  May  the 
good  Lord  incline  our  hearts  also  to  abjure  every  idolatsy,  and  to  seek  our  "  fruit "' 
in  himself  only,  that  he  may  with  joy  address  us  as  "  Ephraim,"  because  he  finds 
in  us  "  double  fruitfulness"!— C.  J. 

Ver.  Q.—The  epilogue.  With  this  weighty  sentence  the  prophet  sealsup  the  writti  n 
record  of  his  life-message.   As  the  foregoing  chapters  express  the  essence  of  Uosch's 


OH.  XIV.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  447 

publlo  teaoUng  during  hii  prolonged  miniBtry,  this  clonng  verse,  in  like  nutnner,  seti 
before  us  the  quintessence  of  that  written  record.  The  conclusion  "  unspecislizes  the 
prophecy,  m  it  were,  and  extracts  the  general  moral  lesson  which  underlies  it  all " 
(Oheyne).    Two  main  points  are  suggested  here  for  our  consideration. 

I.  A  SUHHABY  OF  TBS  pbofhbt's  teaohino.  This  is  given  in  the  second  half  of  the 
verse.  The  Book  of  Hosea  is  full  of  precious  instruction :  1.  About  Oed.  That  **  the 
ways  of  Jehovah  are  right "  is  the  sum  of  its  theology.  God's  "  ways "  are  to  he 
understood  to  mean  his  dealings  with  men  as  the  supreme  moral  Cktvemor.  And  the 
prophet's  fum  in  these  pages  is  akin  to  that  which  Milton  announces  in  the  beginning 
of  his  great  epic^  vis.  to  "  assert  eternal  Providence,  and  justify  the  ways  of  God  to 
men."  (1)  Eis  ways  in  Judgment  are  right.  "  These  things  "  cannot  but  include  all 
the  lamentations  and  chidings  and  announcements  of  punishment  with  which  the 
book  is  so  largely  occupied.  Ephraim  had  sinned  against  the  voice  of  God's  Law,  against 
the  assurances  of  his  love,  and  even  against  the  pleadings  of  his  mercy ;  so  the  Lord 
could  not  be  "  unrighteous  in  taking  vengeance,"  however  dreadful  and  prolonged  that 
vengeance  might  be.  Hosea's  message,  on  its  side  of  sternness,  announced  that 
"righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of  his  throne."  God's  ways  are  right 
in  ms  dealings  with  every  ungodly  nation,  despite  all  the  difficulty  and  mystery  which 
may  gather  round  them.  And  his  ways  are  right  in  his  dealings  with  each  individual 
transgressor,  albeit  that  the  reasons  of  his  procedure  may  be  "  past  finding  out."  The 
rectitude  of  the  Divine  ways  is  attested  by  experience;  for,  although  they  prove 
stumbling-blocks  to  the  ungodly,  "  the  just  walk  in  them,"  and  by-and-by  arrive  at  "  a 
city  of  habitation."  To  his  own  people  Jehovah  is  "  just,"  and  the  Justifier  of  him 
that  believeth  in  Jesus.  (2)  Sis  ways  in  meircy  are  right.  If  there  be  any  book  of 
Old  Testament  Scripture  which  exhibits  the  Divine  grace  aad  compassion,  that  book  is 
Hosea.  The  strain  of  it  is  not  ethical  alone ;  it  k  evangelical  also.  The  prophet 
represents  the  love  of  Otod.  as  the  fundamental  ground  of  God's  relations  to  his  ancient 
people.  Hosea  conceives  of  Jehovah  as  Israel's  Husband  (ch.  iL)  and  Father  (ch.  xi.). 
But,  as  the  prophet  was  persuaded  that  it  was  not  wrong  for  himself  to  continue  to  love 
Gomer,  his  adulterous  wife,  and  to  yearn  for  the  well-being  of  her  children,  when  they 
followed  in  her  evil  ways, — so  God's  dealings  in  mercy  towards  apostate  Israel,  and 
towards  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  are  right  also.  "  Our  book  is,  therefore,  truly  a  classic 
for  the  right  understanding  of  the  Old  Testament  conception  of  God  with  its  interaction 
of  love  and  wrath,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation  concerning  God. 
Only  such  a  God  who  can  be  so  angry  and  so  loving,  who  in  all  his  love  so  displays 
anger,  and  in  all  his  anger  so  displays  love,  could  give  up  his  only  begotten  Son  to  the 
accursed  death  for  the  deliverance  of  rebellious  man ''  (Lange).  But  the  Book  of  Hosea 
is  also  full  of  teaching :  2.  Ahout  men.  It  separates  them  into  two  classes, — "  the 
just "  or  righteous,  and  "  the  transgressors ; "  those  who  "  walk  in  "  the  Lord's  ways, 
and  those  who  "  stumble  thereon."  In  other  words,  this  book  deals  with  the  great 
theme  of  spuritual  apostasy  and  revivaL  (1)  Spiritual  apostasy.  There  are  always 
many  "  transgressors,"  who,  like  Ephraim,  stumble  and  fall  in  uie  right  ways  of  the 
Lord.  And  this  book  is  written  to  warn  men  against  becoming  such.  Hosea  points 
out  the  earliest  symptoms Att  backsliding;  e.^.  the  "morning-cloud  goodness"  (ch.  vL 
4);  the  "grey  hairs"  (oh.  vii.  9);  the  "removing  of  the  bound"  (ch.  v.  10);  the 
" forgetting  of  one's  Maker"  (ch.  viii.  14);  the  "hiring  of  lovers"  (ch.  viii.  9),  etc. 
He  indicates  its  /urt?ter  manifestations;  e.g.  "counting  God's  Law  a  strange  thing " 
(ch.  viii.  12) ;  "  mixing  among  the  people ;  "  being  like  "  a  cake  not  turned  "  (ch.  vii. 
8) ;  becoming  "  an  empty  vine  "  (ch.  x.  1) ;  "  sowing  the  wind  "  (ch.  viii.  7) ;  "  sinning 
more  and  more  "  (ch.  xiii.  2),  etc.  And  he  warns  against  ultimate  results  ;  eg.  idols 
"  broken  in  pieces  "  (ch.  viii.  6) ;  "  the  land  mourning  "  (ch.  iv.  3) ;  "  reaping  the 
whirlwind"  (ch.  viii.  7);  "joined  to  idols"  (ch.  Iv.  17);  "cast  away  by  Ckd"  (oh.  ix. 
17%  etc.  (2)  Spirituai  revival.  The  prophet  deals  with  this  more  pleasant  side  of 
his  message  in  ch.  ii.,14 — 23,  vi.  1 — 8,  and  especially  in  ch.  xiv.  (For  an  outline  of  his 
teaching  regarding  the  rise,  progress,  and  fruits  of  revival,  see  the  three  preceding 
homilies.) 

n.  ThB  MOBAL  <)VAIjnOATION  NBCES8ABT  IF  Wl  WOVU)  PBOnT  BT  THIS  TGAOHnrOk 

The  student  of  Hosea,  who  desires  to  get  at  the  mind  of  the  Spirit  oontained  in  these 
oracles,  must  be  "wise"  and  "prudent."    The  "just"  or  pioua  man  "walks  is  tbe 


448  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  [oh.  xiy.  1— 9. 

Lord's  ways;"  and  these  wayi  require  to  be  walked  in  to  be  understood.  The 
"  irisdom "  which  the  prophet  desiderates  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  intellectual 
acuteness ;  it  is  a  moral  qualification.  Here,  as  in  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  indeed 
throughout  all  Scripture,  the  "  wise  "  are  they  whose  souls  have  been  enlightened  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  who  have  been  brought  into  a  right  moral  state  in  relation  to 
Divine  truth.  The  profound  theology  of  Hosea,  accordingly,  will  not  be  grasped  by  the 
man  of  merely  intellectual  discernment,  or  by  any  one  who  has  only  accumulated 
stores  of  human  learning.  Moral  preparation  is  necessary  in  order  to  the  reception  and 
aisimilation  of  spiritual  truth.  As  the  psalmist  has  it,  "Light  is  sown  for  the 
righteous"  (Ps.  xcvii.  11).  Or,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  expressed  the  same  .thought, "  If  any 
man  b  willing  to  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God  " 
(John  viL  17).  This  experimental  qualification  is  within  every  one's  reach.  The 
possession  of  it  makes  the  simple-minded  shepherd  really  wiser  than  the  "  undevout 
astronomer."  Cowper's  "  cottager,  who  weaves  at  her  own  door,"  has  it  to  the  full ; 
while  "  the  brilliant  Frenchman  never  knew  "  it.  Only  the  right-hearted  man  will  be 
habitually  persuaded  of  the  equity  of  the  Divine  government,  both  as  regards  judg- 
ment and  mercy.  Such  a  one  has  learned  to  "  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good." 
Correctness  of  conduct  promotes  correctness  of  creed,  and  helps  to  the  proper  under- 
standing of  God's  ways.  A  man  thinks  rightly  just  to  the  extent  of  his  living  purely 
(Fs.  cxi.  10).  In  our  day,  accordingly,  one  must  be  a  believer  in  Christ  and  a  follower 
of  him  if  he  would  profit  by  the  study  of  Hosea. 

Lkssons.  1;  What  a  commentary  upon  this  verse  is  the  whole  history  of  the 
Hebrew  nation,  from  the  beginning  until  now  I  2.  Hosea's  last  word,  like  Holy 
Scripture  everywhere,  draws  a  sharp  contrast  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked. 
3.  Every  man  must  make  choice  either  of  "  walking  in  God's  ways,"  or  of  "  stumbling 
thereon."  4.  The  believer  should  derive  comfort  from  this  text  in  presence  of  the 
mysteries  of  Providence.  6.  This  final  exhortation  should  come  home  to  us  with  still 
greater  power  than  it  was  fitted  to  do  to  Hosea's  contemporaries ;  for,  since  he  lived, 
the  four  great  world-empires  have  successively  fallen,  the  Jews  remain  scattered  among 
the  cities  of  the  earth,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  been  lifted  up  on  the  cross  as  an 
atonement  for  sin,  and  his  gospel  has  been  preached  among  the  nations. — C.  J« 

Vers.  1, 2.—Ood's  message  to  the  prodigal.  This  chapter  stands  out  in  vivid  contrast 
from  much  that  precedes  it.  The  denunciation  of  threats  is  over,  and  now  Hosea  turns 
to  tender  pleading  with  the  godless.  The  change  is  like  that  which  we  see  sometimes 
during  a  thunderstorm.  The  clouds  gather,  the  wind  sinks  into  a  solemn  silence,  then 
the  thunder  rolls  and  crashes  overhead,  and  men's  hearts  fail  them  for  fear.  But  suddenly 
there  is  a  lull,  the  clouds  break,  and,  as  a  burst  of  sunshine  lights  up  the  earth,  the 
rainbow  of  God's  faithfulness  and  goodness  is  seen.  With  such  a  sudden  and  sublime 
transition  does  Hosea  pass  here  from  storm  to  calm,  from  denunciation  to  pleading. 
The  prophet  is  addressing  a  nation  which,  as  such,  could  not  be  saved.  The  kingdom 
of  Israel  was  to  be  hopelessly  destroyed.  But  the  children  were  still  "  heirs  of  the 
promises,"  and,  while  tlie  corporate  society  to  which  they  belonged  would  be  swept 
away,  they  themselves  might  return  to  their  God.  There  is  no  nation  so  evil  but  that 
in  it  some  may  work  righteousness,  no  family  so  godless  but  that  some  of  its  members 
may  be  loyal  to  Christ.  Circumstances  never  necessitate  the  ruin  of  a  soul.  The 
desolation  of  society  has  been  historically  the  means  of  saving  what  is  best  in  it;  t.g, 
if  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  the  unscrupulous  Buckingham  had  been  successful  in  his 
foreign  policy,  the  result  would  have  been  the  establishment  of  a  tyranny  in  England. 
Our  national  defeats  just  then  were  the  cause  of  our  constitutional  salvation ;  men 
being  roused  to  a  consciousness  of  wrong-doing  by  the  consequences  of  wrong-doing.  So 
with  IsraeL  The  destruction  of  Israel  seemed  to  the  heathen  the  failure  of  Jehovah's 
purpose;  but  it  was  the  means  of  salvation  to  many  who  heard  and  obeyed  in  the 
misery  of  exile,  as  they  would  not  have  heard  and  obeyed  in  prosperity,  the  exhortation, 
"  0  Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord."  A  world-wide  truth  was  taught  by  our  Lord  when 
he  described  the  prodigal  as  thinking  of  tne  father's  home,  when  he  "  had  spent  all," 
and  famine  was  in  the  land,  so  that  "  he  began  to  be  in  want."  Oar  text  it  Qod's 
message  to  such  a  one. 

L  Tbk  condition  or  t^b  anwiSB.    |.  A  condition  <^  e^ran^mtent.    Implied    ip 


0H.XIT.1— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  449 


"  letum."  Of  thoie  addressed  by  Hosea,  some  had  once  joined  in  Jehovah's  worship, 
but  had  forsaken  it,  while  others  had  been  talcea  as  children  to  the  altars  of  idols. 
These  two  classes  are  represented  still.  There  are  those  who  have  never  Icnown  God ; 
to  them  he  is  no  more  than  the  emperor  of  a  distant  land  might  be,  the  ruler  of  others, 
one  to  be  heard  and  read  of,  but  nothing  more.  There  are  also  those  whose  hearts  were 
once  tender,  who  were  nominally  on  the  side  of  the  Church,  to  whom  the  Lord  says, 
''  I  have  somewhat  against  thee,  because  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  Apply  the  text 
to  each.  2.  A  conditioned  moral  degradation.  "Fallen."  (V)  Godlessnett  is  itself  an 
inward  degradation.  The  godless  man  has  "  fallen  "  below  what  he  mi^ht  have  been, 
as  a  ruler  of  himself  and  a  worshipper  of  God.  He  has  fallen  from  the  likeness  and 
from  the  favour  of  God.  (2)  It  leads  to  moral  degradation ;  so  that  ultimately  courage, 
purity,  and  reverence  in  the  outward  life  disappear.  "  Iniquity,"  i.e.  an  inward  tendency 
to  evil,  does  for  the  character  what  the  sea  does  for  the  cliff,  undermining  it  secretly, 
till  unexpectedly  it  falls.  3.  A  condition  of  self-destructiveness.  "  Thine  iniquity." 
Not  Adam's  transgression,  not  thy  father's  neglect  or  evil  example,  not  the  associations 
of  life,  but  "  thine  own  iniquity,"  ruins  thee.  Therefore,  with  a  sehse  of  weakness  and 
guilt,  let  us  return  to  the  Lord,  saying,  "  /  have  sinned  against  Heaven,"  etc. ;  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

IL  The  ohabaotbbistics  of  his  KBTnEM.  1.  Sincerity,  or  thoroughness.  The 
Pharisees  were  condemned  for  want  of  it.  All  are  rejected  of  whom  God  can  say, 
"  This  people  rlraweth  nigh  unto  me  with  their  mouth ;  .  .  .  but  their  heart  is  far  from 
me."  The  Hebrew  signifies,  "  Return  right  up  to  thy  God."  You  are  not  to  stop  at 
self-reformation  or  at  sentimental  feeling,  but  to  return  "right  up  to"  God,  and  stand 
face  to  face  with  him.  To  be  nearly  saved  is  to  be  altogether  lost,  2.  Confession. 
"  Take  with  you  words."  Words  are  cheap  enough.  It  is  well  that  no  costly  sacrifice 
is  required,  but  only  "  words,"  which  the  poorest  and  most  illiterate  can  utter.  Words 
are  worthless  in  themselves,  but  they  have  true  value  when  they  come  from  an  honest 
ani  g  )od  heart.  If  a  child  who  has  done  wrong  is  shut  up  alone  to  think  over  bis 
fault,  he  knows  that  all  he  has  to  say  is,  "  I'm  sorry."  It  is  easy  enough  to  say  the 
words ;  yet  he  sits  there,  proud  and  defiant,  until  better  thoughts  come  to  him ;  and 
when  at  last  he  falters  out  "  I'm  sorry,"  it  is  enough  to  win  him  reconciliation.  The 
"  words  "  are  nothing,  but  they  mean  much,  for  they  involve  self-conquest  and  humili- 
ation. That  is  the  meaning  of  the  exhortation  to  the  penitent.  "Take  with  you 
words."  3.  Entreaty.  (1)  "  Take  away  all  iniquity."  This  implies  that  only  God 
can  do  so.  The  prayer  involves  much.  We  want  not  only  the  consciousness  of  sin  or 
the  punishment  of  sin  removed,  but  the  "iniquity"  itself  taken  away.  The  true 
penitent  does  not  say,  "  Take  away  the  sins  that  disgrace  me,  but  spare  those  by  which 
I  make  money,"  or,  "  Destroy  my  lusts,  but  let  ambition  and  pride  remain."  Popular 
sins,  pet  sins,  as  well  as  vile  sins,  are  included  in  the  words,  "  Take  away  all  iniquity." 
(2)  ••  And  receive  us  graciously ; "  literally,  "  receive  good."  The  "  good  "  we  offer  God 
comes  from  himself,  so  that  we  must  say  of  all  right  desire  and  true  thought  and 
Christian  service,  "  Of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  '  He  can  only  cast  out  evil  by 
pouring  in  good.  He  leaves  no  heart  empty,  but  gives  the  new  love  to  keep  out,  as 
well  as  to  cast  out,  the  old.  Yet  even  the  good  he  gives  is  so  affected  by  our  imperfec- 
tions that,  casting  ourselves  upon  his  condescension  and  mercy,  we  need  to  pray, 
"  Receive  good."  4.  Resolve :  (1)  To  have  done  with  the  old  sins.  "  Asshur  shall  not 
save  us,"  etc.  This  is  an  abjuration  of  Israel's  three  sins :  (a)  trust  in  man  (Asshur) ; 
(6)  trust  in  self  (horses,  equivalent  to  military  power);  (c)  trust  in  idols.  These  have 
their  modern  counterparts,  when  we  trust  (a)  in  the  influence  of  others  to  get  us  on  in 
life ;  (b)  in  our  physical  or  intellectual  power ;  (e)  in  our  wealth  and  position,  instead  of 
in  God.  (2)  To  offer  perpetual  thanksgiving.  "  So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips." 
The  meaning  of  the  phrase  is — ^when  we  have  received  pardon  and  conquest  of  sin, "  we 
will  praise  thee  with  joyful  lips,"  What  more  notk  than  praise,  such  as  the  redeemed 
render  1  what  more  natural,  when  we  remember  the  goodness  of  Godl  what  more 
help/id  to  otheri  than  the  songs  which  of  old  caused  the  glory  of  God  to  fill  the  house  of 
the  Lord  I     "  It  is  a  good  thing  to  give  thanks  unto  the  Ijord,"  etc. 

m.  The  encouraoement  to  his  obedience.  1.  It  is  found  in  the  fathtrlineti  of 
God.  Ver.  3:  "For  in  thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  He  is  "thy  God,"  to 
whom  thon  oweit  obedience;  who  has  girded  thee,  though  thou  hast  not  known  him; 
nosBA.  2  a 


iSO  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xiv.  1—9. 

and  who  now  sees  thee  a  great  way  off,  and  has  compassion  on  thee.  When  the  doye 
found  no  rest  for  her  foot  in  a  dark  and  desolate  world,  she  returned  to  the  ark ;  nor 
had  she  to  flutter  outside  it  in  rain.  Noah  saw  her,  and  put  out  his  hand  and  "  took 
her  in  unto  him  into  the  ark."  If  Noah  did  that  for  a  poor  tired  bird,  what  will  not 
(Jod  do  for  his  own  tired  child  ?  2.  They  are  found  in  ths  promises  of  Ood.  Ver.  4 
"  I  will  heal  their  backsliding,"  etc.  He  pledges  himself  to  cure  our  waywardness  ana 
fickleness,  and  he  is  faithful.  Therefore,  though  a  good  reputation  has  been  lost,  a 
pious  ancestry  disgraced,  and  holy  promises  broken,  yet  be  encouraged  to  obey  the 
loving  exhortation,  "  0  Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God." — A.  K. 

Ver.  6. — The  heavenly  dew/all.  The  former  part  of  the  chapter  describes  the  experi- 
ence through  which  a  Church  or  a  soul  must  pass  before  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise. 
The  repentance,  the  vows,  the  hopes  of  the  penitent  are  here  crowned  by  Divine  good- 
ness. With  a  startling  and  sudden  transition,  in  the  fourth  verse,  Jehovah  is  represented 
as  interposing  amidst  the  prayers  of  those  returning  to  him.  So  our  Lord  describes  the 
father  as  unable  to  listen  to  the  close  of  the  prodigal's  confession,  before  he  breaks  forth 
in  a  gush  of  generous  pardon  and  blessing.  How  encouraging  the  truth  this  suggests 
for  all  who  turn  to  God !  We  accept  our  text  as  a  figurative  description  of  the  revivi- 
fying and  beautifying  influence  of  the  Holy  S^iirit  upon  the  human  heart.  Let  us 
notice,  therefore,  some  of  the  characteristics  of  the  dew. 

I.  Dew  is  unseen  in  its  comino.  We  see  its  efi'ects  when  every  leaf  and  flower 
flutters  in  the  eaily  sunshine ;  but  the  dew  came  unperoeived,  when  darkness  was  over 
the  earth.  1.  Probably  the  most  powerful  forces  are  those  which  are  unseen.  The 
noblest  part  of  rnan  is  hidden  from  human  gaze,  and  of  him  who  is  the  directing  Power 
of  the  universe  it  is  said,  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time."  If  it  be  argued  that 
because  God  is,  and  always  has  been  invisible,  he  must  be  non-existent ;  it  may  also  be 
argued  that  the  conscious  ego  does  not  exist,  because  it  has  never  been  seen.  It  is  true 
that  no  research  or  analysts  in  the  natural  world  has  discovered  God  ;  it  is  equally  true 
that  no  investigation  of  the  human  body,  living  or  dead,  has  ever  revealed  the  subtle 
consciousness  of  whose  existence  each  man  is,  however,  certain.  Both  are  beyond  the 
range  of  experimental  science.  We  do  not  know  how  the  Spirit  of  God  affects  ns ; 
we  cannot  discover  the  nexus  by  means  of  which  holy  thoughts  and  impulses  from  above 
becomes  ours,  yet  we  are  confident  that  they  are  of  God  and  not  of  us.  In  our  holiest 
and  best  hours  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  to  us,  but  secretly,  "  as  the  dew  lighteth  upon  the 
grass."  2.  The  evidence  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  he  found  in  its  effects ;  e.g.  the 
conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus ;  the  profound  teaching  of  the  unscholarly  writers  of 
Holy  Scripture ;  the  triumph  of  Christianity  through  the  influence  of  such  men  as  were 
its  first  representatives ;  the  moral  transformatioa  of  some  we  ourselves  have  seen. 
One  example  of  genuine  conversion  will  do  more  to  prove  the  work  of  the  Spirit  than 
all  the  tomes  of  theology  ever  written. 

II.  Dew  is  silent  in  its  fall.  We  can  hear  the  pattering  of  rain  or  the  rippling 
of  streams,  but  the  dewfall  does  not  disturb  an  insect's  sleep.  1.  The  Church,  as  well 
as  the  world,  depends  too  often  on  noise  and  bustle,  as  the  signs  or  the  causes  of  success. 
The  preacher  whose  eloquence  attracts  the  multitude,  around  whom  are  clustered 
societies  and  organizations  to  do  all  manner  of  work,  is  not  always  the  man  most  richly 
blessed  of  God.  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  signs  that  the  work  is  of  God  are  to  be  found, 
not  in  the  outward,  but  in  the  inward — in  truer  thoughts  of  sin  and  holiness,  in  a  loftiei 
standard  of  Christian  integrity,  in  the  generosity  and  self-sacrifice  of  Christ's  disciples, 
in  the  purity  and  love  which  are  being  silently  inwrought  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Hence  we  should  be  slow  to  measure  success  in  our  own  efforts  or  those  of 
others.  2.  As  a  rule,  spiritual  blessing  is  fichest  when  outward  joy  U  haxt.  The 
dew  falls  not  during  sunshine,  but  in  the  night.  Note  the  spiritual  richness  and  power 
of  the  Obitrch  in  times  of  persecution.  Befer  to  the  development  of  Christian  faith, 
peace,  hope,  devoutness,  in  the  dark  reasons  of  affliction.  The  world  most  be  hushed 
that  we  may  hear  Chxl's  voice.  Earth  must  he  darkened  before  the  dew  of  heavenly 
blessing  falls. 

III.  l^EW  18  BETTVINO  IN  ITS  INTLUEKOB.  We  see  nothing  comparable  to  that 
with  which  Hosea  was  familiar,  living  as  he  did  in  a  land  where  no  rain  fell  for  months 
together,  and  where  the  withholding  of  dew  meant  the  death  of  vegetation.    Without 


m.  xiT.  1-S.]  THB  BOOK  OF  HOBSA.  461 

It  corn  would  not  reach  maturity,  and  olives  and  yinea  and  fig  tnM  would  yield  m 
fruit.  A  more  terrible  curse  than  that  pronounced  by  Elijah  in  Ahab's  reign  could  not 
have  been  inflicted.  Christ  Jesug  foresaw  the  dearth  of  comfort  and  hope  and  energy 
which  would  prevail  in  his  Church  if  his  disciples  were  left  to  themselves.  Hence  h« 
gave  the  promise  of  the  Comforter,  whom  he  would  send  from  the  Father,  to  lead  his 
disciples  into  all  truth,  and  to  convince  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg- 
ment. The  garden,  glittering  and  beautiful  after  its  dewy  baptism,  may  illustrate  such 
spiritual  refreshment  as  we  see  in  Peter  coming  from  the  upper  room  at  Feotecost,  or  in 
John  rejoicing  even  in  the  esile  of  Fatmos.  What  are  the  graces  and  gifts — the  fruits 
of  the  Spirit  in  us,  which  need  the  heavenly  benediction  ?  Whence  their  impoverish- 
ment? Where  their  source  of  revival?  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your  joy 
may  be  full." 

lY.  Dew  is  befeated  and  ABnNOANT  in  its  rALb  Its  departure,  as  well  as  its 
coming,  is  rapid  and  secret.  Hence  Hosea  elsewhere  uses  it  as  an  illustration  of 
transient  religious  feeling.  To  give  a  dewfall  once  in  a  season  would  be  of  little  use. 
1.  It  comes  night  after  night,  and  this  is  in  accordance  with  the  Divine  method.  Thus 
God  gave  the  mauna,  which  could  not  be  hoarded  or  stored  up  for  future  use.  By  this 
means  the  people  learnt  their  constant  dependence  on  God.  Still  we  are  taught  to  pray, 
"Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread" — a  prayer  which  includes  spiritual  as  well  at 
temporal  sustenance.  Israel  could  not  live  on  yesterday's  manna.  You  cannot  live  on 
^  the  relics  of  your  old  faith.  Your  character  will  break  down  if  it  rests  on  the  memory 
of  your  past  experience.  The  feeling  aroused  when  you  first  thought  of  God  was  enongh 
to  hring  you  to  him,  but  not  enough  to  A:eep  you  near  him.  The  prayer  which  brought 
pardon  mast  be  daily  repeated  for  purification  from  sin.  And  in  our  weakness  this  is 
necessary,  lest  we  should  lapse  into  a  prayerless  life,  and  go  on  our  way  in  a  spirit  of 
presumptuous  self-dependence,  2.  It  is  not  that  Ood  cannot  give  grace  (Aunda/iitly,  or 
that  he  willingly  withholds  from  the  feeblest  and  most  worthless  what  they  want  and 
can  receive.  He  does  not  stint  the  world  of  dew.  The  humblest  flower  has  its  drop; 
unsightly  things  are  baptized  with  that  blessing ;  the  rough  bracken  shares  it  equally 
with  the  rose,  and  the  tiny  flower  on  the  window-sill  of  the  pauper  is  as  much  blessed 
as  the  garden  of  the  peer.  Free  to  all,  it  is  a  fit  emblem  of  the  fulness  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  which  God  will  in  nowise  withhold  from  him  who  seeks.  **  I  will  be  as  the  dew 
unto  Israel." 

CoNOLUBioN.  If  Ood  is  prepared  to  give,  are  we  prepared  to  receive  9  Let  as  not 
make  a  mistake  about  the  Holy  Spirit  similar  to  that  which  men  formerly  made  about 
the  dew,  which  represents  him.  They  supposed  that  the  moon  and  planets  poured  it 
down  upon  the  earth,  regardless  of  its  condition.  But  at  the  beginning  of  this  century. 
Dr.  Wells,  by  three  years'  experiments,  established  the  theory  which,  as  Dr.  Tyndall 
sa}'^s,  "  has  stood  the  test  of  all  subsequent  criticism,  and  is  now  universally  accepted." 
It  was  demonstrated,  in  short,  that  dew  was  not  dependent  on  the  condition  of  the 
heavens  only,  but  on  the  condition  of  the  earth ;  ay,  and  of  the  various  things  upon 
the  earth.  It  was  shown  that  the  aqueous  vapour  condenses  on  things  which  are  cooled 
by  the  radiation  of  their  own  heat,  and  on  those  only ;  so  that  if  anything,  a  cloud,  for 
example,  comes  between  them  and  heaven,  which  prevents  the  ^ving  off  of  their  heat, 
the  dew  does  not  come ;  or,  if  they  do  not  themselves  freely  give  off  their  heat,  though 
all  around  are  blessed,  they  are  not.  Carry  the  thought  into  the  higher  sphere  of  which 
we  have  spoken.  If  there  be  no  outgoing  of  warm  earnest  desire  on  your  part,  if  there 
be  not  an  honest  putting  away  of  any  cloud,  be  it  of  doubt  or  of  sin,  which  lies  between 
your  soul  and  heaven,  though  others  may  be  blessed,  yon  will  fail  to  receive  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promise,  "I  will  be  as  the  dew  tmto  IsraeL"— A.  B. 

Vers.  6,  6. — The  bedewed  Church,  This  is  a  description  of  the  condition  of  a  Ohnrch 
which  has  received  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  "  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  Israel." 
Its  blessedness  is  so  full  and  so  varied  in  its  manifestations  that  no  one  emblem  would 
suffice  to  represent  it.  Hence  the  text  is  crowded  with  imagery.  The  bedewed  Churoh 
has  these  characteristics. 

L  Growth.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  L  ThU  presuppose*  Ufs.  A  lifeless  log 
would  not  grow,  however  rich  the  soil,  f«vourable  the  season,  abundant  the  sunshine 
aad  dew ;  but  if  these  conditions  be  ^ven  to  s  lily  bolfa^  though  it  bo  ansightly  in 


«1  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oh.xit.1— 9. 

appearance  and  deeply  buried  in  the  earth,  it  must  grow,  because  it  lives.  No  Church 
can  expect  the  bleBseduess  described  in  the  text  unless  it  is  living,  consisting  of  those 
who  have  more  than  a  name  to  live,  whose  consciousness  of  God's  presence  and  devotion 
to  hU  service  prove  that  they  have  passed  from  death  unto  life.  2.  This  indicates  mul- 
Uplieation.  A  lily  multiplies  itself,  and  so  foot  by  foot  conquers  the  soil  about  it. 
Similar  extension  is  a  ^igu  of  vitality  in  a  Church  ;  for  if  the  life  of  Christ  be  in  it,  it 
will  never  be  self-absorbed,  content  with  enjoyment,  or  even  with  self-culture,  but  will 
propagate  itself  in  the  waste  places  around.  3.  It  impliei  variety.  The  lily  genus 
contains  an  unusual  variety  of  specief.  Sometimes  a  single  scale  will  produce  a  new 
plant.  Some  lilies  are  stately,  others  lowly ;  some  grow  in  heat,  others  spread  their 
broad  leaves  over  the  surface  of  a  quiet  pool.  Far  greater  varieties  are  seen  in  th* 
forms  in  which  Divine  life  displays  itself  to  the  world.  Some  Churches  are  ornate  in 
their  acts  of  wort-hip,  others  stern  in  their  simplicity;  some  lay  stress  on  accurate 
definitions  of  theology,  others  on  the  human  side  of  their  mission,  etc.  Yet  all  these 
but  imperfectly  represent  the  fulness  of  Divine  life  which  was  in  Christ.  These  are  not 
antagonistic  forms  of  life,  but  imperfect  developments  of  the  one  life.  4.  Jt  mggests 
purity.  All  Churches  are  agreed  in  seeking  this  which  the  lily  so  often  represents. 
"  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  Ood,"  and  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
Happy  is  it  for  men  that  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  from  all  sin." 

II.  Stabilitt.  "  He  shall  .  .  .  cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon."  The  hly  grows 
fast,  but  is  fragile ;  indeed,  stability  is  seldom  reached  rapidly  in  nature.  The  succulent 
plant,  which  swiftly  reaches  maturity,  is  killed  by  the  first  frost ;  but  the  oak,  which 
wrestles  with  the  wind  and  laughs  at  the  storm,  is  the  growth  of  years  or  centuries. 
In  the  spiritual  sphere,  however,  God  can  create  a  Church  swiftly,  whose  beauty  is  not 
transient :  "  It  grows  as  the  lily,  but  cast  forth  its  roots  as  Lebanon."  The  allusion  is, 
not  to  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  but  to  Lebanon  itself.  Standing  on  the  summit  of  that 
mountain  range,  you  see  below  you  blooming  flowers,  solemn  cedars,  here  a  patch  of 
waving  corn  and  there  a  terraced  vineyard,  here  a  quiet  dell  and  there  a  busy  village. 
These  change,  but  Lebanon  abides ;  for  it  sends  out  its  rooky  ridges,  like  giant  roots, 
down  deep  beneath  the  distant  sea.  That  is  Hosea's  emblem  of  the  stability  of  the 
Church,  of  which  Christ  said,  "  The  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  The 
outward  forms  of  Christian  life  may  change,  but  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  the  one  Hope 
of  humanity,  tbe  one  true  King  of  the  world,  is  rooted  deep  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and 
the  purpose  of  God  and  "  his  kingdom  is  that  which  shall  never  be  destroyed." 

m.  Extension.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  No  man  can  le  good  without  doing 
good.  If  he  has  high  moral  tone,  intense  spiritual  earnestness,  strong,  deep-rooted  con- 
victions, an  attractive  Christ-like  character,  bis  influence  will  spread  in  spite  of  himself 
— over  his  home  and  business  relationships.  This  power  is  quite  distinct  from  social  or 
intellectual  influence,  and  may  exist  without  it.  Hence  it  is  that  the  rough-handed 
fishermen  of  a  despised  country  are  swaying  the  destinies  of  the  world.  "  I  appoint 
unto  you  a  kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  unto  me."  Show  how  far-reaching 
18  the  quiet  influence  of  a  Christian  mother,  whose  only  sphere  of  activity  is  her  own 
home.  Note  :  Influence  is  not  less  because  it  is  morally  bad.  Not  only  do  the  branches 
of  the  cedar  spread,  but  also  the  branches  of  the  upas  tree,  whose  shadow  is  deadly. 
God  forbid  that  the  extension  of  our  influence  should  prove  the  extension  of  our  evil- 
doing,  and  therefore  of  our  retribution  I 

IV.  Beauty.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree."  No  tree  in  Palestine  was 
more  valuable  than  the  olive.  Its  oil  was  used  as  food,  was  poured  on  sacriflces, 
was  employed  in  the  coronation  of  the  king,  and  afforded  sustenance  for  light'.  No 
wonder  it  is  so  often  used  in  Scripture  as  an  emblem  of  prosperity.  Here,  probably, 
the  reference  is  to  the  abiding  beauty  of  the  character  created  by  God's  Spirit — the 
olive  being  evergreen,  as  beautiful  in  winter  as  in  summer.  In  natural  dispusition  we 
often  see  gaiety  and  pleasantness  supplanted  by  moroseness  and  irritability,  when  the 
experience  of  life  has  been  bitter.  But  we  have  seen  Christians  whose  luxurious  home 
has  been  exchanged  for  straitened  circumstances,  whose  vigorous  health  has  failed, 
whose  family  circle  has  been  broken  up;  and  yet,  in  thanUfiilneSs  for  what  is  left,  in 
serenity  of  spirit,  in  trnstfulness  for  the  future,  we  see  the  unfading  beauty  of  the  olive. 
"  He  shall  be  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water,  that  bringeth  forth  his  fruit  in 
his  season :  his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither." 


ca.  xiv.l— 9.J  THE  BOOK.  Ob'  HOSfiA.  453 

V.  Attkactivenbss.  "His  smell  as  Lebanon."  In  the  ralley  between  the  two 
ranges  of  Lebanon,  aromatic  plants  abound;  myrtle  and  lavender  and  sweet-smelling 
reedfl  send  forth  delicious  fragrance,  and  every  passing  breeze  is  perfumed  and  oanies 
over  the  world  a  message  concerning  the  tender  mercy  of  Qod.  It  was  with  some 
thought  of  this  that  the  Church  is  represented  as  praying,  "  Awake,  0  north  wind ;  and 
come,  thou  south;  and  blow  upon  my  garden,  that  the  spices  thereof  may  flow 
out."  Doubtless  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  are  signified  in  that  verse  and  in  this,  bat. 
the  reference  is  chieily  to  the  diffasive  influence  of  love,  the  gi'eatest  yet  the  quietest 
moral  power  we  know.  There  is,  unhappily,  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  in  the  physical, 
a  beauty  that  is  cold  and  almost  repellant.  There  are  Churches  and  Christians  whose 
intellectual  culture  and  social  respectability  none  would  dispute,  but  they  are  the  last 
in  the  world  to  whom  the  troubled,  the  sinful,  the  sceptical,  would  turn  for  sympathy. 
They  ue  deep-rooted  as  Lebanon,  pure  as  the  lily,  but  they  have  none  of  the  smell  of 
Lebanon,  and  do  not  bewray  themselves  and  attract  others  by  their  sweetness.  We 
cannot  do  Christ's  work  without  his  Spirit,  without  revealing  sympathy  and  love  like 
his.  If  we  are  to  have  any  power  for  him,  it  mu^t  he  spiritual  power.  If  we  are  to 
lay  hold  of  men  and  save  them,  it  must  be  by  the  arms  of  brotherly  love.  "  Let  the 
beauty  of  the  Lord  our  Qod  be  upon  us :  and  establish  thou  the  work  of  onr  hands  upon 
us ;  yea,  the  work  of  our  bands  establish  thou  itl"— A.  B. 

Yerg.  1,  2. — Counsels  to  the  sinful.  It  was  the  o£Sce  of  the  prophet  to  be  faithful  at 
once  with  man  and  with  God.  He  was  bound  not  to  flatter  man,  not  to  conceal  or 
palliate  human  sins.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  his  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God 
as  the  Buler  of  all  men,  the  Judge  of  the  obdurate,  the  Healer  of  the  penitent. 

I.  A  REMINDER  OF  THE  FALL.  The  Book  of  Hosea's  prophecies  is  full  of  reproaches 
and  expostulations  addressed  to  backsliding,  idolatrous  Israel.  The  people  are  charged 
with  iniquity,  and  they  are  put  in  mind  of  the  "  fall "  into  which  their  ungodliness  has 
brought  them.  As  surely  as  men  wander  from  the  ways  of  God  into  the  ways  of  error, 
unrighteousness,  and  folly,  so  surely  do  they,  sooner  or  later,  meet  with  a  fall.  It  ig  a 
plain  truth  that  the  godly  stand  upright.  Under  a  Divine  and  righteous  rule  it  cannot 
be  well  with  those  who  neglect  and  despise  the  moral  law.  Our  first  parents  "  fell "  by 
sin,  and  in  this  they  furnished  an  exemplification  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience 
as  a  lesson  to  their  posterity. 

II.  An  encoubaqement  to  bepentanok.  In  the  very  language  used  in  this  expostu- 
lation and  entreaty  there  is  much  to  cheer  and  to  justify  the  approach  of  the  penitent 
sinner  unto  God.  1.  There  is  the  designation  "Israel,"  the  use  of  which  seema  a 
reminder  of  the  Divine  favour.  2.  There  is  the  appellation  given  to  Jehovah^^— **  th 
Lord  thy  God;"  thine,  even  though  thou  hast  shown  thyself  so  insensible  and  so 
ungrateful.  3.  1  here  is  the  term  which  the  counsellor  employs — "  turn,"  "  return," 
unto  the  Lord,  implying  that  the  right  and  proper  path  is  Gtidward,  that  to  have  for- 
saken that  path  was  deviation  and  error,  that  steps  must  be  retraced.  What  stress  is 
laiil  in  Scripture  upon  sincere  repentance  and  conversion — upon  the  turning  of  the  soul 
unto  him  against  whom  sin  has  been  committed,  needs  not  to  be  shown ;  yet  the  sinful 
need  that  such  directions  should  be  repeated,  both  to  preserve  them  from  any  other  and 
any  false  way,  and  to  encourage  diffident  and  desponding  souls  in  their  access  to  God. 

III.  A  DIRECTION  to  confession  AND  ENTREATT.  "Take  With  you  words."  L 
This  is  an  encouragement  to  the  expression  and  outpouring  of  the  feelings  of  the  heart. 
Mere  words,  that  b,  meaningless  and  insincere  words,  are  vain ;  but  words  which  are 
the  utterance  of  a  penitent  and  lowly  soul,  are  acceptable.  2.  Words  should  utter  the 
self-abasement  which  is  the  sinner's  proper  attitude  of  heart  before  a  righteous  Lord. 
Confession  is  indispensable ;  for  only  the  hardened  and  insensible  can  withhold  it.  3. 
Words  should  plead  for  pardon  and  acceptance.  The  prophet  himself  puts  such 
language  into  Israel's  lips,  and  at  the  same  time  represents  the  willingness  of  an 
ofiended  God  graciously  to  hear  and  royally  to  answer. 

Afflioation.  To  uiow  what  light  is  furnished  by  the  gospel  of  Christ  to  make 
arident  alike  the  sinner's  condition  and  also  the  grounds  and  assuianoe  of  Divine  favour 
and  forgiveness. — T. 

Vers.  2,  3. — Tlie  suppHcation  and  the  vow.    Words  alone  are  vain,    Tet,  In  the 


154  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSE  A.  [oh.  xiT.  1— 9. 

order  of  nature,  words  are  the  expression  of  thon^t  and  sentiment  and  resolve. 
Espedally  must  words  uttered  to  Heaven  be  sincere  and  truthful ;  for  he  is  the  Searcher 
of  hearts,  whose  favour  the  sinner  heseeches  with  contrition  and  with  confidence.  Let 
it,  then,  be  understood  that  the  words  here  suggested  as  suitable  for  the  repenting 
sinner's  address  to  God  are  the  utterance  of  deep  emotion  and  sincere  resolution. 

I.  Penitent  confession.  Israel  acknowledges  that  there  has  been  misplaced  confi- 
dence. She  has  trusted  in  alliances  with  Assyria,  in  military  resources,  in  the  vain 
aid  of  the  idols  of  the  surrounding  idolaters.  In  all  this  she  has  been  her  own  enemy, 
and  has  been  proving  her  own  folly.  The  confession,  which  is  the  indispensable 
condition  to  acceptance,  is  here  made. 

II.  Bepentanoe  and  besolte.  Israel  not  only  sees  the  £ict  and  feela  the  reproach 
concerning  herself;  she  resolves  upon  a  change— a  turning  from  human  aid  and  an 
abandonment  of  self-confidence.  Apart  from  this  there  is  no  hope  of  a  safer  way,  a 
better  life. 

III.  Entbeatt  fob  foboivenebs  and  aoceptance.  Israel  loathes  her  sin,  and 
desires  that  both  the  sin  and  its  consequences  should  be  removed.  Israel  is  weary  of 
enmity  with  God,  and  desires  that  there  may  be  peace,  that  she  may  be  accepted  and 
dealt  with  in  grace  and  love. 

lY.  The  suppliant's  tow.  It  has  ever  been  characteristic  of  hnman  nature  to  deal 
with  the  higher  Power  as  though  that  power  were  human,  and  to  be  appeased  with 
offerings  and  with  promises  of  service.  Vows  have  been  and  still  are  made  under  the 
influence  of  this  superstitious  belief.  Yet  this  is  no  argument  against  such  vows  as 
that  here  put  into  the  lips  of  Israel:  "So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips." 
Sacrifices  of  obedience  and  of  praise  are  just  on  the  part  of  man,  and  are  acceptable  to 
God.  None  who  is  graciously  pardoned  and  accepted  can  withhold  this  tribute.  There 
have  doubtless  been  those  who,  in  their  ignorance  and  unspiritnality,  have  hoped  to 
bribe  Deity  with  the  proffer  of  their  praises.  But  none  the  less  does  it  become  the 
pardoned  penitent  to  express  his  gratitude  to  him  who  is  plenteous  in  forgiveness. — T. 

Ver.  3. — "  The  fatherless  findeth  mereuP  The  sorrows  of  human  life  are  many,  and 
some  of  them  are,  by  us,  largely  inexplicable.  The  relation  of  father  and  son  is  an 
obvious  provision  of  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  beautifully  symbolizes  the 
relation  between  God  and  his  dependent  children.  Yet  there  are  the  fatherless,  deprived 
of  the  care  and  protection  so  urgently  needed.  Why  should  it  be  permitted  that  any 
should  be  placed  in  a  pusition  so  painful  and  pitiable  ?  We  cannot  tell.  Still  the  case 
of  such  furnishes  an  opportunity  for  the  intervention  of  him  who  is  the  Father  of  the 
fatherless. 

I.  What  the  fatherless  need.  To  understand  this  we  must  consider :  1.  Of  what 
they  are  deprived.  They  are  without  a  father's  kindness,  wisdom,  and  bounty.  2.  To 
what  they  are  exposed.  How  many  are  the  ills  which  befall  the  orphan  I  He  is  exposed 
to  neglect ;  poverty  may  prevent  his  enjoyment  of  a  suitable  nurture  and  education. 
He  is  exposed  to  injustici:  and  wrong.  If  he  has  property,  he  is  liable  to  the  cupidity 
of  a  selfish  guardian.  He  is  exposed  to  actual  ill  treatment.  The  cruel  may  take 
advantage  of  his  defenceless  position  to  treat  him  with  violence  for  which  there  is  little 
or  no  redress. 

II.  What  the  fateebless  find.  They  may  look  for  help  to  man,  and  look  in  vain. 
But  in  God  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy.  That  which  is  denied  by  earth  is  accorded  by 
Heaven.  1.  God  raises  up  friends  who,  to  some  extent,  take  the  father's  place.  Pity 
leads  Christians  to  adopt  orphans  into  their  own  families,  or  to  found  asylums  where 
they  can  enjoy  the  blessings  of  kind  supervision  and  liberal  education.  2.  God,  in  his 
providence,  opens  up  before  the  fatherless  careers  of  usefulness  and  honour  in  life. 
Hovt  many  orphans  have  occupied  distinguished  and  serviceable  positions  in  society  1 
It  is  by  the  mercy  of  God  that  what,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  seemed  so  unlikely, 
has  come  to  pass.  3.  God,  by  his  Word  and  his  Spirit,  often  reveals  to  the  fatherless 
the  riches  of  his  own  fatherly  love.  In  him  are  compassion  and  affection  deeper  and 
vaster  than  a  human  heart  can  know.  He  dries  the  orphan's  tears,  supphes  the  orphan's 
wants,  and  enriches  the  orphan's  nature  with  the  treasures  of  hia  grace  and  lova.— T. 

Y«r.  4.— OroeJMM  asturancei.    Ai  the  father  was  forward  to  meet  and  to  welcome 


OH.  xiT.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OP  HOSBA.  tfS 

the  returning  prodigal,  so  our  heavenly  Father  is  ever  anxious  and  ready  to  oonBole  and 
to  restore  the  wandering  sinner  who  repents,  confesses,  and  deplores  his  transgresnons, 
and  casts  himself  upon  Divine  compassion.  The  assurances  of  this  verse  must  have 
heen  comforting  to  Israel ;  they  have  heen  comforting  to  multitudes  who  have  sought 
in  the  Word  of  God  some  consolation  for  their  burdened  and  penitent  spirits. 

I.  Divine  anoeb  I8  avebteo.  1.  The  displeasure  of  God  with  sin  and  with  the 
sinner  is  a  fact  in  the  moral  government  of  the  universe  which  it  would  be  folly  to 
overlook.  God  is  angry,  i.e.  with  the  wicked,  every  day.  2.  Yet  God  delights  not  in 
wrath,  but  in  mercy.  Hence  the  provision  in  the  gospel  of  redemption  from  the  curse 
of  the  Law.  It  is  not  by  any  interposition  from  without;  it  is  by  the  exercise  of  his 
own  wisdom  and  clemency,  that  the  great  Judge  of  all  lays  aside  his  snger.  The 
penitent  and  believing  sinner  is  the  object  of  the  compassion  of  •  God  of  righteousness 
and  love. 

II.  HnUAM  DEFEOTION  AND  DISOBEDIENCE  ABB  OTEBLOOEED  AND  FOBaiTEN.  "  Back- 
sliding "  is  an  expression  which  implies  that  privileges  and  blessings  have  in  the  past 
been  enjoyed,  but  then  misused.  Such  was  the  case  with  Israel;  the  sin  was  the 
greater  because  it  was  sin  against  light  and  knowledge,  against  favour  and  forbearance. 
The  grace  of  God  is  sufiBcient  now,  as  in  the  olden  times,  to  deal  with  cases  of  defection 
and  apostasy.  These  are  regarded  as  malignant  spiritual  diseases ;  but  they  are  not 
beyond  the  healing  power  of  the  great  Physician.  The  virtue  of  the  Saviour's  blood, 
the  eflScacy  of  the  Spirit's  purifying  energy,  are  su£Bcient  even  for  a  case  apparently 
so  hard  and  hopeless  as  this  supposed.  None  need  despair  who  "  truly  repents,  and 
unfeignedly  believes  Christ's  holy  gospel." 

III.  The  lote  of  God  enriches  hearts  lono  and  painfully  estbanobd.  The 
promise  here  uttered  is  beyond  our  highest  expectations.  Forbearance  and  forgiveness 
do  not,  among  men,  necessarily  imply  the  bestowal  of  friendship,  of  love.  But  God's 
ways  are  not  our  ways.  He  is  not  satisfied  simply  to  annul  a  sentence  of  condemna- 
tion, to  remit  a  merited  penalty.  He  reveals  the  tenderness  of  a  fatherly  heart  rejoicing 
over  the  restoration  of  those  long  alienated.  He  completes  the  work  of  recovery  by 
manifesting  his  love  towards  those  whom  he  pardons  and  accepts.  The  freedom  and 
generosity  of  this  Divine  love  are  specially  mentioned;  and  may  well  awaken  the 
wonder  and  admiration  of  the  ransomed  and  restored. 

Application.  What  gratitude,  affection,  and  devotion  are  due  from  pardoned  and 
accepted  sinners  towards  him  who  is  not  satisfied  merely  to  heal,  but  who  condescends 
to  lovet— T. 

Vers.  5 — 7. — National  prosperity.  The  prospect  of  Israel's  repentance  and  reforma- 
tion fills  the  mind  of  the  prophet  with  a  happy  exultation,  and  suggests  imagery  of  the 
most  beautiful  and  vivacious  description.  The  poetical  allusions  crowd  in  upon  his 
mind  and  flow  from  his  pen  with  a  harmonious  prodigality.  Heading  this  passage,  we 
are  transported  in  imagination  into  the  scenes  of  verdure,  fragrance,  and  fruitfulness, 
which  furnished  Hosea  with  the  lively  emblems  of  that  national  prosperity  which  he 
was  inspired  to  anticipate  with  patriotic  confidence  and  hope.  There  rise  before  our 
vision  the  cedar-glades  of  Lebanon,  the  flowery  slopes  of  Carmel,  the  yellow  corn-fields 
of  Bethlehem,  the  gray  and  unchanging  olive-yaras  of  Judsea.  All  are  too  foint  to 
depict  the  glorious  vision — a  vision  which  surely  no  material  prosperity  can  realize,  upon 
which  no  earthly  day  shall  ever  dawn. 

I.  The  sonBOB  of  life  and  prosperitt.  •  I  will  be  as  the  dew  unto  IsraeL"  As 
the  sweetly  tempered  elements  are  the  source  of  life  and  growth,  of  beauty  and  fertility, 
in  field  and  garden  and  forest ;  so  only  Heaven's  favour,  "  the  continual  dew  of  God's 
blessing,"  can  give  rise  to  true  national  greatness,  to  the  growth  of  a  noble  patriotism, 
a  disinterested  virtue,  a  general  prevalence  of  piety.  A  biassed  promise  is  thi*  of 
showers  of  blessing,  of  heavenly  nurture,  of  abundant  grace. 

IL  The  bions  of  vitalitt  and  pbospebitt.  We  notice  here  figurative  descriptions 
of:  1.  Life.  The  several  productions  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  are  laid,  so  to  speak, 
under  tribute,  and  are  constrained  to  set  forth  the  true  and  higher  life  of  the  individual 
man,  and  especially  of  society,  of  nations.  The  olive  and  the  vine,  the  cedar  tree  and 
the  luxuriant  corn  are  all  the  signs  of  the  vitality  and  prodigality  of  nature.  Many 
and  varied  are  the  formt  in  which  life  manilests  its  presence  and  its  activity.    When 


IM  THE  BOOK  OV  HOSEA.  icM.ttw.i—^. 

aatioDR  rise  from  calamity  and  chnitiiement,  when  public  ipirit  ipiings  into  being, 
when  the  arts  and  industries  of  society  are  vigorous  and  prosperous,  when  justice  and 
mutual  consideration  prevail,  when  the  poor  are  cared  for,  when  piety  aunmes  practical 
and  beneficent  forms, — there  is  life.  2.  Growth.  Steady  and  vigorous  growth  ia  the 
result  of  genial  influences  acting  upon  life.  Declension  is  the  precursor  of  death.  ^  As 
surely  as  the  tree  lives  and  thrives,  it  spreads ;  as  sorely  as  the  seed  is  sown  in  a  fruitful 
soil,  the  crop,  by  its  abundance,  rewards  the  labourer's  toiL  Emblematic  of  the  extension 
of  the  people  who  are  filled  with  a  true  national  life,  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  God  lives 
and  moves,  and  in  whose  midst  the  Church  is  not  a  dead  organism,  but  an  organism 
which  is  the  vesture  and  emlradiment  of  a  spiritual  and  imperiahable  life,  3.  Beauty 
and  attractivenets.  The  Author  of  nature,  the  Giver  of  life,  has  ordered  that  beauty 
and  fragrance  shall  accompany  the  vital  growth — that  the  cedar  shall  be  stately  and 
the  olive  evergreen,  that  the  vine  shall  cling  with  grace  around  the  elm,  that  the 
fragrance  of  the  lily  shall  delight  the  sense,  thnt  the  com  shall  wave  in  beauty  and 
rustle  with  music  in  the  passing  breeze.  And  the  same  Being  appoints  that,  in  the 
moral  realm,  true  excellence  and  true  attractiveness  shall  be  conjoined.  The  beauty 
of  holiness,  the  harmonies  of  praise,  the  fragrance  of  piety,  are  signs  and  ornaments  of 
spiritual  life.  Where  these  graces  abound,  the  world  will  feel  the  spiritual  magnetism 
of  the  Church.    "  They  shall  come  again  who  dwell  under  his  shadow." — ^T. 

Yer.  8. — Idolatry  abjured.  This  is  the  language  of  sincere  repentance.  The  state 
of  mind  here  revealed  is  decisively  acceptable  to  God,  and  is  the  earnest  and  promise 
of  better  days.  It  is  a  sign  of  the  Spirit's  gracious  working  in  the  heart  that  every 
rival  to  God's  dominion  is  forsaken  and  abjured. 

I.  The  expebiekcb  that  leads  to  Tms  resolution.  1.  Disappointment  in  the 
service  of  others  than  the  true  God.  Israel  had  addicted  herself  to  strange  gods,  only 
to  learn  that  all  the  flattering  promises  of  their  priests  and  ministers  were  delusive  and 
vain.  And  whatever  deity  man  has  set  before  hiiriself,  as  worthy  of  the  homage  and 
service  due  to  God  alone,  it  may  be  confidently  asserted  that  such  a  rival  has  failed  to 
answer  prayer,  to  fulfil  hope,  to  satisfy  the  heart.  2.  Chastisement  on  the  part  of 
Divine  Providence.  As  long  as  there  is  a  Supreme  Buler,  let  men  be  assured  he  will 
not  sufier  his  prerogatives  to  be  invaded  without  inflicting  the  righteous  penalties  due 
to  disobedience  and  defiance.  Israel  learned  by  bitter  experience  that  Jehovah  would 
tolerate  no  rival ;  and  every  generation  of  sinners  has  been  taught  the  same  lesson. 
"  The  way  of  trangressors  is  hard."  Happy  they  who,  through  however  painful  an 
experience,  have,  nevertheless,  cume  to  see  and  feel  that  to  have  aught  to  do  with  idols 
is  to  involve  themselves  in  distress  and  misery  I 

II.  The  besults  that  flow  from  this  resolution.  1.  When  the  soul  abjures  the 
objects  of  a  fuolish  aS'ection  and  devotion.  Divine  forgiveness  and  favour  are  waiting  to 
restore  and  comfort  it.  The  soul  that  is  without  idols  shall  not  be  left  without  God. 
2  The  rivals  to  the  true  worship  and  service  shall  lose  their  charms,  and  the  soul  shall 
wonder  how  it  could  have  been  captivated  and  enthralled.  3.  A  full  and  eternal 
satisfaction  shall  take  possession  of  the  nature  which  turns  away  from  idols  with  abhor- 
rence, and  turns  confidingly  and  devoutly  unto  God.  What  the  false  deities  were 
powerless  to  bestow,  the  living  God  confers  in  perfect  completoneH.  "  His  loving-kind- 
ness is  better  than  life." — T. 

Yer,  9. — Witdom  and  righteousness.  The  book  of  Hosea's  prophecies  closei  with  a 
solemn  statement  of  human  freedom  and  human  responsibility.  God's  mind  and  will 
are  revealed,  hut  the  prophet  gives  all  concerned  to  understand  that  the  revelation  alone 
is  insufficient.  Let  men  observe  that  it  depends  upon  the  spirit  in  which  they  receive 
it,  and  the  action  which  they  take  upon  it,  that  all  its  benefit  and  advantage  depend. 

1.  Divine  eevelation  calls  fob  the  exercise  or  human  wisdom.  The  praise  of 
folly,  which  some  religionists  account  a  proper  part  of  piety,  has  no  countenance  !• 
Scripture.  The  wise  man  is  the  good  man  ;  and  his  wisdom  is  apparent  in  his  accept- 
ance of  Divine  counsels  and  his  submission  to  Divine  appointments.  The  faculty  of 
understanding  has  been  implanted  by  the  Creator,  and  the  due  exercise  of  that  faculty 
is  honourable  to  God.  Human  wisdom  may  be  misdirected ;  but  human  ignorance  and 
imorudence  are  far  more  likely  to  lead  men  astray.    What  is  needed  ia  »  more  active 


OH.  XIV.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  SOSfiA.  *6T 

exercise  of  all  the  powers  of  the  mind ;  sloth  ii  of  all  things  the  most  disastrous.  On 
the  whole,  to  know  what  wise  and  great  men  have  thought  is  an  advantage  to  the 
religious  inquirer ;  a  comparison  of  inspired  with  uninspired  wisdom  is  likely  to  lead 
men  into  the  paths  of  true  and  Divine  wisdom. 

II.  DrVINB  BEVELATION  CALLS  FOB  THE  EXEBCISK  OF  BIOHTEOUS  OBEOIENai.     Man 

is  not  a  purely  speculative  being ;  he  i»  eminently  practical,  and  knowledge  of  the 
truth  answers  the  intended  purpose  when  it  leads  to  the  love  and  practice  of  rectitude. 
That  abandoned  sinners  have  been  converted  is  true  and  is  ground  for  rejoicing;  that 
correctness  of  out\i  aid  conduct  has  sometimes  stood  in  the  way  of  a  spiritiukl  life  is  also 
sadly  undeniable.  Yet  the  just  are  likely  to  long  for  a  higher  righteousness.  To  admire 
and  to  aspire  to  goodness  is  to  be  in  the  way  for  the  perfect  satisfaction  which  attends 
those  who  walk  "  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord."  These  ways  are  right.  And  it  is  hypocrisy 
to  profess  to  know  the  revelation  of  God  unless  we  accept  its  practical  precepts,  and 
make  the  Scriptures  the  lamp  of  our  feet  and  the  light  of  our  path.  They  are  truly 
wise  who  understand  and  know  God's  declarations,  and  they  are  truly  Just  who  walk 
in  his  ways. — T. 

Vers.  \—l.—Bepentanoe,  or  reformation.  "  O  Israel,  return  onto  the  Loud  thy  Ctod," 
etc.  "After  the  prophet  has  set  before  the  sinful  nation  in  various  ways  its  own 
guilt,  and  the  punishment  that  awaits  it,  viz.  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom,  he 
concludes  his  addresses  with  a  call  to  thorough  conversion  to  the  Lord,  and  the 
promise  that  the  Lord  will  bestow  his  grace  once  more  upon  those  who  turn  to  him, 
and  will  bless  them  abundantly  "  (Delitzsch).  The  subject  of  these  words  \%— Repent- 
ance ;  or,  the  greatest  reformation.  Beformation  is  a  subject  on  which  men  are  never 
tired  of  talking:  it  is  the  grand  text  of  the  demagogue,  as  well  as  the  leading  purpose 
of  the  philanthropist.  There  are  various  kinds  of  reformation.  There  is  the  doctrinal 
reformation — reformation  in  creed,  the  renunciation  of  one  set  of  opinions  and  the 
adoption  of  another.  There  is  the  institutional  reformation — ^reformation  in  political, 
in  ecclesiastical,  and  in  social  laws.  There  is  the  reformation  in  external  character — 
involving  the  renunciation  of  old  habits  and  the  formation  of  new  ones.  But  all  such 
reformations  are  of  little,  if  any  wortli,  apart  from  the  moral  reformation — a  reformation 
in  the  leading  spirit  and  controlling  dispositions  of  the  soul,  a  reformation  iuTolving 
a  thorough  change  of  heart.  This  is  the  only  reformation  worth  working  for.  In  these 
verses  we  have  several  things  worth  notice  in  relation  to  it. 

I.  Its  nature  and  method  indicated.  1.  Its  nature.  "  0  Israel,  return  unto  the 
Lord  thy  God."  The  description  contained  in  the  first  and  third  verses  of  this  refor- 
mation implies  three  things.  (1)  That  the  soul  is  away  from  Ood.  Truly  the  moral 
heart  of  humanity  is  far  gone  from  the  great  Father.  The  souls  of  men  are  in  the 
"  far  country  "  of  sin.  "  Fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  It  has  gone  down  from  the  high 
hills  of  spiritual  purity  and  Divine  communion.  (2)  The  renunciation  of  all  depend- 
ence upon  creatures.  "  Asshur  shall  not  save  us ;  we  will  not  ride  upon  horses."  This 
means — We  will  not  trust  to  Asshur — that  is,  Assyria — for  help.  Nor  will  we  ride 
upon  horses — court  friendship  with  Egypt  from  whence  they  are  fetched.  When  danger 
comes,  we  will  trust  in  God,  and  him  only.  Moral  reformation  involves  all  this.  AH 
dependence  on  anything  short  of  God  for  salvation  is  given  up — science,  philosophy, 
ritualism,  priesthood,  shall  not  save  us.  (3)  Utter  abandonment  of  all  idols,  "  Neither 
will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of  our  bands,  Te  are  our  gods.  For  in  thee  the 
fatherless  findeth  mercy."  2.  Its  method.  "  Take  with  you  words,  and  turn  to  the 
Lord."  Why  take  words  to  God  ?  (1)  Not  because  words  can  inform  him  of  anything 
of  which  he  is  ignorant.  With  words  we  enlighten  men;  but  Omniscience  knows  all 
connected  with  us-^all  that  we  art,  have  been,  and  shall  be,  through  all  the  ages  of  the 
future.  (2)  Not  because  words  can  induce  him  to  be  more  kind  to  us  than  ho 
With  words  we  persuade  men  to  grant  us  our  requests;  but  our  words  can  ne 
dispose  him  to  do  what  he  has  not  been  always  ready  to  accomplish.  Words  can  ne 
make  him  more  kind  and  merciful  than  he  has  ever  been.  Why,  then,  use  word 
Because  words  relieve  our  own  spirits ;  words  aid  our  own  devotions.  This,  then, 
the  method — go  to  God  at  once,  and  pour  out  your  souls  before  him.  Before  him 
resolve,  "  So  will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips."  And  before  him  pray.  Pray  for 
two  things,  (a)  Eis  forgiveness,  "  Take  away  all  sin."  (h)  Hia  acceptance,  "  Receive 
us  graciously. 


ies  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  [oa.  xnr.  1— t. 


II.  Its  oaube  axs  blesskdnzbb  bpkoifibd.  1.  Itt  eatue.  God.  "  I, will  beal  their 
backsliding,  I  will  tore  them  freely.  ...  I  'nill  he  ts  the  dew."  All  refonnation  ia 
brought  about  by  his  agency.  I  will  act  upon  the  soul  tilently,  penetratingly,  revivify- 
ingly,  "m  the  dew."  All  true  reformation  brings  with  it  God's  silent  but  effective 
agency.  2.  Itt  bleasedneu.  (1)  Health.  "  I  will  heal  their  backsliding."  The  soul 
is  diseased.  God  is  its  great  Physician.  (2)  Divine  favour.  "  I  will  love  them  freely : 
for  mine  anger  is  turned  away  from  him."  The  anger  with  which  their  guilty  con- 
sciences invested  him  is  removed  at  a  thick  cloud  from  the  sky  of  their  soul,  and  it 
glows  in  the  sunshine  of  their  love.  (3)  Growth.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  (a) 
The  growth  is  connected  with  beauty.  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like 
it.  (6)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  strength.  "  Cast  forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon." 
How  deeply  did  the  roots  of  the  cedar  in  Lebanon  strike  into  the  earth  I  and  how  firm 
their  grasp!  The  storms  of  centuries  could  not  remove  them,  (e)  Its  growth  is  con- 
nected with  expantiveness.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  Widely  grew  the  branches 
of  those  old  cedars,  offering  to  the  traveller  a  cooling  shade  from  the  sun  and  a  shelter 
from  the  tempest.  How  a  divinely  formed  soul  expands  I  It  outgrows  the  boundaries 
of  sects  and  the  limits  of  creeds.  Its  sympathies  become  world-wide.  (iQ  Its  growth 
is  connected  with  fragranee.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree,  and  his  smell  as 
Lebanon."  Sweet  was  the  aroma  that  was  swept  by  the  wind  over  those  old  hills. 
How  delectable  the  fragrance  of  a  holy  life  1  (e)  Its  growth  is  connected  with  Bocial 
usefulneii.  It  shall  offer  protection  to  men.  "  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow 
shall  return."  Where  can  we  flee  in  distress  but  to  the  sympathy  and  love  of  the 
good  7  Not  only  protection,  but  beneficent  jiro^ress.  "They  shall  revive  as  the  com, 
and  grow  as  the  vine." — D.  T. 

Ver.  8. — Ood  and  hit  reformed  people.  "  Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  to  do  any 
more  with  idols  ?  I  have  heard  him,  and  observed  him :  I  am  like  a  green  fir  tree. 
From  me  is  thy  fruit  found."  Some  think  that  this  is  a  dialogistic  parallel  as  follows : 
"  Ephraim  :  What  have  I  further  to  do  with  idols?  God :  I  have  answered  and  will 
regard  him.  Ephraim:  I  am  like  a  green  cypress.  God:  From  me  is  thy  fruit 
found."  But  I  am  disposed  to  regard,  with  Delitzsch  and  others,  that  God,  and  not 
Ephraim,  is  representing  himself  as  the  "  green  fir  tree."    I  observe,  therefore— 

L  That  GK)d  foresees  the  ohanoe  in  his  reformed  people.  "  Ephmim  shall  say. 
What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  1.  Mark  the  description  of  the  change.  Before 
the  period  of  their  conversion  comes,  he  hears  them  say,  "  What  have  I  to  do  any 
more  with  idols  ?  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  them  ?  (1)  They  are  beneath  me.  I  am 
ashamed  of  them.  "  What  fruit  had  ye  in  those  things  whereof  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  " 
(2)  They  are  a  caret  to  me.  Idols  degrade,  deceive,  damn.  Omniscience  foresees  all 
the  workings  of  the  penitent  soul.  2.  Mark  God's  recognition  of  the  change.  "  I  have 
heard  him,  and  observed  him."  He  is  cognizant  of  all  the  reflections,  remorses,  resolu- 
tions, of  the  repentant  soul. 

11.  That  God  provides  BLESsnras  fob  his  reformed  people.  1.  Protection.  "  I 
am  like  a  green  fir  tree."  Those  trees  in  Eastern  countries  were  exceedingly  large  and 
thick,  affording  shelter  from  sun  and  storms  and  showers.  2.  Support,  "  From  me 
is  thy  fruit  found."  God  is  to  his  people  the  source  of  all  relief  and  good,  both  for 
this  life  and  the  life  to  come. 

CoNOLUSiOM.  Sinner,  repent  and  be  converted.  Say,  "What  have  I  to  do  any 
more  with  idols?"  Benounce  the  old.  The  Almighty  Father  is  ready  to  receire  and 
bless  you. — D.  T. 

Ver.  9. — Ood's  ways.  "Who  U  wise,  and  he  shall  understand  these  things?  pru- 
dent, and  he  shall  know  them  ?  for  the  ways  of  the  Lord  are  right,  and  the  just  shall 
walk  in  them  :  but  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein."  God  has  his  ways,  his  methods 
of  action.  He  proceeds  on  certain  principles  in  all  his  operations,  both  in  the  realm  of 
matter  and  of  mind.    The  Infinite  has  a  way  of  doing  things. 

I.  His  WATS  are  to  be  studied.  "  Who  is  wise,  and  he  shall  understand  these 
tilings?  prudent,  and  he  shall  know  them  ?"  It  is  one  thing  to  know  the  works  of 
a  man,  and  another  thing  to  know  his  ways,  his  methods  of  action.  He  only  knows 
a  man  who  understands  his  way  of  doing  things.     God's  ways  are  the  highest  subjects 


OH.  xiT.l— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  459 

of  study.  It  is  said  that  he  made  known  hii  "way  "  unto  Moses,  his  "works"  unto 
the  children  of  Israel.  The  millions  know  something  of  his  works ;  only  the  "  wise," 
the  "  prudent,"  the  initiated,  like  Moses,  understand  his  wayi.  Brother,  oome  away 
from  the  study  of  details,  ascend  into  the  realm  of  principleSt  Men  wh»  understand 
God's  ways  become  prophets.    They  can  foretell  the  future. 

II.  His  ways  akb  siOHTEons.  "  The  ways  of  the  Lord  are  right."  L  They  »re 
right ;  they  cannot  he  otherwise.  They  are  right  because  they  are  his.  Ha  cannot  do 
wrong ;  there  is  no  law  external  to  him,  no  law  above  him.  What  he  does  is  right 
because  he  does  it.  To  say  he  does  a  thing  because  it  is  right  is  tantamount  to  the 
assertion  that  there  is  something  independent  of  him.  2.  They  are  right;  human 
conscience  attests  it.  No  conscience  in  heaven,  earth,  hell,  doubts  the  rectitude  of 
God's  ways.  If  sinners  in  hell  felt  they  were  wrong,  they  would  feel  no  remorse  for 
their  conduct.    They  are  right  essentially,  immutably,  everlastingly  right. 

HI.  His  WATS  abb  to  be  fubsued.  "  The  just  shall  walk  in  them."  They  are  not 
merely  to  be  studied,  but  to  be  practically  followed.  Tou  cannot  do  what  God  does, 
but  what  you  do  you  can  do  in  God's  way — do  silently,  lovingly,  beneficently.  Walk 
in  this  way,  the  way  of  love  and  usefulness. 

IV.  His  WATS  MAT  sniN.  "  The  transgressors  shall  fall  therein."  As  God  moves 
in  calm  majesty  and  resistless  force  on  iiis  way,  he  crushes  in  his  march  all  who  oppose 
him.  His  chariot-wheels  grind  them  into  powder.  Becipitur  ad  modum  recipientis. 
What  is  received  influences  according  to  the  qualities  of  the  receiver.  "The  same 
sun,"  says  an  old  author,  "  softens  wax  and  hardens  clay.  But  of  all  transgressors 
those  certfunly  have  the  most  dangerous  fatal  falls  that  fall  in  the  ways  of  God,  that 
split  on  the  Bock  of  Ages,  and  suck  poison  out  of  the  balm  of  Gilead.  Let  the  sinners 
in  Zion  be  afraid  of  this." — ^D.  T. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  prayer  of  the  penitent.  The  prophecy  does  not  close  without  com- 
forting glimpses  into  the  future,  and  sweet  words  of  promise.  The  opening  verses  of 
this  section  invite  the  nation  to  repentance.  They  put  a  prayer  into  the  people's  lips 
with  which  to  return  to  God. 

I.  The  invitation.  (Ver.  1.)  The  door  of  mercy  stands  open  to  Israel.  But  the 
invitation  addressed  to  the  ancient  people  is  equally,  in  Christ,  addressed  to  every 
sinner.  Consider,  accordingly :  1.  The  condition  in  whidi  the  winner  it  found. 
"  Fallen  by  thine  iniquity."  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no,  not  one  "  (Rom.  iii.  10). 
We  luve  all  fallen  by  our  iniquity.  (1)  Fallen  from  the  state  in  which  we  were 
created.  (2)  Fallen  out  of  the  Divine  favour.  (3)  Fallen  into  wretchedness,  guilt, 
discord  with  self,  pollution,  bondage.  f4)  Fallen — in  some  cases — under  heavy  strokes 
of  the  Divine  anger.  We  have  so  fallen  that  we  cannot  raise  ourselves  up  again.  2. 
To  whom  the  sinner  is pointtd.  "The  Lord  thy  God."  Israel's  God  and  ours.  God 
is  our  God,  as  being  (1)  our  Maker;  (2^  our  Sustainer;  (3)  oiu:  moral  Ruler;  (4)  our 
Saviour.  He  is  the  God  and  Father  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  He  gives  ua  in  the 
promises  of  the  gospel  a  claim  upon  himself.  He  is  ours  in  offer,  and  will  be  win  in 
fact,  if  only  we  will  receive  him.  There  is  no  Saviour  beside  him  (ch.  xiiL  4),  and  no 
other  is  needed.  He  alone  is  all-sufficient.  S.  The  invitation  given  to  the  sinner,  "  0 
Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  Ck>d  might  command,  hut  he  condescend!  to 
invite,  to  entreat  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  He  asks  ns  to  return  to  him.  He  can  ask  no  less, 
for  without  penitent  return,  salvation  is  impossible.  His  mercy  is  seen  in  this,  that 
he  asks  no  more — ^no  sacrifices,  no  price,  no  probationary  curriculum,  no  work*  of 
the  Law.  But  the  'return  must  be  dncere,  not  with  the  body,  but  with  the  mind, 
the  affections,  the  will. 

IL  Thk  pbateb.  (Vet.  2.)  The  penitent,  resolved  os  returning  to  God,  it  coun- 
selled to  take  with  him  "  words."  The  inward  penitenoe  is  to  express  itself  outwardly. 
It  ii  to  utter  itself  in  prayer.  This  is  the  only  sacrifice  God  will  require.  The  prayer 
with  which  we  are  to  come  is:  1.  Prayer  for  forgiveness.  "Take  with  you  words, 
and  turn  to  the  Lord :  say  unto  him.  Take  away  all  iniquity."  Forgiveness  is  the 
first  need  of  our  nature.  Till  sin  is  forgiven  us  we  can  have  no  peace  with  Ood,  we 
cannot  be  visited  by  hia  love  or  made  partakers  of  his  Spirit.  Forgiveness  at  once 
precedes,  and  is  a  pledge  of,  the  communication  of  every  other  blessing.  It  b,  therefore, 
the  th^g  we  first  ask  for.    We  are  to  confess  sin  and  to  seek  the  pardon  of  it  (1  John 


MO  THE  BOOK   OF  HOSEA.  [oa.  UT.  1— 9. 

L  9).  2.  T%*  prayer  of  wprighlneu.  "  Accept  what  is  good  "—for  thus  the  second 
clanse  mnst  he  rendered.  The  language  is  not  that  of  self-righteousness,  but  of  sincere 
motiye.  The  penitent  knows  his  unworthiness,  but  is  conscious  at  the  same  time  that 
his  prayer  no  longer  proceeds  from  feigned  lips  (Ps.  xvii.  1) ;  that  his  spirit  is  truly 
contrite ;  that  there  is  some  good  thing  "  in  his  heart  towards  the  Lord  God  "  (1  Kings 
xiii.  14).  He  recognizes  this ;  (1)  As  a  fruit  of  Divine  grace  in  the  soul — therefore 
a  pledge  of  acceptance.  God,  who  by  his  Spirit  draws  the  sinner  to  himself,  will  not 
cast  him  off  when  he  comes  (John  vi.  37,  44,  46).  (2)  As  essential  to  forgiveness. 
For  though  it  is  God's  mercy,  not  our  own  righteousness,  that  saves  nsj  it  is  yet 
essential  to  acceptance  that  our  spirit,  in  returning  to  God,  be  without  guile  (Ps.  xxxii. 
2 ;  li.  4,  6).  Coming  to  God  with  upright  intent,  and  conscious  that  we  do  so,  it  is 
natural  that  we  should  appeal  to  this  in  prayer.  3.  Prayer  in  order  to  praise.  "  So 
will  we  render  the  calves  of  our  lips."  Salvation  carries  with  it  the  obligation  to 
consecration  (Bom.  xii.  1).  The  penitent  has  no  other  desire  than  now  to  live  to  God, 
rendering  to  him  spiritual  sacrifices.  He  asks  God  to  open  his  lips  (by  forgiveness), 
that  he  may  thereafter  show  forth  God's  praise  (Ps,  li.  15).  We  render  to  God  "  the 
calves  of  our  lips  "  (1)  in  acknowledgment  of  him ;  (2)  in  thanksgiving  (Heb.  xiiL  15) ; 
(3)  in  praises  (Ps.  xl.  3  j  L  23) ;  (4)  in  confession  of  him  before  men. 

HI.  Thb  vow.  (Ver,  3.)  With  prayer  is  connected  a  solemn  vow.  Israel  renounces 
all  sinful  trusts,  and  looks  to  Ood  only.  He  renounces :  1.  Trutt  in  man.  "  Assliur 
shall  not  save  us."  The  world  is  a  poor  saviour.  It  promises  much,  but  gives  little. 
Its  favour  is  deceitful.  Its  will  to  help  is  even  more  limited  than  its  power.  But  ite 
power  is  not  great.  It  cannot  (^ave  when  God  contends  with  us.  It  must  leave  us  to 
shift  for  ourselves  at  death.  It  has  no  salvation  for  the  sonl — for  eternity.  2.  Trust 
in  hit  own  strength.  "  We  will  not  ride  upon  horses."  Israel  had  multiplied  horses.  He 
put  trust  in  them  for  his  deliverance.  This  trust,  with  every  other  of  a  similar  kind, 
he  now  renounced.  Neither  in  war,  nor  in  peace,  nor  in  anything  he  did,  would  he 
exalt  himself  as  independent  of  God.  He  would  be  humble.  3.  Trttst  in  idols. 
"  Neither  will  we  say  any  more  to  the  work  of  our  hands,  Ye  are  our  gods."  Thus,  in 
succession,  Israel  renounced,  as  Christians  would  say,  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil.  Every  heart  not  serving  God  has  its  idol — its  something  which  it  puts  in  God's 
place.  This  it  now  renounces,  and  gives  him  all  the  glory.  The  prayer  concludes 
with  an  appeal  to  the  Divine  pity.  "  For  in  thee  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy."  The 
soul  without  God  is  as  one  orphaned.  In  penitence  it  seeks  the  pity  of  him  who  com- 
passionates the  fatherless.    God  feels  this  pity  for  his  alienated  children.— J.  O. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — God's  response  to  the  penitent.  Israel's  repentance  will  be  followed  by 
the  turning  away  of  God's  anger,  and  by  superabundant  blessings.  P'igures  are  heaped 
on  each  other,  and  one  figure  is  employed  to  fill  in  another,  to  set  forth  the  fulness  with 
which  this  blessing  will  descend.  The  prophecy,  hitherto  so  dark  and  troubled,  ends 
in  heavenly  peace. 

I.  Backsliding  healed.  (Ver.  4.)  No  time  is  lost  in  answering  Israel's  prayer. 
Forgiveness  follows  close  upon  return.  So  David  also  found  it :  "I  said,  I  w  ill  confess 
my  transgression  unto  the  Lord;  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin"  (Ps. 
xxxii.  5).  The  penitent  need  not  fear  being  kept  long  waiting  at  the  door  of  mercy 
(cf.  Luke  XV.  20—24).  God:  1.  Turns  away  his  anger.  "For  mine  anger  is  turned 
away  from  him."  Terrible  to  him  who  realizes  it  is  the  thought  of  lying  nndur  the 
Divine  anger.  Infinite  things  are  to  be  hoped  for  from  GtMi's  love.  Infinite  things  are 
to  be  dreaded  from  his  wrath.  We  dread  the  anger  of  fellow-men.  Much  more  should 
we  dread  to  be  the  objects  of  the  anger  of  the  Omnipotent.  "  Pear  not  them  which 
kill  the  body,"  Christ  says,  "but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul,"  etc.  (Matt.  x.  28). 
Just,  however,  because  God's  anger  !■  so  terrible,  is  it  a  blessed  thing  to  know,  as  every 
pardoned  sinner  may,  that  this  anger  is  turned  away.  "  0  Lord,  I  will  praise  thee : 
though  thou  wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  comfortcdst  me  " 
(Isa.  xii.  1).  If  God  s  anger  is  turned  away  from  us,  there  is  nothing  else  we  need  ft  ar. 
And  under  the  gospel  it  h  turned  away  from  every  one  who  believes  in  Christ.  2. 
Beslores  his  love.  "  I  will  love  them  freely."  The  love  is  free  as  being  (1)  spontaneous, 
(2)  unbought,  (3)  unlimited  in  measure.  God  loves  the  redeemed  with  the  same 
love  which  he  bears  to  his  Son,    He  rejoices  in  his  love  towards  them.    As  it  is  the 


OH.  Mv.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  HOSEA.  461 

natnn  of  the  inn  to  ihlne,  so  it  is  the  nature  of  God  to  love.  Judgment  is  his  strange 
work,  but  love  ii  the  proper  ex>  rcise  of  his  being.  The  gospel  is  the  manifestation 
of  love.  Salvation  is  the  triumph  of  love.  God  rejoices  more  over  one  lost  sheep 
brought  back  to  him  than  over  the  ninety  and  nine  that  went  not  astray.  He  sheds 
his  love  abroad  in  his  people's  heart  (Bom.  ▼.  6).  3.  Heali  their  backsliding.  "  I  wiU 
heal  their  backsliding."  He  heals  the  wounds  made  by  sin  (cf.  ch.  yi.  1),  both  the 
spiritual  wounds,  and  the  wounds  resulting  from  temporal  chastisements.  He  revokes 
the  curse.  He  restores  prosperity.  He  gives  compensations  for  past  sorrow.  Often, 
when  wounds  are  healed,  the  scar  remains.  Even  the  sinner,  though  repentant,  is  not 
in  this  life  relieved  from  all  the  consequences  of  his  transgressions.  He  has  to  suffer 
both  in  soul  and  body  for  past  indulgence  in  vice.  But  when  Qod  heals  Israel,  no  scar 
remains.    And  all  scars  will  be  removed  in  eternity. 

II.  The  dbw  to  Isbakl.  (Ver.  6.)  God  will  be  as  the  dew  to  IsraeL  1.  He  Aim- 
lelf  ivill  he  a»  the  dew.  It  is  not  merely  his  blessing  which  he  gives ;  it  is  himsel£  He 
comes  in  his  Spirit.  He  came  first  in  the  Son ;  and,  now  that  Christ  has  ascended,  he 
comes  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  Hie  dew  it  copious.  It  was  so  in  the  East  even  more  than 
it  is  with  us.  It  lay  thick  and  soaking  on  the  herbage.  Every  tree,  every  twig,  every 
leaflet,  every  blade  of  grass,  every  flower,  received  its  abundant  portion.  Thus  is  it  with 
grace.  The  Spirit  wlQ  be  poured  out  in  the  latter  days  yet  more  plentifully.  3.  The 
dew  is  a  source  of  manifold  blessing.  (1)  It  refreshes ;  (2)  it  revives ;  (3)  it  promotes 
growth ;  (4)  it  beautifies ;  (6)  it  increases  fragrance.  So  God's  Spirit  is  a  reviving, 
refreshing,  fructifying,  beautifying,  and  sanctifying  power  in  the  soul.  It  gladdens, 
comforts,  enriches,  gives  sweetness  and  fragrance  to  the  character.  4.  This  dew  is  not, 
like  Israel's  goodness,  evanescent.  It  does  not  pass  away  (cf.  ch.  vL  4).  It  is  not  merely 
a  thing  of  the  dawn.  Or,  rather,  it  is  ever  moming  with  the  soul  to  which  this  dew 
is  given.    It  flourishes  in  perpetual  youth. 

III.  Life  and  fbuft.  (Vers.  6 — 7.)  These  figures  from  the  vegetable  world  are 
used  to  fill  out  the  different  aspects  of  the  prosperity  which  God  would  bestow  on  Israel. 
All  are  emblems  of  life,  and  fitly  symbolize  the  life  of  grace.  The  features  represented 
are :  1.  LUy-Uke  parity  and  beauty.  "  He  shall  grow  as  the  lily."  The  lily  is  white, 
pure,  delicate,  fragile.  It  symbolizes  innocence,  purity,  spiritual  beauty.  Grace 
bestows  a  rare  sweetness  and  refinement.  Nothing  is  more  fair  than  a  pure  soul.  2. 
Cedar-like  strength,  "  His  roots  as  Lebanon."  The  lily,  though  graoefiu,  has  a  weak 
root.  But  God  would  have  his  people  "  rooted  and  grounded  "  in  faith  and  love — not 
easily  shaken  or  removed  (1  Cor.  xv.  68 ;  Eph.  iii.  17 ;  CoL  i.  23).  The  cedar  is  an 
emblem,  not  merely  of  strength,  but  of  stateliness  (majesty),  immovability,  uprightness. 
3.  Spreading  jnagnificenee.  "  His  branches  shall  spread."  Depth  of  root  leads  to  wide- 
spreading  branches.  The  life  of  grace  has  breadth  and  expansiveness  as  well  as  depth 
and  growth  upwards.  4.  Olive-like  frethtuts.  "  His  beauty  shall  be  as  the  olive  tree." 
"Like  a  green  olive  tree  in  the  house  of  God"  (Ps.  hi.  8;  cf.  Ps.  xciL  14).  Fresh, 
unfading,  evergreen,  fruit-bearing.  6.  Widely  diffused  fragrance.  "  His  smell  as 
Lebanon."  Character  has  its  aromft.  Cf.  what  Christ  says  of  Mary  of  Bethany  (Matt, 
xxvi.  13) ;  what  Paul  says  of  Epaphroditus  (PhiL  iv.  18).  The  renown  of  good  deeds 
flows  forth  like  spices.  6.  Fruitfulness,  "  They  that  dwell  under  his  shadow  shall 
return;  they  shall  revive  as  the  corn,  and  grow  as  the  vine;  the  scent  [glory]  thereof 
shall  be  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon."  Corn  and  wine  are  symbols  of  the  highest  material 
blessings — of  plenty,  comfort,  nourishment,  invigoration,  joy.  The  soul  possessed  by 
grace  is  at  once  fed  with  bread  of  heaven,  and  becomes  itself  a  fruit-producer.  In  holy 
deeds,  in  useful  service,  ia  efforts  for  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  in  the 
eheriihing  of  noble  and  God-like  affections,  it  yields  both  com  and  wine. 

lY.  Epbbaih  and  God.  (Ver.  8.)  1.  Qod^i  goodness  confirms  Ephraim  in  his 
renunciation  of  idols.  "  Ephraim  shall  say.  What  have  I  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  " 
This  time  the  goodness  is  not  abused.  It  does  not  make  Ephraim  haughty.  It  does 
not  lead  him  to  forget  God.  He  no  longer  attributes  his  prosperity  to  Baal.  Taught 
hj  experience,  he  loves  God  more  the  more  God  bestows  on  him.  2.  Ephraimft  renewed 
mno$  are  observed  by  Qod.  "  I  hart  heard  him,  and  observed  him."  God  takes  notice 
of  every  stage  of  our  advance  in  grace.  He  takes  pleasure  in  our  progress,  in  our 
renewed  vows,  in  our  deepening  consecration.  3.  Ephraim,  as  the  result  of  his  renewed 
fows,  becomes  yet  marefrvAifuL.    "  I  am  iike  a  green  fir  [cypress]  tree.    From  me  is  thy 


i62  TEH  BOOK  OF  HOSBA.  [oh.  xit.  1— a 

fruit  found."  The  firit  words  tre  (as  we  nndentond  them)  Ephralm's ;  the  lut  wotdi 
are  God'a.  The  CTpress  ii  u>  evergreen,  but  it  does  not  bear  fruit.  God,  however, 
will  glTe  fruit  to  Ephraim  as  well  m  unfadingnesB.  (1)  Ephraim  derives  his  fruit 
from  Qod.  His  fruit  is  spirituaL  It  ia  only  as  he  abides  in  God  that  he  is  able  to 
bring  forth  fruit  at  all.  (2)  Ephraim  "  finds  "  his  fruit  in  God.  Fruitfulness  is  main- 
tained by  active  fellowship,  by  constant  trust,  widting,  watchfulness,  and  prayer. 
"AUda  in  me,*  Obrist  says  (John  zt.  4).  "Without  me^'ha  »ddM,"y9  can  do 
nothing  "  (ver.  6).—^.  0. 

Ter.  9. — The  Utten  nf  (h»  Itooh.  The  lesson  may  be  summed  up  In  few  words,  but 
it  is  so  eomprehensive  that  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  it  makes  all  the  difference 
between  supreme  wisdom  and  supreme  folly.  The  lesson  simply  is  that "  the  ways 
of  the  Lord  are  right."  Men  prefer  their  own  ways  to  God's,  but  what  the  liistory 
of  Israel  teaches  is  that,  if  they  do  so,  it  is  to  their  own  ruin. 

I.  God's  ways  abk  bight.  They  are :  1.  Right  in  themsdvei.  They  are  the  ways 
of  absolute  rectitude.  They  are  marked  out  for  us  by  perfect  wisdom,  spotless  holiness, 
and  unchanging  goodness.  Et^ually  right  are  God's  own  ways,  the  principles  of  his 
government,  the  modes  of  his  action.  His  commands  are  just,  his  requirements  reason- 
able, his  doings  wise,  his  intentions  kind.  2.  Bight  as  conducting  to  a  right  end. 
God  desires  the  good  of  every  one.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  any.  He  sets 
before  us  the  way  of  life.  "  See,"  he  says,  "  I  have  set  before  you  life  and  death " 
(Deut.  zzz.  16, 19).  God  knows  better  than  any  other  wherein  our  true  good  Ues. 
Takingthe  way  he  prescribes,  we  shall  infallibly  attain  to  blessedness. 

n.  Wisdom  is  tested  bt  the  acceptance  ob  bbfubal  of  God's  ways.  "  Who  is 
wise,  and  he  shall  understand  these  things?  prudent,  and  he  shall  know  them?"  1. 
The  wise  recognize  the  rightnese  of  Ood^s  ways.  They  are  taught  of  God  to  recognize 
this  rightness.  Plain  as  the  truth  seems  that  God's  ways  alone  are  right,  the  natural 
heart  is  in<»pable  of  receiving  it  (1  Cor.  iL  14).  2.  The  wise  show  their  wisdom  hy 
walking  in  OoiPs  ways.  "  The  just  shall  walk  in  them."  Wisdom  is  a  practical  thing. 
It  implies  the  adoption  of  that  which  we  Icnow  to  lie  right.  Wisdom  is  connected 
with  uprightness.  It  is  the  upright  in  heart — the  just,  —who  choose  the  right  ways.  8, 
ne  unwise  show  their  folly  hy  refecting  Qed't  uiaj/s.  This  is  thaii  luiik  *  The  ton** 
gressois  shall  fall  therein.''— J.  U 


HOMILETICAL   INDEX 


TO 


THE   BOOK  OF   HOSEA. 


OHAPTBB  L 

rnEHS  FAGB 

The  Sin  of  Israel  ehaiply  reproyed   ...  10 
The  Sufferings  of  Israel  symbolically 

recorded            ...           ...            ...  12 

There  is  Salvation  in  Store  for  both 

Israel  and  Judah              ...            ...  15 

The  Prophet  and  his  Work                ...  16 
Hosea's  Marriage  and  Prophetic  Train- 
ing     ...           ...           ...           ...  17 

Hosea'g  Children  ...            ...            ...  19 

The  Curge  reversed             ...            ...  21 

"  Great  shull  be  the  Day  of  Jezreel "  22 

Divine  Betribution              ...            „.  23 

Divine  Deliverance            ,„           „,  25 

The  Word  of  the  Lord        ...            ...  28 

Spiritual  Infidelity              ...            „.  28 

Mercy  denied        ...            ...            ...  29 

Salvation,  not  of  Man,  but  of  Ood    ...  30 

Rejection  and  Restoration  ;,.            ...  30 

"  Sons  of  the  Living  God  "               ...  31 

One  Body  and  One  Head    ...            ...  31 

Scripture,  Kings,  and  Truth              ...  82 

Retribution            ...            ...            ...  33 

God's  Mercy         ...            „.            m.  31 

The  Destiny  of  the  Race    ...            „.  35 

Superscription      ...           ...           m.  86 

The  "  Wife  of  Whoredoms "              ...  38 

"  Children  of  Whoredoms "...            ...  39 

Mercy  triumphant  over  Judgment    ...  40 


CHAPTER  n. 

The  Prophet  exhibits  the  Gross  Sin  of 
Idolatry  ...  ...  ...      51 

The  Pains  and  Penalties  that  are  at- 
tached to  Sin     ...  ...  ...      63 


THEHB  PAGl 

Sympathy  with  Israel  in  Spite  of  their 

Sins     ...            ...            ...            ...  58 

Jehovah's  Condemuatiou  of  Faithless 

Israel...            ...            ...            ...  61 

Prosperity  abused  and  blighted         ...  62 

Israel's  Restoration              ...            ...  64 

The  Golden  Chain  of  Causation        ...  65 

The  Message  from  Home    ...            ...  67 

God's  Rule  in  Nature  anA  in  Grace  ...  70 

The  Delusions  of  the  Ungo.lly          ...  71 

The  Way  hedged  up          ...            ...  71 

Mercies  abused     ...            ...            ...  72 

Retribution  ...  ,,,  72,  S2 

Comfortable  Words             ...            ...  73 

'•  A  Door  of  Hope "              ...            ...  73 

Divine  Betrothal  ...            ...            ...  74 

The  Great  First  Cause  of  Blessing   ...  74 

Purposes  of  Pity  and  of  Possession  ...  74 

Divine  Restraints                ...            ...  75 

The  Conjunction  of  Sin  and  Mirth  ...  76 

The  Prosperity  of  the  Wicked           ...  76 

Soul-Restoration   ...            ...            ...  -77 

The  Sublime  Privileges  of  the  Good  78 

God  and  his  Universe         ...            ...  79 

Spiritual  Adultery              ...            ...  80 

The  Philosophy  of  the  Divine  Chas- 
tisements          ...            ...            ,..  81 

Israel's  Recovery  ...            ...            ...  82 

Allurement           ...            ,,,            ,.,  82 

The  New  Betrothal            ...            ...  8u! 


CHAPTER  HI. 

God's  Mercifulness  and  Israel's  Sinful- 
ness are  brought  into  Contrast      ...  89 
The  Applicability  of  these  Verses    ...  91 
Hosea  detains  Gomer  in  Seclusion    ...  92 


INDEX. 


THEHI  rAOC 

"The  Love  of  the  Lord  toward  the 

Children  of  Israel"         ...  ...  94 

The   Eingless   State   and   Friestless 

Church              ...           ...  ...  91 

Be  taming  to  God               ...  •..  95 

Love  to  the  AdultereM      m*  «•  95 


CHAPTER  IT. 

Israel'!  Sin  and  Consequent  Suffering  107 
Priestly  Neglect  and  its  Consequences  109 
Faults  in  the  Life  breed  Errors  in  the 
Brain,  and  Errors  in  the  Brain  pro- 
duce in  Turn  Faults  in  the  Life   ...  Ill 
A  Passing  Word  of  Warning  ia  ad- 
dressed to  Judah             ...           ...  112 

The  Lord's  Lawsuit             ...            ...  114 

Israel'!  Guilt  and  Punishment         ...  116 
"  Like  People,  like  Priest "              116, 124 

Ephraim  and  Judah            ...            ...  119 

Insensibility  the  Besult  of  Impenitence  120 

"  Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  I "       ...  122 

A  Controversy      ...            ...            •..  122 

Ignorance  and  Destruction...            ••.  123 

Sensuality  is  Buin               ...            ...  124 

Abandonment       ...           ...            ...  125 

A  Corrupt  People  and  an  Expostulating 

God     ...           ...           ...           ...  125 

A  Terrible  Deprivation       ...            ...  126 

Religious  Ignorance            ...            ...  127 

Secular  Prosperity               •••            ...  127 

Feeding  on  Sin     ...            ...            ...  128 

The  Reciprocal  Influence  of  Priest- 
hood and  People              ...            ...  129 

An  Unholy  Alliance  and  a  Righteous 

Abandonment  ...           ...           ...  130 

Retributive  Justice            ...           ...  130 

The  Lord's  Controversy      ...           ...  131 

Priests  and  People              ...            ...  132 

Sin's  Fatuity        ...            •»            •»  133 

Warning  to  Judah              •»            •••  134 

Offending              ...            m*            m.  135 


OHAPTBB  V. 

God  here  airaigns  the  Sins  of  Prinaea^ 

Priests,  and  People         ...  ...  141 

No  Place  found  for  Bepentance        ...  143 
God's  Judgments  differ  both  in  D^ 

gree  and  Kind  ...  ...  ...  145 

National  Sin  and  Punishment  ...  147 

Lsndmark-Bemovers  ...  ...  148 

The  Divine  Judgments       ...  ...  ISO 


THEHB  VAOV 

The  Misuse  of  Divine  Judgments     ...  151 

The  Affliction  of  God's  Withdrawal...  153 

Divine  Omniscience           ...            ...  155 

Divine  Withdrawal            »•           ...  155 

Human  Treachery              —»           ...  155 

Human  Physicians  Helplesa             ...  156 

Fruits  of  Affliction              ...           ...  156 

National  Depravity            ...           ...  157 

Necessary  Freliminarie!   to  a  Godly 

i-iiie    ...           ...           ...           ...  io<$ 

Too  Late               ...           .^           ...  159 

An  Earnest  Ministry  .m  ...  159 
"The  Moth;"  or,  God's  Quiet  Method 

of  Destroying    ...           ...           ...  160 

Wrong  Methods  of  Belief 162 

God  and  Man       ...           ...           ...  162 

Ephraim  and  Judah            ...            ...  164 

The  False  Physician  and  the  True  ...  165 


OHAFTEB  VL 

Exhortation  and   Encouragement  to 

Bepentance       ...           ...  ...  171 

Israel's  Inconstancy           ...  ...  175 

Bepentance  and  Saving  Knowledge  ...  176 

Fugitive  Piety      ...           ...  ...  178 

Beligion  and  Irreligion       ...  ...  179 

On  Beturning  to  the  Lord  ...  ...  181 

The  Promised  Dayspring    ...  ...  182 

Heavenly  Blessings  for  Weary  Souls  181 

God's  Grief  over  Evanescent  Gooduess  185 

The  Divine  Healer              ...  ...  187 

Spiritual  Bevival ...            ...  ...  187 

The  Quest  of  Divine  Knowledge  ...  188 

Morning  and  Showers         ...  ...  188 

The  Rain              ...           ...  ...  189 

Transitory  Goodness  ...  189, 198 

Mercy  better  than  Saoriflca  ...  190 

Knowledge  and  Mercy        ...  ...  190 

Man's  Highest  Social  Action  ...  190 

Man  God-ward,  and  God  Man-ward ...  191 

A  Threefold  Tlieme            ...  ...  192 

Righteousness  and  Ritualism  ...  193 

Divine  Institutions  corrupted  ...  194 

Naturalness  of  Retribution...  ...  195 

Returning  to  God...            ...  n.  196 

The  Day-dawn  and  the  Rain  ...  197 

The  Broken  Covenant        ...  ...  199 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

Crimes  charged  on  Israel;  People  and 
Princes  ...  ...  ...    209 


INDEX. 


The  Sffly  Sinful  Pride  and  Obdnmcy 
of  Israel,  in  spite  of  Many  Manifest 
Tokens  of  Decay,  oi  their  Disastioug 

Foreign  Policy  ...  ...  ...  213 

Sins  of  Conrt  and  Conntiy ...  •••  215 

"A  Cake  not  turned"         ...  ...  216 

"Grey  Hairs"      ...  ...  ».  218 

Bphiaim's  Folly  and  Falseness        ...  220 

An  Unconsidered  Truth     ...  ...  221 

The  Sin  of  Half-heartedness  ...  221 

The  Unperceived  Signs  of  Moral  Decay  223 

Useless  Prayer*    ...  ...  ...  224 

God's  Memory  of  Man's  Wickedness  225 

Koiie  calleth  unto  God        ...  ...  225 

They  return  not  unto  the  Lord         ...  225 

The  Silly  DoTe     ...  ...  ...  226 

Failure  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  ...  226 

GKid's  Bemembrance  of  Sin  ...  227 

Sad  Aspects  of  Character   ...  ...  227 

The  Silliness  of  Sin  ...  ...  229 

The  Fowler  of  Retribution ...  ...  229 

Divine  Dispensations  abused  ...  230 

Sin's  Malignancy  ...  ...  ,..  231 

The  Oven  and  the  Baker    ...  ...  232 

Mixing  with  the  Ungodly  ...  ...  233 

Ephraim's  Flight  from  God  m.  235 


CHAPTBB  Vm 

Ministerial  Faithfulness      ...            ...  243 

The  Causes  of  Divine  Judgments  are 

more  particularly  specified             ...  214 
rhe  Justice  of  the  Judgments  threat- 
ened with  Further  Additions         ...  248 
Israel  and  Judah  both  in  the  Trans- 
gression            ...            ...            ...  250 

A  Trumpet-Blast  of  Judgment         ...  251 

Sin  its  own  Punishment      ...            ...  252 

Reaping  the  Whirlwind      ...            ...  253 

Holy  Scripture,  and  Man's  Neglect  of  it  254 

On  knowing  God  ...            ...            ...  255 

Sin's  Mockery  of  the  Sinner              ...  257 

"  What  shall  the  Harvest  be  ?  "        ...  258 

The  Inspiration  of  Scripture             ...  259 

Israel's  Cry           ...            261 

The  Broken  Idol  ...           ...           ...  261 

Sowing  the  Wind  and   reaping  the 

Whiriwind         ...            262 

Hired  Lovers        ...            ...            ...  262 

The  Maker  forgotten          ...            ...  263 

Tlie  Conventional  Church  ...           ...  263 

The  Abandonment  of  Good,  and  the 

Consequent  Pursuit  of  Evil          ...  264 


THBVS  faoe: 

Idolatry ...           ...           ...           ...  865 

Perversion  of  Worship        ...            ...  266 

Neither  tlie  Religion  nor  Security  of  a 

Nation  to  be  judged  by  Appearances  267 

Doomsday             ..•.            ...            ...  267 

Broken  Gods        ...            ...            ...  2(j'8 

Israel  among  the  Gentiles  ...            ...  269 

Religion  become  Sin           ...           ...  269 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Sin  ia  (be  Cause  of  Sorrow  and  the 

Source  of  Sadness  ...  ...  27/ 

There  ia  no  Joy,  any  more  than  Peace, 

to  the  Sinner     ...  ...  ...  279 

God's  Goodness  met  with  Ingratitude 

by  a  Sinful  People  ...  ...  280 

"The    Wicked    shall    not    go    Un- 
punished"        ...  ...  ...  282 

The  Assyrian  Captivity     ...  ...  2S4 

The  True  and  the  False  Prophet      ...  286 
Bereavement,  Barrenness,  and  Banish- 
ment ...            ...            ...            ...  287 

The  Lord's  Land  ...  ...  ...  289 

"WhatwUlyedo?"  289 

The  Sin  of  Despising  God's  Prophets  290 

The  Watchman    ...  ...  ...  290 

"Wanderers  among  the  Nations"     ...  291 

The  Solemn  Days  of  Life  ...  ...  292 

Charge  against  Religious  Ministers  ...  203 

The  Lord's  Land  for  the  Lord's  People  294 

Prophet  and  Prophet  ...  ...  295 

Gibeah  and  Baal-peor         ...  ...  296 

Ephraim's  Woe     ...  ...  ...  297 

CHAPTER  X. 

Sin  and  its  Retribution      ...  ...  303 

Israel's  Sin,  Sorrow,  Shame,  and  Suffer- 
ing     ...  ...  ...  ...  309 

A  Chequered  Picture  ...  ...  311 

The  Prolific  Fruits  of  Evil ...  ...  314 

The  Calves  and  the  Kings  ...  ...  314 

National  Prosperity  and  Calamity    ...  316 

The  Divided  Heart  ...  317,  321 

Moral  Abasement...  ...  ...  31S 

Spiritual  Husbandry  ...  ...  320 

"  Foam  upon  the  Water "  ...  ...  322 

Despair  ...  ...  ...  ...  322 

Prepare  for  the  Time  of  Divine  Favour  321-! 

The  Abuse  of  Worldly  Prosperity     ...  323 

Social  Sins  and  their  Result  ...  324 

The   Divine  Voice   to    a    Worthless 

People  ...  .,.  ...  325 


INDEX. 


THEMB 

rAGK 

The  Empty  Vine  ,.,           m 

M. 

825 

The  End  of  Oalf-Worship  ... 

M. 

327 

Past  and  Present  ...            ... 

••• 

328 

Vloral  Husbandry                m» 

•M 

328 

OHAPTEE  XL 

A  Eioh  Display  of  God's  Mercy,  Lore, 

and  Long-sujfering          ...            ...  836 

The    Ingratitude    of   Israel    and  its 

Punishment      ...            ...            ...  338 

Called  out  of  Egypt           ...           ...  342 

Crowned  with  Tender  Mercies          ...  343 

The  Magnet  of  Love            ...            ...  314 

The  Divine  Goodness  despised         ...  346 

" Mercy  seasons  Justice "    ...            ...  347 

The  Tenderness  of  Divine  Discipline  349 

The  Attractiveness  of  God  ...            ...  350 

God's  Yearning  over  Rebels              ».  351 

"When  Israel  was  a  Child"              ...  35S 

Healing  Grace  unrecognized             ...  353 

"Cords  of  a  Man"               ...            ...  353 

"  How  shall  I  give  thee  up  ?  "            ...  354 

G{)d  and  nol  Man...            ...            ...  355 

A  Typical  Portrait  of  a  People          ...  855 
Justice  and   Mercy  in   the  Heart  of 

God    ...            ...            ...            ...  356 

The  Lies  of  a  People           ...            ...  357 

God's  Early  Love  for  Israel               ...  358 

Fatal  Courses        ...            ...            m.  360 

Divine  Belentings                ...            m.  360 


CHAPTEK  Xn. 

Beproof,  Betrospect,  and  Exhortatian  872 

Extent  of  Israel's  Apostasy                ...  878 

Reproofs  and  Remembrancers           ...  379 

Jacob  an  Example  to  liis  Descendants  381 

Three  Painful  Contrasts     ...            ...  383 

Prevailing  with  God           m.            ...  384 

Feeding  on  Wind...           ...           ...  386 

Power  with  God    ...  ...  887,  393 

"  Turn  thou  to  thy  God  " 387 

"Wait  on  thy  God"            ...            ...  388 

Happiness  in  Reserve          ...            m.  388 

Visions  and  Similitudes      .m            m.  389 

The  Ministry  of  Prophets   ...            m.  389 

Worthless  Soul-Food           ...            „.  389 

Genuine  Human  Goodness ...            ...  390 

Fortunes  badly  used,  badly  made,  and 

badly  ended      ...            ...            ...  891 

God's  Method  in  teaching  the  Great 

T«acher8  of  the  World    ...           ...  892 


THBHK  rASI 

God  Faithful,  his  People  Unfaithfiil  892 

Balances  of  Deceit               ...            ...  394 

Preserved  by  a  Prophet      .n           m.  895 

CHAPTEB  XIIL 

Justification  of  the  Ways  of  Ood  to 

Man     ...            ...            ...            ...  105 

Man's  Marvellous  Perversity  and  God's 

Restorative  Mercy            ...            ...  408 

The  Humiliations  wrought  by  the  Sins 

of  Israel             ...            ...            ...  Ill 

Ephraim,  Living  and  Dead                ...  413 

Ruin,  Retribution,  and  Resurrection...  411 

Jehovah  the  Destroyer  of  Death       ...  416 
Self-Destruction   ...            ...            417,121 

"  They  sin  more  and  more "              ...  118 

Driven  Chaff  and  Vanished  Smoke  ...  119 

The  Only  Saviour...            ...            ...  419 

Remembrance  in  the  Wilderness       ...  420 

Forgetting  God    ...            ...            ...  420 

"Thy  Help"         „.  421 

The  Vanity  of  Earthly  Kings            ...  421 

Redemption  from  Death     ...            m.  422 

Rebellion  against  God        ...            ...  422 

The  Life  of  the  Wicked      423 

Mercy  in  Beneficent  Action  and  in  Re- 
tributive Displeasure      ...            ...  123 

Sin  the  Destroyer,  God  the  Restorer  121 
The   Great  Conqueror  of  the  World 

conquered          ...            ...            ...  425 

Reverses  of  Fortune  in  Human  Life ...  125 

Baal-Exaltation    ...            ...            ...  126 

Self-Exaltation     m.            ...            ...  427 

Ood-Exaltation     ,m            m.            ...  128 

Figure  and  Fact  .^           m.           m.  430 

CHAPTER  xnr. 

Tlie  Fallen  invited  to  return             ...  434 
The  Happy  Result  of  Israel's  Peni- 
tence and  the  Merciful  Besponse  to 

Israel's  Prayer  ...            ...           ...  138 

A  Call  to  Understanding    ...            ...  442 

Retnm  to  Ood :  its  Beginnings         ...  442 

Return  to  God :  its  Immediate  Effects  414 

Return  to  God :  its  Ultimate  Results  445 

The  Epilogue        ...            ...            ...  446 

God's  Message  to  the  Prodigal          ,.,  148 

The  Heavenly  Dewfall        m.            ...  450 

The  Bedewed  Church         ...            ,..  451 

Counsels  to  the  Sinful         ...            ,,,  453 

The  Supplioation  and  the  Vow        ^  453 


INDRX. 


»  The  FathvJeBB  findeth  tlenj ' 
Siaoiona  AamianoM  „, 

Kational  Pioiperity  m* 

Idolatry  ebjnied  ...  h* 

Wisdom  and  BighteoiuneM 
BepentanMb  m  Kefonnatioa 


PAGE 

454 
454 
455 
456 
456 
407 


God  and  hiB  Befjnned  People  m*  458 

God's  Wayi  ...  ...  •»  458 

The  Prayer  of  the  Penitent  ...  459 

God's  Response  to  the  Penitent  •#.  460 

The  Lmwb  of  the  Book     «•  .m  468 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED  BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

riCAR  AND  RURAL  DEAN  OF  ST.  PANCRAS,   AND  EXAUININO  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  LORD   BIBHOt 
OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL; 


AND   BY  THE 

llEV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


JOEL. 


Sntrobnction : 
Br   REV.   W.    J.   DEANE,    M.A., 


RECTOR  OF  ASHEN. 


(S^epoeition  anb  fomiUtice: 
By   rev.    prof.   J.    J.    GIVEN,   Ph.D.,  D.D., 

LATE  PROFESSOR  OF  HEBREW  AND  HERUENEUTICS,  UAOEE  COLLEGE,   LONDONDERRr. 

fomilies  bg  t)ariou6  ^ntlioro: 

REV.   PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  A.  ROWLAND,   B.A.,  :.L.l 

REV.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoek  and  Toronto. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


INTRODUCTION. 


{  I.  SuBjEcr  or  tbk  BooBi 

The  propteoy  of  Joel  ia  concerned  with  a  natural  oalanilty  wWoh  had 
befallen  Ms  coimtiy,  and  from  which,  as  his  text,  he  educes  a  call  to 
repentance,  seeing  in  it  the  harbinger  of  the  great  day  of  judgment.  Upon 
their  repentance  the  people  are  promised  present  safety  and  blessing,  and 
a  future  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  not  confined  to  them  only,  accompanied 
with  a  judgment  on  heathen  nations,  after  which  shall  ensue  an  era  of 
holiness  and  peace.  This  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  book,  stated  generally. 
The  details  are  equally  simple.  The  prophecy  is  usually  divided  into 
two  parts,  consisting  respecitively  of  ch.  i. — ii.  17,  and  ch.  ii.  18  to  the  end. 
These  parts  are,  however,  closely  united,  the  latter  growing  naturally  out 
of  the  former,  and  both  forming  one  connected  whole,  representing  chastise- 
ment, repentance,  pardon,  blessing,  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  punishment 
of  enemies,  final  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  book  may  be 
analyzed  as  follows :  The  prophet  begins  by  calling  attention  to  a  terrible 
invasion  of  locusts,  hitherto  unparalleled  in  the  land,  which  has  cut  off  the 
vine  and  the  fig  tree,  and  all  the  fruits  of  the  ground,  so  that  there  is  left 
no  material  for  ofifering  and  libation.  For  this  he  calls  on  Judah  to  weep 
"like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth"  (oh.  L  8);  the  husbandman  and  the 
vinedresser  must  mourn  over  their  stricken  harvest,  and  the  priests  are 

.  themselves  to  lament,  and  to  proclaim  a  fast  and  a  solemn  supplication  for  all 
the  people.  In  this  visitation  is  an  omen  of  something  greater,  more  terrible 
— '•  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  (ch.  i.  16).  This  plague  of  locusts,  accompanied  by 
a  long-continued  drought,  which  destroyed  all  fodder  for  cattle  and  all  hope 
of  another  harvest,  was  the  harbinger  of  a  severer  judgment  (ch  i.  16 — 20). 

,  Tor  these  ills  the  only  remedy  is  true  and  immediate  repentance.     Before 

he  dilates  on  this  subject,  the  prophet  again  depicts  the  onslaught  of  the 

locusts  and  the  fearful  results  of  their  devastations  (oh.  ii.  2 — 11);  and 

then  he  bids  the  priests  sound  their  trumpets  and  summon  the  people  to 

JOKL.  b 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


fasting,  mourning,  and  prayor,  that  they  may  avert  the  wrath  of  God 
and  prepare  for  the  day  of  judgment  (ch.  ii.  12 — 17). 

The  prophet's  appeal  was  not  ineffectual :  priests  and  people  fasted, 
mourned,  and  prayed,  and  the  Lurd  accepted  their  repentance;  so  the 
second  part  of  the  book  commences  with  the  statement,  "  Then  was  the 
Lord  jealous  for  his  land,  and  had  pity  on  his  people  "  (oh.  ii.  18).  He 
promises  the  removal  of  the  scourge  and  the  return  of  plenty,  so  that  the 
heathen  might  no  longer  have  cause  to  deride  them  (vers.  19,  20).  Land 
and  beasts  and  men  may  now  rejoice ;  abundant  rain  shall  fall,  and  the 
crops  shall  be  rich ;  and  bam  and  vat  shall  be  full  to  overflowing ;  and, 
inspired  by  gratitude,  the  people  shall  praise  the  Lord,  the  Giver  of  all 
good  (vers.  21 — 27).  Then,  some  day,  they  shall  receive  large  spiritoal 
blessings ;  there  shall  be  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,  which  shall 
be  attended  by  wonders  in  heaven  and  earth — a  source  of  terror  to  the 
enemies  of  piety,  but  the  deliverance  and  glorification  of  the  Church  of 
God  (vers.  28—  32).  Li  those  days  shall  be  the  judgment  of  the  nations 
according  to  the  attitude  they  have  assumed  towards  Israel,  according  as 
they  have  yielded  themselves  unto,  or  resisted,  the  Spirit  poured  forth. 
The  prophet  mentions,  as  types  of  hostile  nations,  certain '  neighbouring 
peoples  who  have  vexed  and  cruelly  treated  the  Jews,  and  denounces  on 
them  just  retribution  (ch.  iii.  1 — 8).  He  calls  on  all  who  love  goodness 
to  engage  in  a  holy  war  against  the  enemies  of  God ;  he  cries  to  Crod 
himself  to  send  his  mighty  ones  forth  for  the  final  contest  of  good  and 
evil ;  he  sees  the  countless  multitudes  that  throng  the  place  of  judgment, 
and  the  Lord  himself  coming  in  awful  majesty  to  utter  the  final  sentence 
and  to  be  the  Befuge  of  his  people,  who  alone  shall  dwell  in  the  new 
Jerusalem  (vers.  9 — 17).  The  land  shall  overflow  with  Divine  blessing, 
fertilizing  the  very  valley  of  Shittim,  the  most  unpromising  spot ;  hostile 
powers  shall  be  utterly  overthrown ;  but  Judah  and  Jerusalem  shall  abide 
for  ever,  and  none  shall  evermore  make  them  afraid  (vers.  18 — 21). 

Such  is  the  argument  of  the  prophecy.  The  question  remains — Is  this 
description  of  a  plague  of  locusts  to  be  taken  as  the  narrative  of  a  literal 
fact,  or  as  a  metaphorical  representation  of  an  invasion  by  a  hostile  army  ? 
It  is  supposed  that  the  four  kinds  of  locusts  mentioned  (oh.  i.  4)  adumbrate 
four  enemies  of  the  Jewish  people,  though  all  commentators  are  not  agreed 
as  to  the  particular  nations  intended.  The  earlier  exegetes  saw  in  them 
Tiglath-Pileser,  Shalmaneser,  Sennacherib,  and  Nebuchadnezzar;  later  critics 
find  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans,  the  Medes  and  Persians,  the  Macedonians, 
and  the  Romans ;  or,  the  Babylonian,  Syro-Maoedonian,  Boman,  and  anti- 
Christian  powers.  Hengstenberg  does  not  limit  the  metaphorical  sense 
to  any  particular  invaders,  but  refers  it  to  all  the  enemies  of  the  spiritual 
Israel  in  all  ages  of  the  world.  We  have  no  hesitation  in  asserting  that 
the  literal  view  is  the  correct  one,  though  doubtless,  under  the  actual 
visitation,  other  judgments  and  other  truths  are  signified.  The  allegorical 
interpretation  is  maintained  by  great  names,  both  ancient  and  modera, 


Tflfi  BOOK  OP  JOEL,  tii 


and  is  supported  by  the  following  arguments.  1.  The  description  is  too 
terrible  to  be  used  of  any  mere  plague  of  locusts.  2.  Many  of  the  details  do 
not  apply  to  the  known  habits  of  locusts,  or  to  the  devastation  caused  by  them, 
but  could  be  used  only  of  the  attacks  of  hostile  armies.  3.  The  agents  in  this 
■  plague  are  alluded  to  as  responsible.  4.  The  scourge  comes  from  the  north, 
whereas  locusts  are  brought  into  Palestine  from  the  south.  5.  The  time 
of  an  invasion  of  locusts  could  never  be  described  as  "  the  day  of  the  Lord." 
In  reply  to  all  such  allegations,  it  must  be  observed  generally  that,  although 
we  hold  that  the  prophet  is  depicting  a  calamity  which  had  happened 
literally  and  truly,  nothing  forbids  us  from  allowing  that  he  beheld  therein 
a  figure  of  future  events,  and  in  his  description  of  the  past  mingled  terms 
which  are  appropriate  to  what  he  foresaw.  As  all  the  prophets,  Joel  was 
carried  beyond  the  immediate  present,  and  spoke  words  which  had  a  sense 
deeper  than  he  knew,  and  which  had  yet,  or  which  have  yet,  to  find  their 
fulfilment.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  actual  language  describes  a  present, 
not  a  future,  judgment.  The  prophet  calls  the  people  to  repentance  in  the 
face  of  an  existing  plague;  he  bids  the  old  men  bear  witness  that  the 
calamity  is  unprecedented ;  he  narrates  the  matter  with  simple  perfects ; 
he  states  historically  (oh.  ii.  18,  19)  the  effect  of  the  repentance  which  he 
had  urged  upon  the  people,  and  to  which  they  had  devoutly  betaken  them- 
selves. There  is  here  no  prophetic  use  of  a  preterite  in  describing  a  future 
event ;  there  is  no  mark  of  an  allegory  being  intended ;  the  prophet  has 
before  his  eyes  the  infliction  which  he  portrays  in  such  fervent  language ; 
he  calls  on  the  people  to  fast  and  weep,  not  for  a  distant  invasion  of  ima- 
ginary enemies,  but  to  deprecate  present  ruin  which  was  palpable  and 
unmistakable.  So  much  premised,  we  may  briefly  notice  the  arguments 
mentioned  above,  which  are  maintained  by  Hengstenberg,  Fusey,  and 
others. 

1  and  2.  The  accounts  of  the  effects  produced  by  an  invasion  of 
locusts,  which  are  given  by  modern  travellers  and  naturalists,  conflrm  in 
all  points  the  picturesque  description  of  Joel,  and  prove  that  it  is  not 
inaccurate  or  exaggerated.  The  following  passage  from  Van-Lennep 
(*  Bible  Lands,'  i.  p.  314)  disposes  of  most  of  the  objections  which  have 
been  offered  to  the  prophet's  language. 

"  The  young  locusts,"  he  says,  "  rapidly  attain  the  size  of  the  common 
grasshopper,  and  proceed  in  one  and  the  same  direction,  first  crawling,  and 
at  a  later  period  leaping,  as  they  go,  devouring  every  green  thing  that  lies 
in  their  path.  They  advance  more  slowly  than  a  devouring  fire,  but  the 
ravages  they  commit  are  scarcely  inferior  or  less  to  be  dreaded.  Fields  of 
standing  wheat  and  barley,  vineyards,  mulberry  orchards,  and  groves  of 
olive,  fig,  and  other  trees  are  in  a  few  hours  deprived  of  every  green  blade 
and  leaf,  the  very  bark  being  often  destroyed.  Thek  voracity  is  such 
that,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Broosa,  in  the  year  1856,  an  infant,  having 
been  left  asleep  in  its  cradle  under  some  shady  trees,  was  found  not  long 
after  partly  devoured  by  the  locusts.     The  ground  over  which  their  devas- 


iw  INTRODUCTION  TO 


tating  hordes  have  passed  at  once  assumes  au  appearance  of  sterility  and 
dearth.  Well  did  the  Bomans  call  them  '  the  burners  of  the  land,'  which  is 
the  literal  meaning  of  our  word  '  locust.'  On  they  move,  covering  the  ground 
BO  completely  as  to  hide  it  &om  sight,  and  in  such  numbers  that  it  often  takes 
three  or  four  days  fur  the  mighty  host  to  pass  by.  When  seen  at  a  distance,  * 
this  swarm  of  advancing  locusts  resembles  a  cloud  of  dust  or  sand,  reaching 
a  few  feet  above  the  ground,  as  the  myriads  of  insects  leap  forward.  The 
only  thing  that  momentarily  arrests  their  progress  is  a  sudden  change  of 
weather ;  for  the  cold  benumbs  them  while  it  lasts.  They  also  keep  quiet 
at  night,  swarming  like  bees  on  the  bushes  and  hedges  until  the  morning 
■un  warms  them  and  revives  them  and  enables  them  to  proceed  on  their 
devastating  march.  They  '  have  no  king '  nor  leader,  yet  they  falter  not, 
bnt  press  on  in  serried  ranks,  urged  in  the  same  direction  by  an  irresistible 
impulse,  and  turn  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left  for  any  sort  of 
obstacle.  When  a  wall  or  a  house  lies  in  their  way,  they  climb  straight 
up,  going  over  the  roof  to  the  other  side,  and  blindly  rush  in  at  the  open 
doors  and  windows.  When  they  come  to  water,  be  it  a  mere  puddle  or  a 
river,  a  lake  or  the  open  sea,  they  never  attempt  to  go  round  it,  but  unhesi- 
tatingly leap  in  and  are  drowned,  and  their  dead  bodies,  floating  on  the 
surface,  form  a  bridge  for  their  companions  to  pass  over.  The  scourge  thus 
often  comes  to  an  end,  but  it  as  often  happens  that  the  decomposition  of 
millions  of  insects  produces  pestilence  and  death.  History  records  a 
remarkable  instance  which  occurred  in  the  year  125  before  the  Christian 
era.  The  insects  were  driven  by  the  wind  into  the  sea  in  such  vast  num- 
bers that  their  bodies,  being  driven  back  by  the  tide  upon  the  land,  caused 
a  stench  which  produced  a  fearful  plague,  whereby  eighty  thousand 
persons  perished  in  Libya,  Gyrene,  and  Egypt.  The  locust,  however,  soon 
acquires  its  wings,  and  proceeds  on  its  way  by  flight,  whenever  a  strong 
breeze  favours  its  progress.  Our  attention  has  often  been  attracted  by  the 
sudden  darkening  of  the  sun  in  a  summer  sky,  accompanied  by  the  peculiar 
noise  which  a  swarm  of  locusts  always  makes  moving  through  the  air,  and, 
glancing  upward,  we  have  seen  them  passing  like  a  cloud  at  a  height  of 
two  or  three  hundred  feet.  Some  of  them  are  constantly  dropping  to  the 
earth,  and,  after  resting  awhile,  are  driven  by  a  common  impulse  to  rise 
again  and  proceed  with  the  wind,  so  that,  besides  the  principal  cloud,  single 
locusts  or  a  few  together  may  be  seen  in  almost  any  part  of  the  sky. 
During  a  great  flight,  they  sometimes  drop  so  thickly  upon  the  ground  that 
it  is  impossible  to  step  without  treading  upon  some  of  them," 

It  will  be  seen  from  this  extract  that  Joel's  description  is  exact  in  every 
particular,  though  coloured  by  poetic  fancy  and  enriched  by  ornamental  dic- 
tion. It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  it  no  mention  is  made  of  injui-y  to  persons  or 
buildings.  If  a  hostile  invasion  were  intended,  this  omission  would  not  be 
found;  the  mischief  would  not  be  confined  to  cattle  and  vegetable  produc- 
tions. Many  of  the  details  of  the  locust-flight  could  only  be  applied  to 
buman  enemies  by  a  violent  straining  of  metaphorical   language  or  by 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


aBsuming  that  the  prophet  used  incougruous  accessories  in  orfer  to  com- 
plete his  picture. 

3.  Ab  to  the  morality  of  the  agent,  proof  of  which  the  objectors  find  in  its 
being  called  (oh.  i.  6)  "  a  nation  "  {goi),  and  being  said  to  have  "  done  great 
things  "  (oh.  ii.  20),  we  may  remark  that  the  locusts  are  figuratively  repre- 
sented as  an  army  invading  a  land,  marshalled  in  due  order,  and  acting  in 
concert.  So  in  Prov.  xxx.  25,  26  the  ants  and  the  conies  are  called  "  a  people  " 
(am),  and  Homer  ('  Iliad,'  ii.  87)  talks  of  "  the  nations  of  bees."  In  assigning, 
as  the  cause  of  their  destruction,  their  exultation  at  the  great  ruin  they  had 
caused,  Joel  is  using  the  language  of  poetry,  and  does  not  formally  attri- 
bute responsibility  to  these  irrational  instruments  of  punishment.  By  the 
Mosaic  Law,  irrational  creatures  had  to  pay  the  penalty  for  injuries  inflicted 
by  them  (Exod.  xxi.  28,  etc.),  and  it  is  no  great  effort  of  imagination  to 
represent  the  locusts  as  boasting  of  their  evil  achievements,  and  suffering 
accordingly. 

4.  It  is  not  true  that  this  pest  came  only  from  the  south.  Any  wind 
might  bring  it.  Locusts  are  found  in  the  Syrian  desert  above  Galilee,  and 
a  north  wind  would  spread  them  over  Palestine  ;  the  same  wind,  continuing, 
would  drive  them  into  the  wilderness  of  Arabia,  "  a  land  desolate  and 
barren ; "  while,  with  a  little  variation  of  direction,  part  might  be  carried 
into  the  Dead  Sea  and  part  into  the  Mediterranean.  If  "  the  northerner," 
or  "  the  northern  army,"  could  be  taken  to  mean  the  Assyrians,  because 
they  usually  attacked  from  that  quarter,  the  rest  of  the  description  is 
wholly  inapplicable.  No  Assyrian  army  was  ever  driven  into  the  Arabian 
desert,  with  its  van  in  the  eastern  sea  and  its  rear  in  the  western,  and  left 
to  perish  in  the  waters,  tainting  the  air  around. 

5.  The  expression,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  is  not  applied  merely  to  the 
plague  of  locusts.  The  prophet  speaks  of  it  as  "  at  hand,"  not  as  yet  actually 
present.  He  sees  in  the  existing  calamity  a  token  and  a  presage  of  a  greater 
judgment,  when  all  sin  should  be  punished  and  all  wrong  righted — a  fore- 
taste of  that  fearful  day  of  which  Isaiah  (ii.  12 — 17)  speaks,  to  culminate 
some  time  in  a  final  award  given  to  all  the  world.  Looking  thus  beyond 
the  present  affliction  to  what  it  portended  and  imaged,  well  might  the  prophet 
cry,  "  Alas  for  the  day  I  "  and  mingle  with  the  details  of  the  scourge  whict 
lay  upon  the  land  the  terrors  that  shall  accompany  the  final  consummation. 

In  Messianic  prophecy  we  have  generally  to  distinguish  two  ideas — the 
coming  of  Jehovah,  and  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  David.  If  we  except  the 
doubtful  expression  in  chai.  23,  where  for  "the  former  rain"  of  the  Authorized 
Version  some  render  "  a  teacher  of  righteousness"  (which  translation  does  not 
suit  the  immediate  context),  we  have  in  Joel  no  plain  allusion  to  the  personal 
Redeemer ;  but  he  is  very  copious  on  the  advent  of  Jehovah  and  the  day  of 
the  Lord.  This  theophany  brings  with  it  a  large  outpouring  of  grace  and 
a  display  of  avenging  judgment.  Both  these  aspects  are  represented  in  this 
prophecy.  The  promise  of  the  plentiful  effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was 
held  by  St.  Peter  (Acts  ii.)  to  have  been  fulfilled  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 


Ti  INTEODUCTION  TO 


when  the  Holy  Ghost  camo  down  to  dwell  in  the  Chnroh,  and  his  graciona 
influence  was  not  confined  to  one  nation  or  one  class  of  people,  bat  was 
poured  alike  on  Jew  and  Gentile,  and  on  the  highest  and  humblest  members 
of  society.  Doubtless  there  had  been  partial  fulfilments  of  this  prediction 
before  St.  Peter's  time,  as  doubtless  there  have  been  further  fulfilments 
since;  but  the  accomplishment,  which  was  to  continue  unto  the  end,  began 
to  be  seen  in  larger  measure  then,  and  forcibly  vindicated,  the  apostle's 
notice.  The  appearance  of  Jehovah  in  judgment  is  described  in  awful 
terms,  which  are  reproduced  in  our  Saviour's  delineation  of  the  judgment- 
daj'  and  in  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John.  All  nations  are  assembled  before 
the  Lord ;  the  great  contest  betweea  good  and  evil  is  being  decided ;  all 
nature  sympathizes  in  the  unimaginable  strife;  the  struggle  ends;  the 
enemies  of  the  Lord  are  wasted  and  consumed,  while  God's  people  are 
victorious  and  largely  blessed,  their  holy  influence  spreads  widely  around, 
for  the  Lord  dwells  among  them  and  fills  them  with  his  grace. 

^   II.    AUTHOB  AND  DaTE. 

»  Joel  the  son  of  Pethuel "  (in  the  Septuagint,  "Bethuel")— that  is  all  that 
we  know  for  certain  concerning  this  prophet ;  every  other  detail  about  him 
is  inferential  or  conjectural.  His  name  is  explained  by  St.  Jerome  to  mean 
"  beginning,"  or  "  God  is ;  '  but  is  better  interpreted  "  Jehovah  is  God." 
Other  persons  in  Holy  Scripture  have  borne  the  name,  e.g.  Samuel's  eldest 
eon,  who  did  not  walk  in  his  good  father's  steps  (1  Sam.  viii.  2),  a  son  of 
Josibiah  (1  Chron.  iv.  35),  one  of  David's  warriors  (1  Chron.  xi.  38),  and 
a  Levite  under  the  same  king  (1  Chron.  xv.  7).  Pseudo-Epiphanius,  who, 
in  his  'Lives  of  the  Prophets,'  gives  many  legendary  stories  concerning 
these  personages,  asserts  (bk.  ii.  245)  that  he  was  of  the  tribe  of  Eeuben,  and 
bom  at  Bethom,  or  Bethhoron,  identified  with  Beit  Ur,  a  place  ten  miles 
north-west  of  Jerusalem.  Here,  too,  he  is  said  to  have  been  buried.  We 
know  not  the  grounds  on  which  this  tradition  rests.  Equally  insecure  is 
the  opinion  held  by  many  that  he  was  a  priest  or  Levite  ;  the  only  argu- 
ment in  favour  of  the  notion  being  that  he  often  mentions  the  offerings  and 
festivals  of  the  temple  service  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  addresses  the 
priests  as  a  class  to  which  he  did  not  belong ;  "  Ye  priests  ...  ye  ministers," 
he  says  (oh.  i.  13),  and  he  calls  upon  them  officially  to  proclaim  the  fast 
which  he  enjoined.  We  may  affirm  with  tolerable  certainty  that  he  was 
a  native  of  Judasa,  and  exercised  his  prophetic  office  in  that  quarter  of  the 
Holy  Land,  probably  at  Jerusalem.  His  mission  was  to  Judah,  as  Ho.  e  I's 
had  been  to  Israel.  He  exhorts  the  priests  as  though  living  among  them 
(ch.  i.  13,  14);  he  speaks  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  temple  (oh.  i.  9,  13);  he 
addresses  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  ii.  23) ;  it  is  Jerusalem  which 
he  sees  surrounded  and  threatened  (ch.  ii.  9);  the  trumpet  is  to  be  sounded 
in  Zion  (ch.  ii.  15)  ;  the  house  of  the  Lord  is  before  his  eyes  (ch.  i.  9)  ; 
deliverance  is  to  be  in  Mount  Zion  and   in  Jerusalem  (ch.  ii.  32);  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  T« 

captivity  of  Judah  is  to  be  brought  again  (ch.  iii.  1);  the  nations  are  to 
be  chastised  for  their  treatment  of  the  Judeeans  (oh.  iii.  2 — 8)  ;  the  promised 
blessings  are  all  destined  for  Zion  (ch.  iii.  20,  21).  There  is  throughout 
the  book  no  mention  of  Israel,  no  recognition  of  its  separate  existence.  So 
it  is  evident  that  we  have  strong  ground  for  affirming  that  the  scene  of 
Joel's  prophecy  was  Jerusalem. 

But  when  we  come  to  inquire  the  date  of  our  prophet,  we  are  at  once 
landed  in  a  very  dificult  question.  Joel  himself  tells  us  nothing  definite 
concerning  this  matter.  He  does  not,  as  so  many  of  his  biother-prophets 
do,  say  under  what  king  or  kings  he  prophesied ;  and  we  are  left  to 
gather  our  conclusions  from  internal  evidence.  How  uncertain  this  is, 
and  how  likely  to  lead  one  astray,  may  be  inferred  from  the  widely  differ- 
ing results  at  which  critics  have  arrived.  Some  consider  Joel  to  be  the 
earliest  of  all  the  prophets ;  others  regard  him  as  the  latest,  alleging  that 
he  composed  his  book  after  Nehemiah's  reformation,  and  that  the  prophecy 
is  only  a  concoction  of  earlier  writings,  especially  of  Ezekiel  (see  Merx, 
•  Die  Proph.  des  Joel '}.  St.  Jerome  asserts  that  he  was  a  contemporary  of 
Hosea,  and  tradition  generally  assigns  him  to  the  early  part  of  that  period. 
There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  Amos  quotes  Joel  in  Amos  i.  2,  when 
he  says,  "The  Lord  will  roar  from  Zion,  and  utter. his  voice  from  Jerusa- 
lem ; "  for  he  brings  in  the  sentence  abruptly,  and  as  if  citing  from  some 
writing  well  known;  whereas  in  Joel  (ch.  iii.  16)  it  occurs  naturally  as 
part  of  a  whole  paragraph  in  due  connection  with  what  precedes  and  follows. 
Also  Amos  concludes  with  promises  of  blessings  very  similar  to  those  of 
Joel,  and  quite  in  the  same  strain  (comp.  Amos  ii.  13  and  ch.  iii.  18). 
Other  passages,  .too,  seem  to  be  reminiscences  of  the  older  prophet ;  e.g. 
Amos  vii.  3  compared  with  ch.  ii.  13 ;  Amos  vii.  4  with  ch.  i.  20.  As 
Amos  prophesied  during  the  time  that  Uzziah  and  Jeroboam  II.  were  con- 
temporaneous, Joel  must  have  lived  earlier,  before  the  beginning  of  Uzziah's 
reign,  thus  exercising  his  office  previously  to  Hosca.  Other  facts  lead 
apparently  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  only  enemies  mentioned  in  the 
book  are  the  Phoenicians,  Philistines,  Edomites,  and  Egyptians  ;  the  author 
says  nothing  of  invasions  of  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  or  Syrians.  It  seems 
incredible  that  he  should  not  have  enumerated  these  ami  nig  hostile  nations, 
if  he  had  prophesied  after  their  attacks.  The  most  serious  Aramaean  inva- 
sion of  Judah  occurred  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Joash,  when  "  the  host 
of  Syria  came  up  against  him :  and  they  came  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem, 
and  destroyed  all  the  princes  of  the  people  from  among  the  people,  and  sent 
all  the  spoil  of  them  unto  the  Kingof  Damascus  "  (2  Kings  xii.  7;  2  Chron. 
xxiv.  23).  Had  this  great  blow  been  struck  lately,  Joel  could  not  have 
refrained  from  noticing  it;  he  therefore  lived  before  this  catastrophe. 
Further,  the  sin  of  idolatry  is  nowhere  mentioned,  and  the  regular  worship 
of  Jehovah  is  everywhere  presupposed.  Under  the  three  monarchs  pre- 
ceding Jpash,  idolatry  was  prevalent ;  and  under  Jbash  himself  pure  worship 
was  lamentably  degraded  as  soon  as  the  reverent  hand  of  Jehoiada  the  high 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


priest  was  wltMiawn ;  so  that  it  is  oonolnded  that  Joel's  prophecy  must  be 
set  in  the  earlier  part  of  Joash's  reign,  when  the  young  king  was  under  tute- 
lage. This  would  account  for  his  not  being  mentioned  amongst  the  various 
classes  whom  the  prophet  summons  to  penitence,  in  ch.  i.  and  ii.  '  Plainly, 
also,  the  Assyrians  had  not  yet  endangered  the  peace  of  Judah.  From  the 
enumeration  of  the  enemies  too  an  argument  is  drawn.  The  Philistines  and 
Edomites  attacked  Judseain  the  daysof  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi.  10,  etc.),  but 
they  were  not  punished  for  their  revolt  till  the  times  of  Amaziah  son  of 
Joash,  and  Uzziah  his  successor  (2  Chron.  xxv.  11 ;  xxvi.  6).  Therefore 
Joel's  mission  falls  between  the  sin  and  its  chastisement ;  i.e.  between  the 
reigns  of  Jehoram  and  Amaziah.  The  above  arguments  have  seemed  to 
many  critics  sufficient  to  fix  the  date  of  Joel's  prophecy.  But  they  may 
be  pressed  too  far.  Little  importance  must  be  attached  to  the  prophet's 
silence  concerning  the  Assyrians.  He  speaks  (ch.  iii.  2)  of  all  the  nations 
who  are  hostile  to  Judah,  and,  though  he  selects  four  for  special  mention, 
he  does  not  by  this  exclude  all  others.  And,  in  fact,  it  is  certain  that  the 
Assyrians  were  a  peril  to  all  the  dwellers  in  Palestine  long  before  the 
period  now  under  review.  Balaam  had  spoken  (Numb.  xxiv.  22)  of  captivity 
at  their  hands ;  and  the  monuments  show  that  Ahab  had  encountered 
them  when  he  joined  Benhadad  of  Damascus  in  his  confederacy  against 
Shalmaneser  II.,  and  was  defeated  with  great  loss  on  the  Orontes.  Jehu, 
too,  who  lived  in  the  same  time  as  Joash,  paid  tribute  to  the  Assyrians 
(see  Schrader,  '  Die  Keilinschr.  und  Alt.  Test.,'  p.  199).  And  as  to  the 
three  nations  named  by  Joel — the  Philistines,  Edomites,  and  Phoenicians 
— the  same  are  denounced  by  Amos  (i.  6 — 15),  who  lived  later  still ;  and 
therefore  no  definition  of  time  can  be  derived  from  their  mention  by  our 
prophet.  They  were  at  most  only  petty,  vexatious  enemies,  whose  plunder- 
ing raids  were  not  to  be  compared  with  the  onset  of  great  nations,  such  as  the 
Assyrians  and  Chaldeans.  Nothing  certain  can  be  inferred  from  the  place  of 
Joel  in  the  Hebrew  canon,  which  is  not  arranged  in  accurate  chronological 
order.  In  the  Septuagint,  Joel  stands  fourth,  being  placed  after  Micah, 
who  stands  third ;  and,  although  the  present  order  may  be  supported  on 
traditional  grounds,  these  will  not  bear  the  investigation  of  modem  criticism. 
We  have  seen  that,  if  it  be  conceded  that  Amos  quotes  Joel,  a  limitation  as 
to  the  date  of  the  latter  is  at  once  afibrded.  Some  late  writers,  e.g.  Scholz 
and  Merx,  have  assigned  him  to  post-exilian  times,  and  one  indeed  relegates 
him  to  the  Maccabean  period.  Their  arguments  may  be  seen  in  Knaben- 
bauer,  pp.  189 — 194;  the)'  are  very  far  from  convincing^  and  are  shattered 
by  the  fact  (if  it  be  fact)  that  Isaiah  quotes  Joel,  or  has  him  in  mind  when 
lie  writes  certain  passages.  The  paragraph  in  Isaiah  (xiii.  6),  "  The  day  of 
the  Lord  is  at  hand  ;  it  shall  come  as  a  destruction  from  the  Almighty," 
is  cited  verbatim  from  Joel,  including  the  alliteration  in  the  original,  and 
the. remarkable  use  of  the  name  Shaddai,  "  Almighty."  In  the  same  chapter 
of  Ipaiah  there  are  other  reminiscences  of  the  earlier  seer :  as  Isa.  xiii.  10 
c>mpared  with  ch.  ii.  10,  31,  where  the  substance,  if  not  the  words,  are 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


similar;  Isa.  xiii.  13  with  ch.  lii.  15,  16  ;  Isa.  xiii.  8  with  ch.  ii.  6.  Other 
prophets  must  have  made  use  of  Joel,  unless  we  consider  him  a  wholesale 
plagiarist,  who  composed  a  cento  from  various  writers,  and  claimed  inspi- 
ration for  a  mere  collection  of  extracts — an  idea  dishonouring  and  incon- 
ceivable. Thus  Obadiah  has  many  points  of  contact  with  Joel.  Comp. 
Obad.  11,  "cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem,"  with  ch.  iii.  3;  Obad.  10,  "violence 
against  thy  brother  Jacob,"  with  ch.  iii.  19  ;  Obad.  15  with  ch.  i.  15,  etc. 
So,  again,  Zechariah  has  maily  similarities  of  wording  and  meaning.  This 
will  appear  at  once  on  a  comparison  of  ch.  ii.  30 — 32  with  Zech.  xii.  2,  9  ; 
xiv.  1,  6 — 11.  The  internal  indications  of  date  being  so  far  precarious,  we 
must  not  omit  anything  that  may  help  towards  some  conclusion.  One 
such  hint  is  found  in  the  name,  "  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat "  (ch.  iii.  2), 
which  is  possibly  a  proof  that  Joel  lived  after  that  king,  and,  by  the  sym- 
bolical use  of  that  locality,  refers  to  some  event  that  had  happened  there, 
and  this  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  defeat  of  the  Moabites  and  their 
allies,  narrated  in  2  Chron.  xx.  22,  etc.  This  disposes  of  the  theory  of 
Bunsen  (•  Gott  in  der  Gesch.,'  i.  321),  that  Joel  prophesied  soon  after  the 
schism  of  the  ten  tribes,  when  Jerusalem  had  been  plundered  by  Shishak, 
in  the  middle  of  the  tenth  century  B.C.  This  critic  supports  his  position  by 
a  reference  to  the  statement  in  ch.  iii.  19,  that  Egypt  and  Edom  shall  be 
chastised  for  their  violence  against  the  children  of  Judah,  the  violence 
being  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  Shishak,  in  which  event  he  supposes 
that  the  Edomites  took  part.  And  he  deems  that  the  punishment  of 
this  onslaught  was  effected  when  Asa  defeated  Zerah  the  Ethiopian 
at  Mareshah  (2  Chron.  xiv.  9,  eto.),  and  that,  as  this  judgment  is  repre- 
sented as  future,  Joel  lived  before  Asa's  time.  But  there  is  no  proof 
whatever  that  the  Edomites  took  part  in  Shishak's  attack ;  nor  were  they 
punished  at  this  time,  as  they  ought  to  have  been  ;  nor  would  the  defeat 
of  the  Ethiopian  have  been  in  Joel's  eyes  a  judgment  on  the  Egyptians. 
The  unfavourable  mention  af  the  Philistines  and  Phoenicians  is  accounted 
for  by  their  capture  of  Jerusalem  in  the  reign  of  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi. 
16,  17). 

It  remains  to  notice  the  arguments  of  those  critics  who  assign  Joel  to 
post-exilian  times.  They  are  thus  summarized  by  a  recent  commentator 
(Knabenbauer).  1.  The  commonwealth  is  supposed  to  be  so  small  that  the 
sound  of  a  trumpet  blown  in  Zion  would  summon  all  the  inhabitants  to  a 
solemn  assembly ;  and  that  one  invasion  of  locusts  produced  a  dearth  of 
com  and  wine ;  and  the  authority  was  vested  in  the  elders  and  priests ; 
which  state  of  things  could  be  found  only  after  the  return,  2.  A  strict 
observation  of  the  Law  and  of  ceremonies  is  taken  for  granted ;  there  is  no 
idolatry ;  the  people's  sins  are  not  censured ;  and  no  sincere  conversion  to 
God  is  urged,  as  in  earlier  prc^hecies.  Such  a  condition  suits  no  age  before 
the  Captivity.  3.  In  plain  contrast  to  the  prophets  of  preceding  times, 
Joel  confines  himself  to  enjoining  external  acts  of  penitence ;  he  is  at  one 
with  the  most  prejudiced  of  Jews,  and  thinks  that  salvation  belongs  to 


INTEODUCTION  TO 


them  alone.  4.  Hie  whole  prophesy  is  derived  from  the  writings  of 
previous  prophets.  5.  There  is  no  order  or  method  in  his  book,  because  he 
merely  compiled  "  an  eschatological  edifice  "  from  the  study  of  other  authors, 
without  any  attempt  at  logical  arrangement.  How  -false  and  frivolous  are 
most  of  these  allegations  is  apparent  from  what  has  been  already  said,  but 
they  may  be  answered  seriatim.  1.  Nothing  can  be  inferred  from  Joel's 
mention  of  the  call  of  the  trumpet,  except  that,  being  in  Jerusalem,  he 
summons  the  inhabitants  to  assemble.  Besides,  the  summons  may  have 
extended  much  further ;  as  in  Lev.  xxv.  9,  the  trumpet  is  bidden  to  sound 
"  throughout  all  the  land."  The  priests  are  described  merely  as  ministers 
of  the  sanctuary,  whose  duty  it  was  to  take  the  lead  in  the  offices  of  religion. 
No  especial  authority  is  attributed  to  the  elders ;  they  are  simply  bidden 
to  join  with  the  others ;  and  the  king  is  not  mentioned,  either  because 
he  was  then  a  minor,  or  because  his  special  interference  was  not  necessary 
at  this  agricultural  crisis.  The  calamity  was  accompanied  with  drought, 
and  the  devastation  of  the  locusts  would  destroy  the  future  crop,  so  that 
national  scarcity  might  well  be  expected  for  some  time  to  come.  2. 
The  prophet  is  careful  to  bid  the  people  not  to  be  content  with  outward 
signs  of  penitence.  "  Bend  your  heart,"  he  says  (ch.  ii.  13),  "  and  not  j'our 
garments,  .  .  ,  turn  to  me  with  all  your  heart."  The  very  exhortation  to 
turn  to  God  implies  the  leaving  sins,  whatever  they  are.  No  special  mention 
of  idolatry  was  needed  at  other  times  besides  the  post-exilian  era;  and 
there  were  earlier  periods  of  reformation  of  religion  in  Jndah,  when  the 
Law  was  carefully  observed.  3.  This  is  already  partly  answered  by  (2). 
The  external  acts  enjoined  are  intended  to  express  the  fervour  and  reality 
of  the  repentance,  with  due  regard  to  the  position  of  the  priests  as  inter- 
cessors for  the  people.  Far  from  n-stricting  God's  blessing  to  the  Jews 
alone,  the  prophet  foretells  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  upon  all  flesh, 
and  proclaims  that  "  whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  delivered  "  (ch.  ii.  32).  4.  Joel  certainly  founds  himself  upon 
the  histoiy  and  enactments  and  warnings  of  the  Pentateuch;  as  God's 
revelations  occur  in  orderly  development,  he  would  have  been  no  true 
prophet  if  he  had  not  done  so.  But  he  nowhere  shows  traces  of  deriving 
anything  from  Ezekiel,  or  Jeremiah,  or  Isaiah ;  rather,  as  we  have  seen 
above,  and  as  we  note  further  on,  some  of  these  writers  probably  made  use 
of  him.  5.  We  have  alieady  shown  that  the  book  is  one  whole,  metho- 
dically arranged,  and  capable  of  logical  distribution.  We  are,  therefore, 
quite  safe  in  refusing  to  assent  to  the  theory  of  a  post-exilian  date  for  the 
prophecy  of  Joel. 

No  date  that  is  given  is  without  difficulties,  nor  is  it  allowable  to  dog- 
matize in  a  matter  so  uncertain ;  but  on  the  whole  it  seems  safest  to  assign 
to  Joel  a  period  antecedent  to  Amos,  and,  if  we  must  fix  the  time  more 
precisely,  we  may  offer  our  adherence  to  the  opinion  which  has  the  greatest 
weight  of  authority,  that  he  exercised  his  ministry  during  the  minority  of 
King  Joash,  and  aided  Jehoiada  in  re-establishing  and  in  maintaining  the 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  u 


pure  worship  of  Jehovah  in  the  soutbern  kingdom.  We  may  account  for 
the  indefiniteness  of  Joel's  prediction  by  remembering  that  he  is  first  of  all 
comforting  his  people  under  a  certain  material  calamity,  and  showing  them 
how  to  avert  and  remedy  it;  and  that,  in  his  prophetic  foresight  seeing  in 
this  visitation  a  token  of  God's  judgment,  he  gives  a  sketch  of  what  was  in 
store,  leaving  to  other  hands  the  details.  This  is  just  what  might  be 
expected  from  an  early  prophet,  and  is  in  exact  concordance  with  the 
orderly  development  of  revelation. 

§  III.  Genekal  Character. 

All  competent  critics  agree  in  assigning  to  Joel  a  very  high  rank  among 
the  Hebrew  prophets,  placing  him  but  little  below  Isaiah  and  Habakkuk, 
who  are  confessedly  first  in  sublimity  and  elevation  of  style.  For  vivid- 
ness of  description  and  pictiiresqueness  of  diction  he  is,  perhajjs,  unequalled. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  find  passages  surpassing  in  vigour  or  colouring  the 
account  of  the  invasion  of  the  locust-army  and  the  desolation  wrought  by 
it,  and  the  gathering  of  all  nations  in  the  valley  of  judgment.  As  we  read 
these  verses  we  feel  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  an  accomplished  poet, 
one  who  was  a  master  in  the  art  of  language,  and  understood  rhetorical  effect. 
The  style  is  pure  and  clear ;  the  meaning  is  expressed  simply  and  distinctly; 
there  is  no  ambiguity,  there  are  no  dark  riddles  to  solve.  Biief  as  Joel 
is  at  times,  expressing  much  in  a  very  few  words,  he  is  always  intelligible. 
Even  where  he  uses  only  pairs  of  words  to  delineate  his  picture,  he  is  not 
obscure.  See,  for  instance,  oh.  i.  10,  "  The  field  is  wasted,  the  ground 
mourns;  the  corn  is  wasted:  the  new  wine  is  spoiled,  the  oil  decays." 
What  a  scene  of  desolation !  yet  how  briefly  and  forcibly  depicted  I  We 
see  it  all;  we  want  nothing  more  to  present  it  to  our  eyes.  Ho  is  very 
touching  amid  all  his  energy  and  awfulness.  The  tenderness  of  his  nature 
shows  itself  in  many  an  unexpected  hint.  He  has  a  feeling  for  family 
affection  when  he  bids  the  bridegroom  go  forth  from  his  chamber  and  the 
bride  from  her  closet,  to  come  before  the  Lord  in  sorrow  and  penitence,  or 
w  hen  he  summons  Israel  to  mourn  like  a  virgin  girded  with  sackcloth  for 
the  husband  of  her  youih.  He  sympathizes  with  the  very  cattle  in  their 
sufferings  from  scarcity  and  drought ;  in  the  prospect  of  bettor  times  he 
cries  to  them,  '*  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field."  Of  the  prevalent 
sins  which  have  called  down  the  judgment,  he  says  little  or  nothing.  This 
one  important  element  in  prophetic  addresses  is  absent  from  Joel's  utter- 
ances. He  speaks  of  chastisement,  of  repentance,  of  pardon  and  reconoilia- 
tion,  of  a  grand  future  in  store  for  his  people ;  but  he  refrains  from  dwelling 
upon  past  misconduct;  in  the  face  of  the  present  visitation  he  is  gentle  and 
merciful  in  rebuke  and  complaint.  As  for  his  language,  it  is  pure  and,  as 
we  may  call  it,  classical.  He  sometimes  introduces  uncommon  words  (see 
ch.  i.  16),  but  generally  the  diction  is  such  as  was  used  in  the  best  ages  of 
Hebrew  composition,   and   has   in  many  respects  served  as  a  model  for 


wl  INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL, 


succeeding  writei-s.  Tte  idea  of  a  fountain  flowing  from  the  house  of  the 
Lord  has  been  taken  up  and  expanded  by  Zeohariah  (xiv.  8)  and  Ezekiel 
(xlvii.  1,  etc.);  our  blessed  Lord  himself  used  Joel's  imagery  to  adumbrate 
the  terrors  of  the  last  day ;  the  pouring  forth  of  the  Spirit  is  adopted  by 
Ezekiel  (xxxix.  29)  and  Peter  (Acts  x.  45)  and  Paul  (Eom.  v.  6);  the 
army  of  locusts  is  seen  in  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  (ix.  2,  3) ;  the  ripen- 
ing of  the  haftest  is  found  applied  to  Babylon  by  Jeremiah  (li.  33) ;  the 
wine-treading  is  used  abd  amplified  by  Isaiah  (Ixiii.  1,  etc.).  To  Joel  first 
it  was  given  to  tell  of  that  great  daj'  of  the  Lord  which  filled  the  thoughts 
of  many,  as  seen  in  after  time ;  to  him  among  the  prophets  belongs  the  first 
statement  of  the  strange  truth  that,  though  salvation  should  come  to  Zion 
and  spread  from  thence  to  all  the  world,  only  a  remnant  of  Israel  should  be 
saved  (ch.  ii  32). 

If,  turning  from  the  influence  which  Joel  exercised  on  his  successors,  we 
ask  what  he  had  learned  from  his  predecessors,  we  see  at  once  that  he  has 
based  himself  on  Moses.  The  plagues  of  locusts  and  drought,  whose  eflects 
he  so  graphically  depicts,  are  the  very  punishments  which  the  Law 
denounced  upon  disobedience  (Deut.  xxviii.  23,  24,  38,  42) ;  the  scattering 
of  Israel,  and  its  captivity  (ch.  iii.  2,  3),  are  what  Moses  foretold  in  punish- 
ment of  rebellion  (Deut.  xxviii.  49,  64,  etc.).  He  too  intimates  the  repents 
ance  and  consequent  restoi  ation  of  the  people  (Deut.  xxx.),  which  Joel  rejoices 
to  contemplate.  It  was  in  development  of  Moses'  idea  of  the  retribution  which 
awaited  the  enemies  of  Israel  that  Joel  beheld  the  final  judgment,  with  all 
its  terribleness.  To  people  conversant  with  the  language  of  the  Penta- 
teuch, and  with  the  ideas  contained  therein,  these  and  such  like  tiaits  must 
have  come  home  with  startling  applicability,  and  have  proved  that  they 
were  moving  in  the  sphere  of  God's  providence,  and  themselves  bearing 
witness  to  the  truths  of  inspiration. 

§  IV.   LlTEBATUBB. 

The  chief  commentators  on  Joel  are  these:  Hugo  a  St.  Victora,  *  AnnotationeB ; ' 
Q-.  Genebrard,  with  Chaldaic  and  RabbiDical  annotations  and  versions  (I'ari.s:  1563); 
Tamovius,  'Oommentarius'  (Rest.:  1627);  Pocock,  'Works,'  i.  (Oxf.:  1691);  Chandler, 
'Paraphrase,'  etc  (Lond. :  1735,1741);  Leusden,- '  Joel  explicatiis'  (Ultraj. :  1657); 
Baumgarten  (Halle:  1766);  Schurman,  'Scene  proph^tique '  (Wesel:  1700,  1703); 
Von  der  Hardt  (Helmstadt:  1708,  1720);  Bauer  (Wittemberg:  1741);  Svanborg, 
*Latine  Versus '  (Upsal :  1806);  Holzhausen, '  Die  Weissagung.  d.  Proph.  Joel '  (Got- 
tingen:  1829);  Credner  (Halle:  1831);  Meier  (Tubing.:  1841);  Wunsche  (Leipz. : 
1874) ;  Merx,  '  Die  Prophetie  des  Joel '  (Halle :  1879) ;  Scholz,  '  Commentar  zua 
Buche  des  Fr.  J.'  (Warzburg:  1885). 

W.  J.  DEANE,  M.A. 


THE   BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


EXPOSITION 


CHAPTEB  I. 


Ver.  I. — ^The  word  of  the  lord  that  eame 
to  Joel  fhe  son  of  Pethnel.  The  name  Joel 
gignifles  "  Jehovah  is  God,"  or  "  whose  God  ia 
Jehovah."  We  read  in  Scripture  of  several 
of  the  same  name,  but  the  prophet  is  distin- 
gnisbed  as  "  the  son  of  Pethuel,"  a  name  sig- 
nifying "  the  sincerity  of  God,"  or  "  godly 
simplicity."  We  are  not  certain  of  the  exact 
period  at  which  Joel  prophesied,  but  he  is 
generally  believed  to  have  been  the  earliest 
prophetic  writer  of  the  southern  kingdom, 
and  one  of  the  earliest  of  the  twelve  minor 
prophets,  while  Jonah  is  generally  thought 
to  have  been  the  earliest  prophetic  writer 
whose  book  has  found  a  place  in  the  sacred 
canon.  It  is  at  least  certain  that  Joel  pre- 
ceded Amos,  who  begins  his  prophecy  with 
a  passage  from  Joel  (comp.  ch.  iiL  16  with 
Amos  i.  2),  and  borrows  from  Joel  aiiother 
towards  the  close  (comp.  ch.  iii.  18  with 
Amos  ix.  13).  Besides,  Joel  speaks,  in  the 
second  chapter,  of  the  plague  of  locusts  as 
yet  future;  while  Amos,  in  the  fourth  chapter 
of  his  prophecy,  refers  to  it  as  past.  He 
likewise  prophesied  before  Isaiah,  who  also 
borrows,  in  Isa.  ziii.  6,  a  sentence  which 
occurs  in  ch.  i.  IS. 

Vers.  2 — 7. — These  verses  describe  the 
invasion  of  the  locusts,  with  an  exhortation 
to  reflect  on  and  lament  for  the  calamity, 

Yer.  2. — Hear  this,  ye  old  men,  and  give 
ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Hath 
this  been  in  your  days,  or  even  in  the  days 
of  yonr  fathers  1 

Ver.  3. — ^Tell  ye  your  children  of  it,  and 
let  your  children  tell  their  children,  and 
their  children  another  generation.  The 
propliet  thus  draws  attention  to  the  event 
which  lie  is  about  to  relate,  or  rather  predict, 
as  a  calamity  unknown  in  the  memory  of 
living  men,  unheard  of  in  the  days  of  their 
fathers,  unparalleled  in  the  past  experience 
of  their  nationj  and  one  affecting  all  the  in- 


habitants  of  the  land.  He  challenges  th« 
old  men  whose  memory  went  furthest  back, 
and  whose  experience  had  been  longest  and 
largest,  to  confirm  his  statements;  he  calls 
on  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  to  consider  an 
event  in  which  they  were  all  concerned,  and 
to  recognize  the  hand  of  God  in  a  disaster 
in  which  all  would  be  involved.  But,  though 
the  visitation  with  which  they  are  threatened 
had  had  no  precedent  or  parallel  among  the 
generation  then  present,  or  that  which  pre* 
ceded  it,  or  for  many  long  years  before,  it 
was  not  to  remain  without  memorial  or 
record  in  the  time  to  come.  To  this  end 
the  prophet  commands  his  countrymen  of 
Judah  to  relate  it  to  their  children,  to  tlieir 
grandchildren,  and  even  to  their  great-grand- 
children. The  expression  reminds  us  of 
Virgil's— 

"  Yea,  sons  of  sons,  and  those  who  shall  from 

them  be  bom." 
It  reads  like  a  reminiscence  of  what  is 
recorded  of  one  of  the  plagues — the  plague 
of  locusts — in  Egypt,  of  which  we  read  in 
Exod.  X.  6,  "Which  neither  thy  fathers, 
nor  thy  fathers'  fathers  have  seen,  since  the 
day  they  were  upon  the  eartli  unto  this  day ;" 
while  the  direction  to  have  it  transmitted 
by  tradition  seems  an  echo  of  what  we  read 
in  the  second  verse  of  the  same  chapter: 
"  That  thou  mayest  tell  in  the  ears  of  thy 
son,  and  of  thy  son's  son,  what  things  I  have 
wrought  in  Egypt."  Similarly,  it  is  written 
in  Ps.  Ixxviii.  5,  6,  "  He  established  a  testi- 
mony in  Jacol^  and  appointed  a  law  in 
Israel,  which  he  commanded  our  fathers, 
that  they  should  make  them  known  to  their 
children :  that  the  generation  to  come  might 
know  them,  even  the  children  which  should 
be  bom ;  who  should  arise  and  declare  them 
to  their  children."  The  solemn  manner  in 
which  the  prophet  draws  attention  to  this 
by  "Hear,"  "Give  ear," and  the  earnestness 
with  which  he  insists  on  the  record  of  it 
being  handed  on  from  generation  to  genera- 

B 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  1. 1—20. 


tion,  are  intended  to  impress  on. the  people 
the  work  of  God  in  this  visitation,  its  se- 
verity, the  sin  that  caused  it,  and  the  call 
to  repentance  conveyed  by  it. 

Ver.  4. — ^That  which  the  palmer-worm 
hath  left  hath  the  locust  eaten;  and  that 
which  the  locust  hath  left  hath  the  canker- 
worm  eaten;  and  that  which  the  canker-worm 
hath  left  hath  the  caterpillar  eaten.  Some 
interpreters  consider,  and  rightly,  we  think, 
that  the  prophet  enumerates  in  this  verse 
four  different  species  of  locusts.  The  com- 
mon or  general  name  is  arbeh,  from  rabhah, 
to  be  many ;  the  gazam,  or  palmer-worm,  is 
the  gnawer,  or  biter,  from  a  root  (guzam) 
which  signifies  "to  gnaw, bite,  or  cut  off; "  the 
yeleq,  or  canker-worm,  is  the  licker,  from 
yalaqlaqaq,  to  lick,  or  lick  oif ;  the  chasil,  or 
caterpillar,  is  the  devonrer,  from  chasal,  to 
cut  off.  Thus  we  have  the  locust,  or  multi- 
tudinous one,  the  gnawer,  the  licker,  and 
the  devourer,  either  as  (1)  lour  different 
species  of  locust;  or  (2)  the  gnawer,  licker, 
and  devourer  are  poetical  epithets  of  the 
locust,  or  multitudiuous  one.  These  names 
do  not  denote  the  locust  (1)  at  different 
stages,  according  to  Creilner.  Nor  (£)  can  we 
with  propriety  understand  them  allegori- 
cally,  with  Jerome,  Cyril,  and  Theodorot,  of 
the  enemies  of  the  Jews,  whether  (o)  the 
Assyrians.  BabyloniaLS,  and  Chaldeans, 
(6)  Medes  and  Persians,  (c)  Macedonians 
and  successors  of  Alexander,  espeuially  An- 
tiochus,  and  ((2)  the  Bomans ;  or  the  hostile 
kings,  (a)  Shalinane^r,  (&)  Nebuchadnezzar, 
(c)  Autioclius,  and  (d)  the  Romans ;  or  those 
other  kings,  (a)  Tiglatli-Pileser,  (b)  Shalma- 
neser,  (c)  Sennacherib,  and  (d)  Nebuchad- 
nezzar. The  most  celebrated  Hebrew  com- 
mentators understand  the  passage  of  locusts 
in  the  proper  and  literal  sense.  Thus  Bashi 
says,  "  The  palmer-worm  locust,  cunker- 
worm,  and  caterpillar  are  species  of  locusts; 
and  the  prophet  piophesies  about  them  that 
they  will  come ;  and  they  came  in  those  days, 
and  tliey  devoured  all  the  fruit  of  the  trees 
and  eveiy  herb  of  the  field."  Aben  Ezra 
says,  "  This  the  prophet  prophesied  in  refer- 
ence to  the  locust  which  should  come  to 
destroy  tiie  land.  In  tlic  days  of  Moses 
tliere  was  one  kind  of  locust  alone,  but  now, 
witli  the  nrtefe, there  are  the  gazam  and  yeUq 
and  chasil,  and  thpse  three  kinds  are  joined." 
He  also  quotes  Japhet  as  saying  "that  gazam 
is  equivalent  to  gozez,  cutting,  and  the  m^m 
is  like  mem  in  chinmam  reykam ;  and  yeleq, 
that  which  licks  (yiloq)  with  its  tongue  .  .  . 
and  chasil  of  some  signification  Q/achsele- 
nenu)  as  shall  consume  it."  In  like  manuur 
Kimchi  gives  the  derivation  of  the  words  as 
follows:  "Some  say  that  gazam  is  so  called 
because  it  cuts  (gozez)  the  increase;  and 
arbeh^  because  it  is  numerous  in  species ;  and 
yeleq,  because  it  licks  and  depastures  by 


licking  the  herb ;  and  chasil,  because  it  cuts 
the  whole,  from  '  And  the  locust  shall  con- 
sume it'  (Deut.  zxviii.  38)."  When,  how- 
ever, Kimchi  distributes  the  comings  of  the 
locusts  into  four  separate  and  successive 
years,  we  must  reject  his  interpretation  in 
that  respect.  He  says,  "What  the  gazam 
left  in  the  jBrst  year,  the  locust  ate  in  the 
second  year ;  for  the  four  kinds  did  not  come 
iu  one  year,  but  one  after  another  in  four 
years;  and  he  says,  'I  will  restore  to  you 
the  years  the  locust  hath  eaten.' " 

Ver.  5. — Three  classes  are  called  on  to 
lament — the  wiuebibbers,  the  husbandmen, 
and  the  priests.  The  verses  before  us  (vers. 
5 — 7)  contain  the  prophet's  appeal  to  the 
drunkards.  Their  sin  had  not  alarmed  them ; 
the  danger  with  which  (heir  soul  was  im- 
perilled had  not  aroused  tliem ;  now,  how- 
ever, the  heavy  visitation  that  awaited  them 
would  affect  them  more  vehemently,  touch- 
ing them  more  niarly.  Deprived  of  the 
means  of  their  favourite  indulgence,  they 
are  urged  to  awake  from  their  stupid  slumber 
and  perilous  day-dream.  They  are  sum- 
moned to  weep,  shedJing  silent  but  bitter 
tears,  and  howl,  venting  their  sorrow  and 
disappointment  in  loud  and  long  lamenta- 
tion :  Awake,  ye  drunkards,  and  weep ;  and 
howl,  all  ye  drhokers  of  wine !  He  backs  this 
exhortation  by  a  most  cogent  and  unanswer- 
able reason — ^because  of  the  new  wine ;  for  it 
is  cut  off  from  your  mouth.  The  wonl  asis 
is  explained  by  Kimchi  thus:  "Wine  is 
called  D'oy,  and  so  every  kind  of  drink  that 
goes  out  (is  pressed  out)  by  bruising  and 
treading  is  called  D'oy,  according  to  the 
meaning  of  the  root  ddv  in  Mai.  iii.  21. 

Ver.  6. — For  a  nation  is  come  up  upon  my 
land,  strong  and  without  numher.  'i'hc  loss 
of  the  wine  and  of  the  sweet  juice  of  the 
grape  would  be  a  source  of  genuine  sorrow 
to  the  drinkers  of  wine ;  that  loss  would  be 
occasioned  by  the  destruction  of  the  vines. 
In.this  and  the  following  verse  tlie  prophet 
explains  the  iubtrumentality  by  which  that 
destruction  would  be  brought  about.  The 
prophet,  fully  identifying  himself  with  his 
countrymen,  speaking  in  their  nanio  and  as 
their  representative,  says  "my  land."  Kimchi 
understands  the  suffix  to  "  laud,"  like  "  my 
vine"  and  "my  fig  tree"  in  the  next  ver^e, 
as  referring  either  to  the  prophet  himself  or 
to  the  people  of  the  land ;  while  some  refer 
it  to  Jehovah,  the  great  Proprietor,  who  had 
given  the  land  to  his  people  for  their  inh.  rit- 
ance  while  they  observed  his  covenant  and 
obeyed  his  commnndmeuls.  The  locusts  are 
called  a  nation,  just  as  the  "ants  are  a  people 
not  strong,"  and  the  "  conies  are  "  said  to 
be  "but  a  feeble  folk."  Kimchi  says  that 
"every  collection  of  living  tilings  is  called  a 
nation  (goy) ;  accordingly  the  prophet  applica 
'nation'  to  the  locust"    Nor  dote  the  word 


ta.  1. 1—20.] 


l*aE  BOOK  0^  JOEL, 


"  natiou  "  tlius  applied  support  the  allegorical 
sense  any  more  thau  the  Homeric — 

"  Even  as  go  the  swarms  [literally  nations] 
of  closely  thronging  bees." 

This  army  of  locusts  is  characterized  by  the 
two  qualities  of  strength  and  number.  The 
preterite  rhy,  though  past,  really  refers  to 
the  futuia,  to  express  the  certain  oecuiTence 
of  what  is  predicted ;  so  with  d&  in  the  fol- 
lowing Terse,  of  which  Eimchi  says,  "  The 
past  is  in  place  of  the  future ; "  and  Aben 
Ezra  more  fully,  "  A  thing  that  is  decreed 
to  take  place  is  spoken  of  in  the  past."  This 
army  has  peculiar  weapons,  yet  nothing  the 
less  powerful.  Whose  teeth  are  the  teeth  of 
a  lion,  and  he  hath  the  cheek-teeth  of  a 
great  lion ;  or,  lioness.  Different  descriptive 
terms  are  applied  to  lions — the  lion's  whelp 
is  ^M ;  the  young  lion,  which,  though  young, 
is  no  longer  a  whelp,  is  TS3;  also  the  liun, 
from  its  hoarseness  at  a  certain  age,  is  called 
'jne';  the  lion,  from  its  ery,  is  called  by  ono- 
matopceia,  Hf^h ;  the  lion,  from  its  strength, 
is  called  er;^;  while  the  common  name  of  a 
lion,  derived  probably  from  niM,  to  pluck  or 
tear,  is  n;'5(«.  Haviiig  compared  tlie  invad- 
ing locusts  to  an  army  powerful  and  count- 
less, the  prophet  proceeds  to  speuk  of  the 
weapons  wielded  by  tliese  warlike  and  hostile 
invaders.  They  are  their  teeth.  While  the 
common  name  for  locust  respects  their  mul- 
titude, the  other  names  are  of  the  nature  of 
epithets,  and  all,  as  we  have  seen,  derived 
from  ths  vigour  and  voracity  with  which 
they  use  their  teeth.  Those  teeth,  so  de- 
struutive,  are  compared  to  those  of  a  lion  and 
the  molars  or  grin-  lers  of  a  great,  stout,  old 
lion  or  lioness,  for  the  nord  has  been  trans- 
lated in  each  of  these  ways. 

Ver.  7. — He  1  a;h  laid  my  v.m  waste,  and 
barked  my  fig  tree  (margin,  laid  my  fig  tree 
for  a  harking) :  he  hath  made  it  clean  bare, 
and  cast  it  away ;  the  branches  thereof  are 
made  white.  We  have  here  a  detailed  de- 
scription of  the  destiniction  and  devastation 
caustd  by  this  locust-army  in  its  invasion  of 
the  land  of  Judah.  The  most  valuable  and 
most  valued  production  of  that  land,  the 
vine  and  fig  tree,  are  ruined.  The  vine  is 
laid  waste,  so  that  the  vineyard  beoomus  a 
wilderness :  (1)  "  he  has  barked  the  fig  tree  " 
(so  Jerome, "  Ficum  meam  decorticavit ") ;  or 
rather,  (2)  "he  has  broken  the  branches." 
The  word  nsxp  denotes  a  fragment  or  some- 
thing broken,  branches  broken  off,  and  so  the 
LXX.,  "hath  utterly  broken  (eis  (rvyK\a(r- 
fiiv);"  while  (3)  Aben  Ezra  explains  it,' 
"Like  foam  on  the  faoe  of  the  water,  in 
which  there  is  nothing;"  t.e.  a  thing  of 
nought.  The  locusts,  by  gnawing,  had 
stripped  off  the  bark,  or  by  their  excessive 


weight  had  broken  off  the  branches.  The 
next  clause,  which  speaks  of  making  it  clean 
bare,  is  explained  by  the  Chaldee  of  peeling 
off  the  bark,  but  that,  according  to  the  first 
rendering,  has  been  already  expressed.  It 
is  rather  more  than  this — it  is  stripping  off* 
the  leaves  and  fruits  or  flowers;  the  barked 
or  broken  branches  and  twigs  of  vine  and  fig 
tree  are  then  cast  away  or  down  to  the  ground. 
And  all  that  is  left  are  the  whitened  branches 
from  which  the  bark  has  been  stripped  off. 
The  casting  away  or  down  to  the  earth  may 
refer  to  the  bark ;  thus  Eimchi :  "  He  re- 
moves the  bark ;  and  so  Jonathan  explains, 
'  He  quite  removes  the  bark  and  casts  it 
away ; '  and  the  explanation  is  that  he  ca4s 
the  bark  to  the  earth  when  he  eats  the  juicy 
parts  between  the  bark  and  the  wood ;  or  the 
explanation  may  be  that  he  eats  the  rind 
and  casts  the  vine  blossom  to  the  earth,  and, 
lo,  it  is  bared."  Some,  again,  understand  it 
of  what  is  uacatable,  and  others  of  the  vine 
itself. 

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  consequence  of  such  ■ 
ruin  and  havoc  is  great  and  general  lamen- 
tation. The  drunkards  were  first  called  on 
in  the  preceding  verses  to  mourn,  for  the 
distress  came  first  and  nearest  to  them. 
But  now  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers, 
mourn;  things  inanimate,  by  a  touching 
personification,  join  in  the  lamentation — the 
land  mourneth;  the  husbandmen  that  till 
the  ground  mourn. 

Yer.  8. — Lament  like  a  virgin  girded  with 
saokoloth  for  the  husband  of  her  youth.  1. 
The  verb  here,  which  is  an  Uttu^  heyd/ievav, 
is  (1)  imperative  feminine ;  the  subject  must, 
of  course,  correspond.  That  subject  has  been 
variously  supplied :  (a)  the  ground,  accord- 
ing to  Aben  Ezra;  (b)  naphshi,  my  soul, 
i.e.  the  prophet's  address  to  himself;  (c) 
the  daughter  of  Zion,  or  virgin  daughter  of 
Zion ;  but  (d)  tlie  congregation  or  people  of 
Judah,  as  suggested  in  the  Chaldee,  is  the 
real  subject.  (2)  The  LXX.  has  Spiivii(rov 
trph  lie,  evidently  combining  two  readings, 
or  rather  two  punctnations,  of  the  same 
word,  viz.  '"?«,  to  me,  and  ^h]<,  lament.  2. 
The  mourning  is  of  the  deepest,  bitterest 
kind,  like  that  of  a  virgin  for  the  husband 
of  her  youth.  It  is  either  the  ease  of  a 
maiden  betrothed  to  a  youthful  bridegroom, 
whom  she  sincerely  loves,  but  he  dies 
before  they  are  married,  and  thus,  instead 
of  the  wedding  dress,  she  puts  on  the  gar- 
ment of  mourning,  the  sackcloth  of  rough- 
hair;  or  she  lias  been  married,  and  her 
husband,  still  in  youth,  is  snatched  away 
from  her  by  death,  and  she  is  clothed  in 
widow's  weeds — in  her  case  real  weeds  of 
woe,  and  outward  tokens  of  sincere,  uot 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  1. 1—20. 


eimulated,  Borrow.  The  expression  reminds 
us  of  Isaiali's  "  wife  of  youtU,"  and  of  the 
Homeric  expression  frequently  translated 
"  virgin  or  youthful  spouse,"  though  more 
correctly  "wedded  wife."  Suoh  is  the 
lamentation  to  which  the  people  of  Judab 
are  called. 

Ver.  9. — The  meat  offering  and  the  drink 
offering  is  cut  off  from  the  house  of  the 
Lord;  the  priests,  the  Lard's  ministers,  mourn. 
While  all  the  inliabitants  of  the  land  are 
called  to  lament,  and  have  abundant  cause 
for  lamentation,  different  classes  of  society 
are  specified,  and  the  grounds  of  their  sorrow 
particularized.  1.  The  meat  offering  and 
drink  offering  accompanied  the  morning 
and  evening  sacrifice,  and  that  sacrifice, 
with  its  accompaniments,  being  an  expres- 
sion of  gratitude  to  God  by  a  daily  presen- 
tation to  him  of  the  firstfruits  of  his  own 
mercies,  was  a  visible  memorial  of  Jehovah's 
covenant  with  his  people ;  while  the  fact  of 
its  being  out  off  implied  the  cessation  or 
suspension  of  that  covenant  and  the  people's 
exclusion  from  the  covenanted  mercies  of 
God.  2,  But  the  ministering  priests  in  par- 
ticular had  cause  of  mourning,  indeed  a 
twofold  cause:  (1)  their  occupation  was 
gone  when  there  were  no  materials  at  hand 
wherewith  to  minister ;  their  oflSce  could  no 
longer  last,  as  they  wanted  the  appointed 
means  for  the  discharge  of  its  prescribed 
functions;  (2)  their  livelihood  depended 
largely  on  thoge  offerings  in  which  they  were 
allowed  to  have  a  share,  but,  when  these 
ceased  through  failure  of  the  means  ofsupply, 
the  support  of  the  priests  of  necessity  ceased 
also,  or  was  so  curtailed  as  to  threaten  the 
entire  want  of  the  means  of  subsistence. 

Ver.  10. — The  field  is  wasted,  the  land 
mouxneth ;  for  the  com  is  wasted :  the  new 
wine  is  dried  up,  the  oil  languisheth.  This 
verse  is  closely  connected  with  the  preceding, 
for  the  failure  of  the  meat  offerings  and 
drink  offerings  was  owing  to  the  devastation 
of  the  uoun&y  and  the  destruction  of  its 
crops  by  the  locust-plague.  The  field  was 
laid  waste  by  them,  nor  was  it  a  field  here 
and  there,  or  a  solitary  district;  it  was  the 
whole  land  without  exception  or  exemption 
that  had  cause  to  grieve, "  if  aught  inanimate 
e'er  grieves."  This  is  expressed  by  one  of 
those  paronomasias  of  which  the  Hebrews 
were  sa  fond,  thus,  ehuddad  sadheh,  abhelah 
adhamah,  equivalent  to  "  field  falls,  ground 
grieves ; "  or  "  field  fruitless,  land  laments." 
"The  oblation,  or  meat  offering,  consisted 
of  flour  mingled  with  oil;  the  libation,  or 
drink  offering,  consisted  of  wine.  There 
were  also  firstfruits  of  corn  and  wine  and 
oil ;  while  all  the  produce  of  the  land  was 
tithable.  Now,  however,  the  corn  was 
wasted  and  the  oil  languished ;  and  there- 
fore the  meat  offerUg  had  partially  fulled  or 


entirely  ceased ;  the  new  wine  was  dried  up, 
and  therefore  the  drink  offering  must  needs 
have  been  given  up.  The  mention  of  cum 
and  wine  and  oil  in  particular  is  owing  to 
their  connection  with  the  temple  service, 
for  the  firstfruits,  tithes,  oblations,  and 
libations  depended  largely  upon  them. 

Vers.  11,  12.  —  Be  ye  ashamed,  0  ye 
husbandmen.  The  verb  from  &'13  (formed 
from  efs^),  to  be  or  feel  ashamed,  or  turn 
pale  with  shame ;  isn  is  "  to  blush  or  turn 
red  with  shame."  It  is  written  defectively, 
to  distinguish  it  from  B''3in,  which  occurs 
in  the  tenth  verse  and  again  in  the  twelfth, 
and  which  is  the  Hiph.  of  tfv,  to  be  parched 
or  dried  up.  Their  hope  was  disappointed 
through  the  destruction  of  their  wheat  and 
barley — their  most  serviceable  and  valuable 
cereals ;  while  disappointment  of  hope 
causes  shame;  hence  we  read  of  a  '*hope 
that  maketh  not  ashamed,"  because  It 
never  disappoints  as  empty  hopes  do.  Howl, 
0  ye  vinedressers,  for  the  wheat  and  for 
field  the  barley ;  beoanse  the  harves::  of  the 
is  perished.  The  vine  is  dried  up,  and  the 
fig  tree  languisheth.  There  is  a  transpo- 
sition here  which  is  a  species  of  the  figure 
chiasmus,  so  called  from  the  form  of  the 
Greek  letter  chi  (x).  The  husbandmen  are 
put  to  shame  on  account  of  tlie  destruction 
of  the  wheat  and  barley — the  entire  failure 
of  their  field  crops  and  ruin  of  their  harvest ; 
while  the  vinedressers  have  reason  to  howl 
because  of  the  loss  of  their  vines  and  the 
languishing  of  their  fig  trees.  The  prophet, 
after  particularizing  the  vine  and  fig  tree, 
proceeds  with  the  enumeration  of  other  im- 
portant fruit  trees  that  had  perished  by  the 
teeth  of  the  locusts.  The  pomegranate  tree, 
the  palm  tree  also,  and  the  apple  tree,  even 
all  the  trees  of  the  field,  are  withered.  The 
pomegranate,  though  abundant  in  that 
region,  had  shared  the  fate  of  the  fig  and 
vine;  even  the  palm  tree,  the  date  palm, 
though  a  vigorous  tree  and  little  subject  to 
injury,  having  no  juice  in  the  leaves  or  fresh 
greenness  in  the  rind,  ceased  to  fiourish ; 
and  the  apple  tree— the  medicinal  apple, 
as  Virgil  terms  it — suffered  in  like  manner. 
Kor  was  It  the  fruit  trees  only  that  were 
injured ;  the  hardier  forest  or  timber  trees — 
all  the  trees  of  the  field — shared  in  the 
calamity.  Thus  Jerome  represents  the 
prophet  as  asking,  "  Why  should  I  speak 
of  the  com,  wine,  oil,  and  barley?  when 
even  the  fruits  of  the  trees  have  been  dried 
up,  the  fig  trees  have  languished,  with  the 
pomegranate  and  palm  and  apple;  and  all 
trees,  whether  fruit-bearing  or  not,  are  con- 
sumed by  the  devastating  locusts."  Because 
joy  is  withered  away  from  the  sons  of  men. 
This  clause  is  connected  by  "  because  "  with 
"howl,"  the  intermediate  woriUbeing  treated 


OB.  L  1—20.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


parenthetically  or  passed  over.  Joy  here  is 
either  (1)  literal ;  while  "  withered "  ii 
figurative,  and  signifies  "  has  ceased  or  been 
taken  away;"  or  (2)  "joy"  is  figurative, 
denoting  the  means  of  joy,  and  "  withered  " 
may  then  be  understood  literally.  The 
min,  from,  is  a  pregnant  construction,  that  is, 
"is  withered  i^m"  being  equivalent  to  "is 
withered  and  taken  away  from  "  the  sons  of 
men.  Thus  Eimchi : "  Beeavxejoy  it  loithered 
— U  withered,  as  if  he  said,  '  it  has  ceased 
because  the  products  and  the  fruits  are  the 
joy  at  t^e  sons  of  men,'  and  so  Jonathan  ex- 
plains it,  '  because  joy  has  ceased ; '  or  the 
meaning  of  '  withered '  may  be  by  way  of 
figure." 

Ver.  IS.— Gird  ycnnelTe'B,  and  lament,  ye 
priests:  howl,  ye  ministers  of  the  altar: 
oome,  lie  all  night  ia  sackoloth,  ye  ministers 
of  my  God.  The  invitation,  or  rather  ex- 
hortation, here  is  to  something  more  than 
lamentation  and  mourning ;  for,  however 
natural  in  the  circumstauces,  affliction  itself 
could  not  avert  or  remove  the  calamity. 
They  are  uiged,  therefore,  to  repentance  as 
well  as  lamentation.  They  were  to  assume 
the  outward  signs  of  the  inward  grace  i  they 
were  to  gird  themselves  with  sackcloth,  the 
outward  symbol  of  their  inward  sorrow; 
next  they  were  to  enter  the  temple  or  house 
of  God ;  they  were  to  spend  the  night  there 
in  the  attitude  and  garb  of  mourners ;  night 
and  day  they  were  to  bewail  their  sins  with 
humble,  penitent,  and  contrite  hearts.  The 
priests  are  the  persons  first  addressed,  and 
that  not  only  because,  in  discharge  of  their 
priestly  functions  as  ministers  of  Jehovah 
and  ministering  at  the  altar,  they  had  been 
specially  touched  by  the  present  dibtre^ ; 
but  also  beca.use  of  their  official  position 
they  were  to  present  an  example  to  the 
people  whose  leaders  they  were  and  on  whose 
behalf  they  ministered  (comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  13, 
"  Do  ye  not  know  that  tijey  which  minister 
about  holy  things  live  of  the  things  of  the 
temple?  and  they  which  wait  at  the  altar 
are  partakers  with  the  altar?").  Kimchi 
gives  a  correct  exposition  of  this  verse : 
"  Oird,  that  is  to  say,  gird  on  sackcloth,  and 
he  explains  afterwards,  pass  the  night  in 
sackoloth,  because  even  by  night  ye  shall 
not  remove  the  sackcloth  from  off  you ; 
perhaps  Jehovah  will  have  mercy  upon  you. 
And  he  says,  'ministers  of  the  altar,'  and 
adds,  '  ministers  of  my  God,'  because  the 
ministry  was  as  the  altar  to  God;  and  he 
connects  the  ministry  to  God — to  the  altar, 
as  wherein  they  minister  to  Jehovah."  For 
the  meat  offering  and  the  drink  offering  is 
withholden  from  the  house  of  your  God. 
This  is  the  reason  asBi};ncd  for  the  urgent 
call  to  rapentance ;  and  it  is  much  the  same 
with  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  ninth 
Terse. 


Vera.  14—20. — ^After  urging  the  priests 
to  lead  the  way  In  the  matter,  lie  proceeds 
to  summon  all  classes  of  the  people,  and 
particularly  the  elders,  to  engage  in  peni- 
tence, fasting,  and  solemn  supplications,  in 
order  to  avert  the  calamities  that  were  im- 
pending, or  to  escape  from  them  if  they  had 
already  begun. 

Yer.  14. — Sanctify  ye  a  fast,  call  a  solemn 
assembly,  gather  the  elders  and  all  the  in- 
habitants of  the  land  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord  your  God,  and  cry  unto  the  Lord.  The 
command  is  addressed  to  the  priests  as  the 
representatives  and  rulers  of  the  people  in 
all  matters  of  religion ;  they  communicated 
to  the  people  the  commands  of  Jehovah. 
This  verse  directs  attention  to  three  things 
— the  duty  commanded ;  the  persons  called 
upon  to  discharge  it;  and  the  place  of  its 
performance.  1.  The  duty  required  was 
a  fa^t  and  a  solemn  assembly;  and  the 
priests  are  strictly  enjoined  to  see  to  it  that 
both  these  shall  be  duly  announced  and 
rightly  observed.  The  fast  was  abstention 
from  food  in  token  of  sorrow  for  sin ;  it 
was  intended  to  be  the  external  evidence 
of  penitential  sorrow  for  sin.  The  solemn 
assembly,  or  "  day  of  restraint,"  as  it  stands 
in  the  margin,  was  a  public  meeting  of  the 
people  for  the  purpose  of  solemn  supplication 
that  the  Almighty  might  be  entreated  to 
deliver  them  from  the  sore  calamity  with 
which  he  had  seen  fit  to  visit  them.  It  was 
a  season  during  which  they  were  restrained 
from  all  servile  work,  and  attention  given 
exclusively  to  humiliation  and  prayer. 
2.  The  persons  summoned  for  this  purpose 
were  the  elders,  those  who  were  so  both  by 
age  and  office — the  magistrates  as  examples 
to  others,  and  as  having  been  implicated  in 
the  sins  from  which  they  now  suffered. 
With  the  word  "elders"  are  joined  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land  —  the  whole 
of  the  people,  poor  and  rich  alike;  all 
had  had  their  share  in  the  national  sin, 
all  were  sliarers  in  the  national  suffering, 
and  it  therefore  behoved  all  to  repent  of 
their  sins  and  seek  the  Lord.  3.  The 
place  of  assembly  was  the  house  of  the 
Lord ;  that  is,  the  temple,  or  that  portion  of 
it  called  "  the  court  of  the  Israelites."  Nor 
were  they  to  assemble  there  without  an 
errand ;  the  purpose  of  their  assembling  in 
that  sacred  place  was  to  supplicate  the  Lord 
to  alleviate  their  distress,  or  rather  remove 
it  altogether.  They  were  directed  to  cry 
mightily  to  the  Lord  ;  to  cry  unto  him  with 
vehement  earnestness  and  importunate  per- 
severance till  he  would  be  pleased  to  send 
relief.  The  proclamation  of  »  fast  was  a 
common  expedient,  to  which  people,  Jewish 
and  Gentile,  according  to  their  respective 


TflE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


[oh.  1. 1—20. 


light,  resorted  in  the  day  of  tlieir  difficulty 
and  distress.  We  read  of  it  on  many  occa- 
sions ;  for  example,  by  King  Jehoshapljat 
in  prospect  of  a  hostile  attack  by  the  allied 
armies  of  Moab,  Ammon,  and  Bdom ;  again 
in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim ;  also  by  Ezra  in 
the  day  of  danger ;  and  by  the  people  of 
Nineveh  in  consequence  of  the  preaching 
of  Jonah. 

Ver.  15. — Alas  for  the  day !  for  the  day  of 
the  Lord  is  at  hand,  and  as  a  destruction 
from  the  Almighty  shall  it  come.  Some 
understand  these  words  as  suggested  by  the 
prophet  to  the  people,  that  they  might  use 
tiiera  in  their  solemn  and  soiTowful  appeal 
to  the  Almighty.  This  is  favoured  by  the 
Syriao,  whidi  adds,  "and  say,"  as  if  the 
prophet  prescribed  to  them  the  substance 
of  their  address.  We  prefer  taking  them 
as  the  prophet's  own  words,  which  he  em- 
ploys to  justify  the  urgency  of  the  appeal 
contained  in  tlie  two  preceding  verses  to  the 
ministers  of  religion,  the  priests,  to  the 
magistrates,  the  elders,  and  to  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  community,  even  all  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  land.  The  day  referred  to  is 
the  time  of  the  judgment  that  was  coming 
on  the  land  through  the  locusts.  The  day 
of  the  Lord,  first  mentioned,  it  is  said,  by 
Joel,  is  the  day  when  lie  inflicts  judgments 
on  sinners,  as  in  the  present  instance;  it 
may  be  a  presage  of  that  judgment  that 
brought  ruin  on  their  city,  temple,  and  nation. 
It  may  be  an  emblem  of  that  judgment  that 
wound  up  their  nation  by  the  destruction  of 
their  capital,  or  even  of  the  final  judgment 
when  God  shall  destroy  impenitent  sinners 
and  deliver  his  saints.  3.  This  day  of  the 
Lord  comes  suddenly,  secretly,  and  irresist- 
ibly ;  and,  when  it  comes,  it  is  a  destruction 
from  the  Almighty,  or,  according  to  the 
Hebrew  paronomasia,  h'shod  misshad^ai, 
equivalent  to  "ruin  from  tlie  Besistless." 
Tlie  day  of  God's  anger  against  Judah  is 
a  presage  of  that  day  when,  as  Judge  of  all, 
Jew  and  Gentile,  he  will  take  vengeance  on 
his  enemies.  Joel's  prophetic  glance  reached 
onward  and  forward,  not  only  to  the  close  of 
the  Jewish,  but  to  the  conclusion  of  the 
Christian,  dispensation. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — These  verses  contain  mani- 
fest proofs  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  was 
ciiming,  and  coming  as  a  destruction  from 
the  Almighty.  Is  not  the  meat  out  off  before 
our  eyes)  The  food  for  daily  sustenance, 
and  the  food  for  Divine  service — the  corn  and 
wine  and  oil,  as  mentioned  in  ver.  10 — had 
vanished  while  they  beheld  the  process  of 
destruction,  but  could  not  hinder  it.  "  These 
locusts,"  says  Thomson,  in  '  The  Land  and 
the  Book,'  "  at  once  strip  the  vines  of  every 
leaf  and  cluster  of  grapes,  and  of  every  green 
twig.  I  iilso  taw  many  large  fig  orchards 
'  clean  bare,'  not  a  leaf  remaining ;  and,  as 


the  bark  of  the  fig  tree  is  of  a  ailvary  white- 
ness, the  whole  orchards,  thus  rifled  of  their 
green  veils,  spread  abroad  their  branches 
•"made  white'  in  melancholy  nakedness  to 
the  burning  sun."  He  then  refers  to  the 
exclamation  in  ver.  15,  and  to  that  in  the 
words  before  us,  "Is  not  the  meat  cut  off 
before  our  eyes  ?  "  and  then  proceeds,  "  This 
is  most  emphatically  true.  I  saw  under  my 
own  eye  not  only  a  large  vineyard  loaded 
with  young  giapes,  but  whole  fields  of  corn, 
disappear  as  if  by  magic,  and  the  hope  of 
the  husbandman  vanish  like  smoke."  Yea, 
joy  and  gladness  from  the  house  of  our  Uod. 
Not  only  had  the  food  necessflry  for  the 
support  of  daily  life  perished— "The  foofl  of 
the  sinners,"  says  Jerome,  "  perishes  before 
their  .eyes,  since  the  crops  they  looked  for 
are  snatch^id  away  from  their  hands,  and 
the  locust  aiiticipateg  the  reaper," — ^but  the 
ofierings  used  in  Divine  worship  had  ceased. 
Owing  to  the  destruction  of  the  crops,  the 
firstfruits,  as  a  matter  of  course,  failed ;  the 
thank  offerings  coul  1  not  be  procured  Con- 
sequently, the  joy  that  usually  accompanied 
the  presentation  <if  these  and  other  offerings 
was  also  cut  oflF.  When  the  Hebrews  of 
old  brought  their  burnt  offerings,  sacrifices, 
tithes,  heave  offerings,  vows,  free-will  offer- 
ings, and  firstlings  of  herds  and  flocks,  it  was 
a  joyful  season,  a  time  of  rejoicing  before 
the  Lord,  as  we  learn  from  Deut.  xii.  7, 
"  There  ye  shall  eat  before  the  Lord  your 
God,  and  ye  shall  rejoice  in  all  that  ye  put 
your  hand  unto,  ye  and  your  liouseholds." 
All  this  joy  and  gladness,  so  graciously  asso- 
ciated with  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  were 
now  things  of  the  past.  The  seed  (margin, 
grains)is  rotten  under  their  clods,  the  gamers 
are  laid  desolate,  the  bams  are  broken  down ; 
for  the  com  is  withered.  This  was  a  fearful 
aggravation  of  their  calamity.  Their  present 
distress  thus  prolonged  itself  into  the  future, 
as  there  was  no  prospect  of  a  crop  in  the 
following  year  to  cheer  them.  The  rotting 
of  the  seed  that  had  been  sown  and  car^ 
fully  covered  in  the  earth  was  occasioned  by 
the  drought.  The  visitation  of  locusts,  aa 
Stanley  says,  "came,  like  all  such  visita- 
tions, in  the  season  of  unusual  drought — a 
drought  which  passed  over  the  country  like 
flames  of  fire."  The  rotting  of  the  seed,  and 
the  withering  of  the  corn,  if  the  mouldering 
seed  germinated  and  put  forth  a  blade  at 
all,  rendered,  barns  useless,  and  granaries, 
or  the  larger  storehouses,  unnecessary.  The 
barns  were  left  to  decay  and  tumble  down : 
and  the  granaries  were  desolate,  and 
so  there  was  no  further  use  for  them. 
Several  difficult  expressions  occur  in  this 
verse.  P'rudoth  is  from  parad,  to  scatter 
about,  or  to  i-ovi  broadcast,  and  hence  signi- 
fies "  scattered  things,"— seed  or  grain  sown. 
tl^y  is  to  dry  up,  moulder,  wither ;  and   g 


on.  I.  1—20.] 


TUB  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


Baid  of  seeds  that  lose  theii  germinating 
power.  Megrwphoth  are  clods  of  earth,  the 
root  being  garaph,  to  wash  away  (Judg,  v. 
21);  the  noun,  therefore,  denotes  a  olod  of 
earth  rolled  together  by  water  and  swept 
away.  Otsaroth  were  the  storehouses,  but 
these  were  allowed  to  moulder  away,  as 
there  was  no  reasonable  prospect  of  a  harvest 
or  of  grain  to  store  in  them.  The  mam- 
m'gurah  or  m'gurah,  viz.  the  bams,  had  now 
become  a  useless  appendage  of  the  farm- 
stead. How  do  the  heasts  groan!  the  herds 
of  cattle  are  perplexed,  hecanse  they  have  no 
pastnre ;  yea,  the  flocks  of  sheep  are  made 
desolate.  The  drought  that  preceded  and 
accompaiLied  the  plague  of  locusts  destroyed 
the  pasture-grounds,  and  thus  the  herds  of 
cattle  were  bewildered,  being  deprived  of 
pasture  and  water;  they  were  perplexed  to 
know  where  to  find  food  to  satisfy  the  crav- 
ings of  hunger,  and  water  to  quenoli  their 
thirst;  in  their  perplexity  they  sought  both, 
but  found  neither.  The  flocks  of  sheep,  too. 
that  are  more  easily  satisfied  and  accustomed 
to  browse  on  grass  shorter  and  sparser,  were 
desolate  for  want  of  nourishment,  or,  as  the 
word  ashem  may  bo  translated, "  expiate  the 
sin  of  man,"  inasmuch  as  they  suffered  from 
its  consequences.  This  also  was  true  to  the 
life,  as  Thomson  assures  us.  After  quoting 
this  verse  (18)  he  adds, "  This  is  poetic,  but 
true.  A  field  over  which  this  flood  of  deso- 
'lation  [the  locusts]  has  rolled  shows  not 
a  blade  for  even  a  goat  to  nip."  What  with 
the  locusts  devouring  what  appeared  above 
ground,  and  the  drought  destroying  the  seeds 
sown  under  the  surface,  the  havoc  was 
complete  ;  famine  and  distress  afflicted  both 
man  and  beast.  In  the  progress  of  this 
visitation  the  cereals — com,  and  wheat,  and 
barley,  and  other  grains — were  ruined ;  the 
fruit  trees — vine,  and  olive,  and  fig,  and 
pomegranate,  and  apple,  and  palm — were 
destroyed.  But  not  only  were  the  herbs  for 
the  service  of  man  eaten  up,  but  the  grass 
for  the  cattle  perished.  Stanley  refers  to  it 
in  the  following  eloquent  words :  "  The 
purple  vine,  the  green  fig  tree-,  the  grey 
olive,  the  scarlet  pomegranate,  the  golden 
com,  the  waving  palm,  the  fragrant  citron, 
vanished  before  them ;  and  tlie  trunks  and 
branches  were  left  bare  and  white  by  their 
devouring  teeth.  What  had  been  but  a  few 
moments  before  like  the  garden  of  Eden  was 
tr/Eed  into  a  desolate  wilderness.  The  herds 
<  (  cattle  and  flocks  of  sheep  so  dear  to  the 
shepherds  of  Judah,  the  huabandmen  so 
dear  to  King  Uzziah,  were  reduced  to  star- 
vation. The  flour  and  oil  for  the  'meat 
offerings'  failed;  even  the  temple  lost  its 
accustomed  sacrifices."  The  remarks  of 
Eimchi  on  some  of  the  difficult  or  unusual 
words  of  this  verse  deserve  attention.  On 
t!»3p  he  observes,  "  It  is  equivalent  in  mean- 


ing to  way,  for  the  heth  and  the  pe  boloiij; 
to  the  same  organ."  In  his  note  on  p'rudolh 
he  says,  "They  are  the  grains  of  seed  tliat 
are  under  the  earth;  and  he  says  another 
curse  will  be  that  the  seed  will  be  destroyed 
and  rotten  under  the  earth,  and  slfall  not 
bud ;  and  what  shall  bud,  the  locusts  shall 
eat  it.  Or  the  grains  of  seed  shall  rot 
because  of  the  rains  whieh  do  not  descend 
upon  them,  for  there  shall  also  be  in  like 
manner  a  great  drought  [literally, '  restraint 
of  rain ']  in  tliose  years."  On  the  garners 
(fiUarotK)  being  laid  desolate,  and  the  barns 
(mawm^urotK)  broken  down,  he  observes  on 
the  former,  "The  garners  for  the  produce 
are  laid  desolate,  for  there  was  nothing  to 
bring  into  them,  and,  lol  they  are  laid 
desolate.  In  reference  to  the  latter  he 
says,  "  He  (the  prophets)  repeats  the  matter 
in  different  words ;  for  mammtguroth  is  the 
same  as  otsaroth,  and  so  '  is  the  seed  yet  in 
the  barn,  m'gurah '  (Hos.  ii.  20),  gives  proof 
of  this."  And  he  accounts  for  their  being 
broken  down  either  "(1)  because  they 
brought  nothing  into  them,  or  (2)  they  were 
broken  down  because  they  had  no  caretaker 
to  repair  them  after  the  custom  from  year  to 
year,  and  so  they  fell  and  were  destroyed." 
Of  the  perplexity  of  the  herds  he  gives  the 
following  explanation:  "He  speaks  collec- 
tively (i.e.  the  verb  is  singular,  agreeing 
with  the  noun),  and  afterwards  individually 
(the  verb  being  plural) ;  perplexed  has  the 
meaning  of  confusion,  as  a  man  who  is  con- 
fused in  his  knowledge,  and  does  not  know 
what  to  do,  and  so  they  (the  herds)  are  con- 
fused in  the  land,"  in  other  words,  tliey 
wandered  up  and  down,  and  knew  not  where 
to  go  for  drink  or  pasture.  He  (Kimchi)  adds, 
in  his  further  explanation,  "  that  the  flocks 
of  sheep  sometimes  find  pasture  where  the 
oxen  do  not  find  it,  because  that  they  (sheep) 
go  up  upon  the  mountains  and  upon  the 
hills — a  thing  which  the  oxen  do  not  in 
general  do." 

Vers.  19,  20.— 0  lord,  to  thee  will  I  cry. 
In  consideration  of  man  and  beast— creatures 
rational  and  irrational  being  subject  to  so 
much  hardship  and  suffering — ^the  prophet 
appeals  in  intense  earnestness  of  spirit  to 
God,  and  all  the  more  so  because  of  tlie  en- 
couragement of  his  own  Word,  as  it  is  written, 
"  Lord,  thou  preservest  man  and  beast."  For 
the  fire  hath  devoured  the  pastures  of  the 
wilderness,  and  the  flame  hath  burned  all  the 
trees  of  the  field.  The  fire  and  flame  here 
referred  to  denote  the  fiery  heat  of  the 
drought  which  burnt  up  the  meadows  and 
score  lied  the  trees.  Some  seem  to  under- 
stand the  terms  literally,  as  applied  to 
setting  on  fire  the  heath,  or  even  the  trees, 
in  order  to  check  the  progress  of  the  locusts 
or  turn  them  aside  by  smoke  and  flame. 
This,  however,  is  refuted  by  the  following 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


[oh.  I.  1— 


verse,  which  mentions  the  rivers  of  water 
being  dried  up :  The  beasts  of  the  field  cry 
also  unto  thee :  for  the  rivers  of  waters  are 
dried  np,  and  the  fire  hath  devoured  the  pas- 
tures of  the  wilderness.  In  like  manner  we 
read  in  Jer.  xiv.  4—6, "  Because  the  ground 
is  chapt,  for  there  was  no  rain  in  the  earth, 
the  ploughmen  were  ashamed,  they  covered 
their  heads.  Tea,  the  hind  also  calved  in 
tlie  field,  and  forsook  it,  because  there  was 
no  grass.  And  the  wild  asses  did  stand  in 
the  high  places,  they  snuffed  up  the  wind 
like  dragons;  their  eyes  did  fail,  because 


there  was  no  grass."  The  various  animals 
suffering  from  hunger  and  thirst  expresi 
their  distress  in  loud  and  lamentable,  though 
inarticulate,  cries.  The  Hebrew  words  which 
respectively  denote  the  cries  of  the  different 
animals  are,  according  to  Bashi,  the  follow- 
ing :  i-\j)  expresses  the  cry  of  deer ;  Dru  (also 
mV),  to  roar  like  lions ;  nyi,  to  low  as  oxen ; 
^nx,  to  neigh  like  horses;  ^ixs<x  (rather 
C|xpx,  fulfil),  to  twitter  or  chirp  as  birds. 
Further,  the  subject  is  plural,  but  the  verb 
is  singular,  for  the  purpose  of  individualizing. 


HOMILETICS 

Ver.  1. — 27i«  value  of  the  Divine  Word.  The  prophet  gives  us  no  intimation  of  the 
time  when  he  wrote,  nor  of  the  tribe  to  which  he  belonged,  nor  of  the  family  of  which 
he  was  a  member ;  he  merely  mentions  the  name  of  his  father,  probably  for  sake  of 
distinguishing  himself  from  others  of  the  same  name.  1.  He  is  mainly  occupied  with 
the  solemnity  of  the  message  which  he  had  receiveii,  and  the  source  »  hence  it  came ; 
nor  yet  does  he  inform  us  of  the  mode  in  which  the  message  reached  him  — whether  by 
an  audible  voice,  or  vision  by  day  or  dream  by  night.  Information  of  this  kind  might 
gratify  curiosity,  but  would  not  tend  to  edification.  Certain  he  was  that  the  word 
came  from  God,  and  he  hastens  to  assure  those  whom  he  addressed  of  the  same. 
2.  God  speaks  to  us  in  many  ways. 

Vers.  2 — i. — A  retrospect  and  a  prospect.  The  former  was  sufficiently  gloomy,  tlie 
latter  might  prove  salutary  in  its  tendency.  The  olilest  are  challenged  to  lock  back  on 
the  past  and  recall  all  the  years  that  had  been,  and  then  say  if  they  could  find  any^ 
parallel  for  the  disasters  of  the  calamitous  time  through  which  they  had  just  passed 
or  were  passing.  The  prophet  did  not  need  to  name  or  specify  the  calamity ;  somewhat 
indefinitely  or  abruptly  he  asks,  "  Hath  this  been  in  your  days,  or  even  in  the  days  of 
your  fathers?"  He  knew  well  that  the  thought  then  uppermost  in  every  heart  was  the 
calamity  that  had  pressed  so  sorely,  or  was  probably  still  pressing  upon  them. 

I.  The  dutt  of  commkmobation  is  taught  us  here.  Why  should  a  tale  so  doleful 
be  put  upon  record  and  transmitted  to  children  and  children's  children,  that  is,  grand- 
children (for  which  there  is  no  corresponding  word  in  Hebrew),  and  onward  still  to 
great-grandchildren,  and  from  them  yet  forward  to  another  generation?  We  can 
easily  understand  why  the  memory  of  God's  mercies  should  be  kept  up ;  but  wliy 
keep  a  record  of  miseries  so  crushing  and  cruel?  Obviously  not  for  the  purpose  of 
distressing  posterity.  The  object,  there  can  be  no  reason  to  doubt,  was  to  perpetuate  a 
standing  memorial  of  those  great  and  grievous  calamities,  in  order  by  such  memorial 
to  set  up  a  solemn  warning  against  the  great  and  heingus  sins  that  had  entailed  these 
calamities. 

II.  1'he  despicable  things  that  providence  mat  make  the  means  of  destruc- 
tion. These  locusts — "  gnawer,"  "  licker,"  "  devourer " — whether  different  species  of 
locnsts,  or  difierent  stages  of  their  development,  or  merely  poetical  epithets  rhetorically 
to  characterize  the  destructive  processes  or  modes  of  operation,  were  weak  and  mean 
instrumentalities  by  themselves  and  in  their  individual  capacity. 

Vers.  6 — 8, —  The  lessons  taught  ly  this  calamity.  The  lessons  which  God  intended 
to  teach  his  people  by  the  calamitous  events  here  recorded  are  solemn  as  salutary. 
Among  them  may  be  reckoned  the  ends  for  which  they  were  sent,  the  alarming  extent 
of  them,  and  the  effects  produced. 

I.  The  ends  op  the  cbushino  calamity  then  pressing  on  the  people  of  Judah. 
1.  It  was  designed  to  rouse  them  out  of  their  sinful  slumber.  Previous  intimations  of 
Divine  displeasure  had  failed.  Now  Ond  speaks  to  them  in  a  way  which  they  could 
no  longer  mistake  or  withstand.    Z  He  bad  spoken  to  them  by  the  word  of  bii 


on.  I.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOEL. 


prophets,  now  he  speaks  to  them  by  the  rod  of  his  wrath.  3.  The  nature  of  their 
sufferings  remind  them  of  the  nature  of  their  sins,  filling  them  with  remorse,  not  so 
much,  if  at  all,  because  of  their  sins,  but  because  they  are  debarred  the  iodulgence  of 
those  gins.  Their  regretfolness  arises  from  their  besetting  sins  becoming  impossible 
to  them. 

II.  Thb  extent  of  the  calamity. 

III,  The  effects  abe  pabtiodlabized.  The  effects  as  here  detailed  prove  the 
extremity  of  the  distress.  Every  green  thing  perished  before  this  terrible  locust  army 
of  invasion ;  every  succulent  herb  was  devoured  by  them ;  then  the  trees  were  attacked 
—their  fruitage,  their  sheltering  leafage,  their  branches,  their  bark.  No  wonder  they 
are  again  called  on,  both  in  their  individual  and  national  capacity,  to  mourn,  and  lamen- 
tation behoved  to  be  of  the  most  sincere  and  sorrowful  kind.  When  God's  judgments 
ar«  abroad  in  the  earth  men  learn  righteousness. 

Vers.  9 — 13. — The  calamity  has  /alien  upon  all,  and  therefore  the  wail  of  woe  pro- 
ceeds from  all.  All  classes  are  summoned  to  this  sorrowful  work ;  no  office  in  the  state 
is  exempt;  things  animate  and  inanimate;  priests  and  people — the  Lord's  priests  who 
ministered  at  the  altar,  and  the  people  to  whom  they  ministered  ;  the  whole  land  and 
the  fields  into  which  it  was  partitioned;  the  tillers  of  the  soil  and  the  dressers  of 
the  vine. 

L  PoVEBTT  TENDS  TO  THB  DECAY  OF  PIETT.  As  a  rule  neither  the  depth  of  penury 
nor  the  height  of  prosperity  is  favourable  to  religion ;  in  the  one  case  corroding  cares, 
in  the  other  worldly  pleasures,  interpose  between  the  soul  and  God. 

II.  The  blight  is  bbouoht  by  sin.  The  blessing  of  God  makes  rich,  the  smile  of 
God  makes  all  things  joyful. 

III.  The  uncebtainty  op  worldly  pleabubes  should  lead  men  to  seek  spiritual 
ENJOYMENT.  On  the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth  rich  and  poor  weie,  as  they  still  are, 
alike  dependent.  While  the  rich  could  afford  the  finest  of  the  wheat,  and  the  poor 
had  to  content  themselves  with  such  bread  as  barley  yielded,  both  alike  derived 
their  support  from  the  bounteous  earth.  They  had  looked  forward  for  their  supply 
from  the  harvest  of  the  earth  as  usual  without  any  dread  or  apprehension.     1.  The 

■  pleasantest.  period  of  the  year  became  the  most  painful.  2.  The  joy  of  harvest 
may  be  withheld,  and  all  joy  of  an  earthly  kind  or  from  an  earthly  source  may  be 
withered  from  the  sons  of  men ;  but  there  are  spiritual  joys  which  no  accidents, 
as  men  call  them,  can  touch.  3.  The  children  of  God  are  independent  of  worldly 
pleasures. 

IV.  Duties  enjoined.  In  times  of  emergency  the  duties  of  humiliation,  fasting, 
and  prayer  are  properly  enjoined,  and  should  be  rightly  observed.  1.  The  persons  that 
are  called  on  to  lead  the  way  in  discharging  such  duties  are  the  ministers  of  religion ; 
as  sharers  in  the  common  calamity,  as  having  had  a  share  in  the  sins  that  occasioned 
it,  above  all  because  of  their  prominent  position  as  teachers  and  guides  of  the  people  in 
sacred  things,  they  are  bound  to  take  a  principal  and  prominent  part  in  public  humilia- 
tion, penitence,  and  prayer.  2.  The  first  duty  at  such  times  is  confession  of  sin ;  to 
this  duty  they  are  to  address  themselves  at  once,  girding  themselves  for  it.  3.  With  this 
full  confession  of  sin  with  the  lips,  there  must  be  real  contrition  of  heart;  of  this  the 
outward  sign  and  symbol,  as  usual,  in  the  East  was  clothing  the  body  in  sackcloth. 
While  contrition  without  confession  is  defective,  confession  without  contrition  is 
hypocritical.  4.  Nor  is  this  grief  for  sin  confined  to  the  daytime ;  it  extends  into  the 
night>watches. 

Yen.  14 — 20. — Cailam,ity  removed.  L  Tee  disohabge  of  the  duties  enjoined 
IN  A  bioet  WAT.  After  the  prophet  had  summoned  the  ministers  of  religion  to 
realize  their  respoosibility  and  humble  themselves  under  a  due  sense  of  sin — its  sin- 
fulness in  God's  sight — he  further  intimates  its  calamitous  consequences  to  a  country, 
to  a  community  both  in  a  temporal  and  spiritual  sense ;  he  then  proceeds  to  point  out 
the  proper  method  of  going  about  repentance  and  reform,  urging  the  work  with  suitable 
motives.  1.  There  was  to  be  a  fast  in  all  the  homesteads  of  Judah,  and  by  all  the 
people  of  the  land,  with  due  preparation  for  its  observance.  "Sanctify  ye  a  fast." 
2,  Then  a  proclamation  of  a  solemn  assembly  was  to  follow.    3.  The  peretms  to  b« 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  i,  1—20. 

convened  are  specified.  Tliey  were  the  public  ofEce-tearers  and  persons  of  influence, 
and  aloncr  witli  them  the  whole  people — high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old, 
alike.  Thus  a  very  promiscuous  multitude,  consisting  of  the  whole  body  of  the  people 
with  their  rulers,  was  summoned  to  this  great  convocation.  4.  The  place  of  meetiii'j 
was  the  house  of-  Goil ;  for  if  we  would  worship  God  acceptably,  we  must  follow  the 
method  he  has  prescribed.  5.  And  when  all  this  preparation  had  been  duly  made — 
the  ptoclamation  made,  the  persons  assembled,  the  place  of  convocation  thronged — there 
was  prayer,  solemn,  public,  earnest,  energizing  prayer,  to  be  engaged  in — a  simultaneous 
uplifting  of  heart  and  voice  to  the  Lord,  a  crying  unto  the  Lord  their  God. 

II.  Certain  weighty  motives  abb  added. 

Application.  1.  We  ste  in  all  this  the  sad  effects  and  ruinous  consequences  of  sin. 
Under  its  blighting  influence  the  fairest  spot  on  earth  becomes  a  wilderness,  the  most 
fruitful  land  becomes  a  desert,  and  the  richest  region  is  turned  into  a  barren  waste  by 
the  iniquity  of  them  that  dwell  therein.  2.  The  only  way  of  relief  is  by  returning  to 
God.  "  Whither  should  we  go  with  our  cries  but  to  him  from  whom  the  judgment  we 
dread  comes?  There  is  no  flying  from  him  but  by  flying  to  him;  no  escaping  from  the 
Almighty  but  by  making  our  submission  and  supplication  to  the  Almi^^hty;  this  is 
taking  hold  on  his  strength  that  we  may  make  peace."  3.  The  prophet  stimulates 
those  that  are  backward  to  engage  in  this  duty  by  his  own  examjjle.  "  0  Lord,"  he 
says,  "  to  thee  will  I  cry ; "  as  though  he  said,  "  As  for  others,  let  them  do  what  they 
please;  as  for  myself,  I  will  do  that  which  conscience  and  God's  own  Word  tell  me  to 
be  the  right  thing  to  do,  and  the  right  as  well  as  only  safe  course  to  take."  4.  Our 
dependence  on  God  both  for  daily  bread  and  spiritual  nourishment. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  2, 3. — Tradition.  The  generations  of  mankind  succeed  one  another  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth ;  but  they  are  not  disconnected,  isolated,  independent.  Each  receives 
from  those  who  have  gone  before,  and  communicates  to  those  who  shall  come  after. 
Hence  the  continuity  of  human  history ;  hence  the  life  of  humanity. 

I.  TbADITION  alone  18  AN  INSUFFICIENT  BASIS  FOR  EELIGION.      It  is  WcU  knOWn  that 

oral  tradition  is  liable  to  corruption.  Inaccuracy  creeps  in,  and  the  truth  is  distorted, 
by  the  weakness  of  memory,  the  liveliness  of  imagination,  the  power  of  prejudice. 
Hence  the  importance  ef  a  "book-revelation,"  which  has  been  often  but  unjustly 
reviled.  The  Scriptures  are  a  standard  by  which  correctness  of  belief  may  be  tested, 
by  which  ignorance  may  be  instructed,  and  errors  avoided.  There  were  traditions  in 
the  apostolic  age  which  originated  in  misunderstanding,  and  which  were  corrected  by 
the  evangelists. 

II.  Tradition  has,  however,  a  valuable  plaois  in  religion.  1.  Memories  of 
Divine  goodness  and  interposition  are  thus  preserved.  The  Passover  may  be  adduced 
as  an  example.  The  children  of  a  Hebrew  family  asked,  when  partaking  of  the  Paschal 
meal,  "  What  mean  ye  by  thi«  feast  ?  "  and  an  opportunity  was  thus  given  for  the  father 
to  relate  the  story  of  Israel's  Emancipation  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt.  2.  Instances 
of  Divine  displeasure  and  wrath  following  upon  human  sin  were  thus  handed  down. 
Joel  alluded  especially  in  this  passage  to  snch  purposes  as  these :  Calamities  came  upon 
the  land;  the  people  were  sorely  chastened ;  and  the  prophet  enjoins  upon  the  old  to 
communicate  to  their  posterity — to  their  children's  children — the  awful  events  by 
which  Jehovah  signalized  his  indignation  with  national  unfaithfulness  and  disobedience. 
3.  Piety  was  thus  promoted.  One  generation  would  learn  from  another  what  are  the 
Divine  laws,  what  the  principles  and  methods  of  the  Divine  government.  In  this  • 
manner  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  confidence  in  his  faithfulness,  would  evidently  be 
promoted  and  perpetuated. — T. 

Ver.  5. — "  Awake  I "  This  solemn  appeal  to  those  who  are  designated  and  denounced 
as  drunkards  is  fraught  with  implicit  lessons  of  wisdom  and  faithfulness  for  all  devout 
readers  of  God's  Word. 

I.  It  implies  the  prevalence  of  spiritcal  slumber.  Such  is  the  state  of  those 
who  are  immersed  in  the  cares  and  the  enjoyments  of  this  earthly  life,  who  are  deaf  to 


CH.  1. 1— 20.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  11 


the  thunder  of  the  Law  and  to  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  who  are  blind  tc  the  visions 
of  judgment  or  of  giace  that  are  passing  before  their  closed  eyes. 

n.  It  dbnoukces  spieitual  blumbeb  as  sin  and  folly.  The.body  needs  sleep  and 
repose ;  but  the  soul  should  never  be  insensible  and  indifferent  to  Divine  and  eternal 
realities.  Such  a  state  is  one  of  indifference  to  the  presence  and  to  the  revelation  of 
him  who  has  (he  first  claim  ux>on  the  hearts  he  has  framed.  Slumber  such  as  this  is 
fast  deepening  into  death. 

IIL  It  calls  fob  bbpbntanck  and  newness  of  life.  There  is  implied  a  power  to 
respond  to  the  Divine  summons.  And  certainly  the  first  thing  for  the  sinner  to  do  is 
to  shake  off  sloth  and  indifference,  to  look  about  him,  to  listen  to  the  voice  that  speaks 
from  heaven,  to  catch  the  welcome  accents  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the  message  of  God 
to  the  souk  of  men.  Blessed  be  God,  this  is  the  appeal :  "  Awake  thou  that  sleepest, 
and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light  1 " — T. 

Ver.  9. — Seligiotta  privatums.  The  old  covenant  was  one  especially  characterized 
by  human  ministrations  and  external  observances  and  solemnities.  Apart  from  priests 
and  sacrifices  its  purposes  could  not  have  been  accomplished,  and  its  witness  to  the 
world  would  have  been  unintelligible  and  vain.  No  wonder  that  to  the  Hebrew  mind 
no  prospect  was  more  terrible  than  the  cessation  of  public  worship,  of  public  offerings, 
of  sacerdotal  services.  In  the  spiritual  economy  imder  which  we  live,  the  case  is  some- 
what different.  Yet  no  enlightened  mind  can  contemplate  without  concern,  without 
dismay,  a  state  of  society  in  which  religious  offices  should  be  suppressed  and  religious 
hiinistrations  silenced. 

L  The  suspension  of  the  offiobs  of  kelioion  would  involve  the  suspension  of 

THE  PUBLIC  communication  OF  Qob's  WILL  TO  MAN. 

II.  It  would  involve  the  discontinuance  of  human  fellowship  in  the  loftiest 

BELATIONS  AND  THE  MOST  BENEFICIAL  EXBBCISES. 

IIL  It  would  involve  the  cessation  of  a  united  and  public  presentation  of 

THE   BAOBIFICES   DUE  FBOU  MAN  TO  Gk>0. — T. 

Ver.  12. — The  withering  ofjmj.  The  description  given  by  the  prophet  of  the  devasta- 
tion and  misery  caused  by  the  horrible  plague  of  locusts  is  so  graphic  and  so  frightful, 
that  the  very  strong  language  in  which  the  effect  produced  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the 
land  is  portrayed  cannot  be  deemed  exaggerated.  The  husbandmen  are  covered  with 
shame,  and  joy  is  withered  in  all  hearts. 

I.  Jot  is  natural  to  man,  and  is  the  appointment  of  a  benevolent  Cbeatoe. 
It  is  occasioned  by  the  plentiful  produce  of  the  earth,  by  the  possession  of  health  and 
by  circumstances  of  comfort,  by  the  solace  of  himian  affection.  Joy  is  a  motive  to 
activity,  and  diffuses  itself  from  heart  to  heart,  and  raises  the  tone  of  society.  A 
joyless  life  man  was  not  designed  to  lead. 

IL  The  visitation  of  calamity  may  witheb  joy.  It  is  a  plant  of  great  beauty, 
but  also  of  great  delicacy.  Exposed  to  the  fierce  winds  of  adversity,  this  fair  plant 
withers  and  decays.  Such  is  the  constitution  of  the  world,  and  such  the  changeable- 
ness  of  life,  that  this  event  does  sometimes  occur,  as  in  the  circumstances  described  in 
this  passage  by  the  Prophet  JoeL 

III.  Even  the  withekinq  of  joy  mat  be  sanctified  and  overruled  fob  oood  by 
TRUE  BELIGION.  It  may  lead  the  afflicted  to  seek  consolation  and  happiness  in  a  higher 
than  any  earthly  source.  Especially  does  the  gospel  of  Christ,  by  revealing  unto  us  as 
our  Saviour  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,"  teach  us  that  there  are  joys  of  benevolence  and  self- 
sacrifice  which  are  preferable  to  all  delights  of  sense,  to  all  enrichments  of  worldly 
prosperity. — T. 

Ver.  14. — A  fast.  The  afflictions  which  befell  Judah  are  represented  as  producing  a 
deep  impression  upon  the  whole  nation,  and  as  justifying  the  calling  of  a  general  fast. 

I.  Those  who  fast.  This  is  an  exercise  which  cannot  be  performed  vicariously. 
1.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  take  part  in  it.  2.  The  elders  of  the  people,  as 
reprosentatives  and  leaders,  are  especially  summoned  to  attend. 

IL  The  tokens  of  fasting.  Mere  abstinence  from  food  or  from  delicacies  is  not 
religious  fasting.    Humiliation  and  contrition  f|ro  the  essentials.    Yet  these  may  exjiress 


M  THE   BOOK   OF  JOEL.  [ch.  i.  1—20. 

themselves  in  renunciation  of  ordinary  pursuits,  refusal  of  ordinary  pleasures,  the 
assumption  of  mourning  garments,  the  refusal  of  wonted  repose  and  comfort, 

m.  The  BEi.iaioTTS  aspects  of  fastiko.  There  must  he  acknoivledgment  of  sin 
before  God,  with  confession  and  contrition.  The  Lord's  house  must  be  sought.  The 
confession  must  be  general  and  public.  The  cry  of  prayer  must  be  heard  in  the  sanc- 
tuary. Such  a  fast  will  not  be  observed  in  yain.  It  will  prepare  the  way  for  the  day 
of  reconciliation,  and  for  the  feast  of  gladness. — T. 

Ver.  15. — "  The  day  of  the  Lord.''  This  phrase  is  peculiarly  Joel's,  and  it  is  apparently 
used  by  him  in  different  senses.     Of  these  we  notice  three. 

I.  The  day  of  the  Lobd  is  a  day  of  calamity  and  betribution.  This  is  plain 
from  its  further  designation  as  a  day  of  destruction,  and  from  the  prefatory  exclamation 
"  Alas ! "  with  which  it  is  introduced.  Superstition,  no  doubt,  has  often  misinterpreted 
the  calamities  of  human  life ;  yet  it  would  be  insensibility  and  spiritual  bliudness  not 
to  recognize  the  presence  of  God  in  the  day  of  adversity.  Such  a  day  is  the  Lord's,  as 
reminding  us  of  the  Lord's  Kingship  over  creation,  and  as  summoning  us  to  sincere 
repentance  towards  God. 

J  I.  The  day  of  the  Lobd  is  a  day  of  judghekt.  The  retribution  of  the  present 
is  an  earnest  of  the  day  of  recompense  to  all  mankind,  when  the  Judge  of  all  shall 
summon  all  nations  to  his  bar. 

in.  The  day  of  the  Lobd  is  to  his  people  the  day  of  bfibitctal  and  imperish- 
able BLESsiNO.  So  the  Apostle  Peter  interprets  the  language  of  the  Prophet  Joel. 
The  outpouring  of  spiritual  blessing,  the  effecting  of  spiritual  deliverance,  the  fulfilling 
of  the  purposes  of  infinite  mercy,  shall  all  come  about  in  that  promised  and  expected 
day.— T. 

Vers.  17, 18. — The  desolation  of  the  land.  Whether  actually  and  literally  by  a  plasne  of 
lecust^or  by  a  hostile  incursion  such  as  a  plague  of  this  kind  might  well  typify,  Judah 
was  overrun,  afiSicted,  and  cursed.    The  picture  is  one  of  unrelieved  gloom  and  misery. 

I.  The  punitive  judgments  op  God  reach  men  thbouoh  the  crops  of  the  field, 
AND  THE  HERDS  AND  FLOCKS  OF  THE  PASTURE.  The  neccssaries  of  life,  the  constituents 
of  wealth,  arc  in  the  hand  of  God.  He  rules  not  only  in  heaven  but  upon  earth.  It 
may  be  doubted  whether  we  are  at  liberty  confidently  to  attribute  to  Divine  displeasure 
the  sufferings  which  befall  nations  in  the  way  of  disaster  and  famine ;  but  in  this  passage 
this  interpretation  is  given  upon  prophetic  authority. 

II.  Such  judgments  are  intended  to  summon  those  afflicted  with  them  to 
contrition  and  repentance.  It  may  be  that  only  by  some  such  means  can  the  hard 
heart  be  broken,  and  brought  to  true  humiliation  and  penitence. 

in.  Such  judgments  should  lead  men  to  seek  theib  highest  good,  not  in 
perishable  possessions,  but  in  spiritual  enrichment.  To  many  men  poverty, 
losses,  worldly  ruin,  have  been  the  means  of  the  highest  happiness.  Well  is  it  if,  losing 
the  gifts,  we  find  the  Giver ;  losing  the  streams,  we  find  the  Fountain.  The  soul  may 
learn  to  cry,  "  Thou  art  my  Portion,  O  my  Godl " — T. 

Vers.  19,  20. — Trouble  leads  to  prayer.  When  Scripture  depicts  human  misery  and 
destitution,  it  does  not  leave  the  matter,  as  though  there  were  nothing  further  to  say. 
Always  a  way  of  escape  is  pointed  out;  always  a  gleam  of  light  is  let  in  upon  the 
darkness ;  always  a  remedy  is  offered  for  the  disease  whose  symptoms  are  described. 

I.  The  cry  to  which  trouble  leads  is  a  cry  op  conkession.  GJod  has  not  afflicted 
the  greatest  sufferer  beyond  his  deserts.  The  distressed  sotil  gives  utterance  to  the 
acknowledgment,  "  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I  sinned." 

II.  The  oby  which  trouble  pbompts  is  a  cry  of  helplessness.  The  soul  may 
have  called  upon  others,  and  in  vain.  There  is  no  answer,  no  deliverance,  when  help 
is  sought  fi'om  man.  Perhaps  the  soul  addresses  itself  last  to  the  Helper  wlio  should 
have  been  sought  first,  before  all. 

III.  The  cry  which  trouble  prompts  is  a  cry  op  faith.  God  lias  snid, "  Call 
upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver  thee."  The  promise  is  remembered, 
acted  upon,  and  pleaded.  Believing  the  Divine  assurance,  the  afflicted  lifts  up  his  eyes 
unto  the  hills  whence  comcth  help. 


CH.  I.  1— 20.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  13 

IV.  The  cbt  whicS  trouble  prompts  is  a  cry  which  is  heard  and  answered. 
God  delights  to  hear  the  suppliant's  entreaty,  ihe  sinner's  confession,  the  earnest  peti- 
tion of  interceding  friends.  Such  cries  oi-me  up  into  the  ear  of  God.  The  sacrifice  is 
accepted;  the  sin  is  forgiven;  the  grace  is  accorded;  the  chastisement  is  removed;  the 
blessing  is  bestowed. — T. 

Ver.  1. —  The  life-worh  of  an  obscure  prophet.  The  literary  style  of  this  book  deserves 
the  consideration  of  every  student  of  Scripture.  With  the  exception  of  Isaiah  and 
(as  some  think)  of  Habakkuk,  Joel  surpasses  all  his  brethren  in  sublimity.  His 
pictures  of  the  disasters  following  upon  sin  are  marvellously  vivid,  and  his  promise 
of  the  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  still  living  in  the  memory  of  the  Jews  when 
Peter,  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  declared  that  its  fulfilment  had  come.  The  first  lialf 
of  the  book  describes  the  Divine  judgments  which  were  at  hand,  and  the  second  half 
(beginning  with  the  eighteenth  verse  of  ch.  ii.)  unfolds  the  promise  of  Divine  favour. 
Its  readers  pass  from  darkness  to  light,  from  grief  to  joy,  from  estrangement  to  recon- 
ciliation ;  and  in  this  book,  as  in  experience,  the  transition  hinges  on  the  penitential 
prayer  to  which  it  was  the  prophet's  mission  to  summon  the  people.  We  know  scarcely 
more  of  Joel  than  the  fact  that  he  was  the  son  of  Pethuel.  But  the  meaning  of  his 
name — "  Jehovah  is  God  " — was  suggestive ;  for  it  was  none  other  than  the  cry  of  the 
people  on  Carmel,  when  fire  came  down  from  heaven  in  answer  to  Elijah's  prayer,  and 
would  thenfore  serve  as  a  reminder  to  his  auditors  of  their  solemn  acknowledgment 
of  Jehovah's  supremacy  and  claims. 

I.  The  preparation  which  Joel  received  for  work  is  described  in  the  single 
phrase,  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Joel."  This  was  the  one  fact  necessary  to 
authenticate  his  message.  If  God  was  speaking  through  him,  then — whoever  he  might 
be — the  world  was  bound  to  listen  to  him ;  his  word  was  a  declaration  from  the  Unseen. 
There  is  now  a  general  forgetfulness  of  the  possibility  of  such  revelation.  It  is  accepted 
by  some  as  an  axiom  that  the  God  who  created  the  world  and  set  it  going  cannot 
interfere  further  with  his  own  handiwork ;  that  if  he  exists  at  all,  he  lives  at  an  infinite 
remove  from  mimdane  affairs,  as  did  the  god  of  Epicurus.  If  we  speak  of  works 
done  which  cannot  at  present  be  accounted  for  by  the  laws  we  have  deduced  from 
observed  ordinary  phenomena,  and  urge  that  men  have  had  glimpses  of  an  outlying 
sphere  of  energy  which  surrounds  what  is  visible,  we  are  regarded  as  credulous  enthu- 
^iasts.  But  in  an  earlier  age  there  were  men  whom  scientists  would  be  the  first  to 
condemn,  who,  having  never  seen  a  comet  blazing  in  the  sky,  nor  heard  of  such 
a  phenomenon,  would  have  laughed  to  scorn  its  possibility.  Yet  the  world  now  not 
only  believes. in  the  existence  of  comets,  but  has  found  out  the  law  of  their  return, 
and  has  assigned  them  their  own  places  in  the  planetary  system  with  which  once  they 
appeared  to  have  nothing  in  common.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  same  process  will 
take  place  in  regard  to  what  we  now  call  supernatural  ?  There  are  psychical  pheno- 
mena still  awaiting  explanation  which  have  convinced  us  that  we  have  influence 
over  each  other,  apart  from  physical  contact ;  and  if  one  human  spirit  can  affect 
another,  surely  it  is  not  incredible  that  the  Father  of  spirits  was  able  to  touch  the 
springs  of  thought  and  feeling  in  those  ancient  prophets.  Indeed,  this  was  not  peculiar 
to  them  ;  it  is  an  experience  of  to-day  among  the  devout  and  prayerful,  who  obey  the 
command  of  their  Lord,  "  What  I  tell  yon  in  darkness,  that  speak  ye  in  light." 

II.  The  obscurity  op  work  with  which  Joel  was  content.  His  was  the  spirit  of 
John  the  Baptist,  who  was  willing  to  remain  only  the  "  voice  "  of  God.  The  world 
little  thinks  how  much  it  owes  to  its  silent  workers  in  literature,  in  politics,  and  in 
religion.  Many  are  living  in  quiet  homes,  or  in  poor  lodgings,  whose  names  are  never 
heard,  whose  duties  are  not  suspected,  who  by  their  pens  are  leading  the  nation  iu 
ways  of  righteousness.  God's  most  faithful  servants  are  sometimes  personally  obscure. 
Some  are  patiently  plodding  away  at  monotonous  work,  and  bear  in  the  spirit  of  their 
Master  many  an  injustice  and  cruel  slight.  Others  in  business  stretch  out  the  helping 
hand  to  weaker  brethren  who,  but  for  such  timely  aid,  would  sink  in  a  vortex  of  ruin. 
And  ministering  angels  still  venture  into  haunts  of  vice  to  seek  and  to  save  those  who 
are  lost.  The  Father  who  seeth  in  secret  will  hereafter  bestow  some  of  the  highest 
places' in  bis  kingdom  on  those  who  all  their  life  long  have  been  without  honour  or 
applause. 


li  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [cm.  1. 1—20, 

in.  The  infldekce  of  Joel's  work  it  would  not  bo  easy  to  over-estimate.  Several 
of  the  latiT  prophets  were  indebted  to  him  for  suggestive  thoughts  and  phrase.s.  Peter 
quotes  his  prophecy  about  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  John,  in  his  Book 
of  the  Bevelation,  makes  use  of  his  image  of  the  locusts.  It  is  thus  that  God  builds 
the  temple  of  truth.  We  see  its  stately  proportions  and  exclaim,  "  Behold  what 
manner  of  stones  and  what  buildings  are  here  I "  but  how  often  we  forget  the  quarries 
from  which  the  ston^fl  were  dug.  and  the  workmen  who  did  tho  first  rough  work  of 
shaping  them  for  the  Master's  use !  It  ii  not  so  with  God.  We  often  admire  the  hero 
who,  in  advocacy  of  the  truth,  compels  the  world  to  listen ;  but  the  germs  of  his 
character  may  be  traced  to  the  nurture  of  a  gentle  mother,  whose  chaiaoter  and 
teaching,  with  God's  blessing,  made  her  son  what  he  is.  He  is  the  living  witness 
of  the  issues  flowing  from  her  obscure  work. 

IV.  The  codeagb  and  hopefulness  which  Joel  showed  in  his  work.  All  was  dark 
around  him,  and  he  knew  things  would  be  darker  still  before  the  sunshine  came.  He 
was  living  in  a  kingdom  which,  after  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes,  was  about  equal 
in  area  to  the  county  of  Suffolk,  and  even  with  the  addition  of  tlie  district  belungini; 
to  Benjamin  was  not  so  large  as  Yorkshire.  Yet  he  boldly  looks  forward  to  a  time 
when  that  kingdom  would  be  the  centre  of  light  to  the  world.  We  talk  of  the  "  mate- 
rialism of  the  old  dispensation ;  "  but  here  is  faith  in  spiritual  force  which  may  put  us 
all  to  shame.  We  ought  not  to  be  unduly  discouraged  by  statistics  which  compare  the 
numbers  of  Christians  with  the  numbers  of  heathens.  We  should  reflect  that  on  the 
side  of  Christ  are  the  leading  nations  of  the  world — not  those  falling  into  decay,  but 
those  which  are  planting  the  future  empires  which  will  rule  the  future.  Yet,  with  all 
our  thankfulness  for  this,  our  confidence  must  be  not  in  it,  but  in  him  who  can  and 
will  work  through  these  peoples  tiU  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  become  the  kingdoms 
of  our  God. — A.  R. 

Ver.  14. — Religious  reformation.  In  this  chapter  the  prophet  gives  a  graphic 
description  of  the  devastation  of  the  land  of  Judah  by  swarms  of  locusts.  After  eating 
all  the  green  leaves  and  succulent  parts  of  the  trees,  they  destroyed  even  the  bark 
(ver.  7),  so  that  the  effects  of  this  awful  visitation  would  last,  not  for  a  single  season,  but 
for  years.  God  sent  this  pest,  as  he  sends  other  troubles,  in  order  to  .arouse  the 
sensuous  and  careless  people  to  -thought  and  to  contrition.  The  witlidrawal  of  earthlj 
blessings  often  tends  to  turn  men's  thoughts  to  those  that  are  heavenly.  Losses  and 
griefs  of  every  kind  may  bring  a  man  or  a  nation  to  penitence,  and  this  is  one  of  their 
designs.  But  while  this  chapter  primarily  refers  to  a  physical  plague,  any  one  who 
reads  between  the  hues  can  see  here  suggestions  of  spiritual  desolation,  symbolized  by 
the  visitation  of  locusts.  The  vine  was  a  well-known  emblem  of  God's  people,  and 
as  such  was  used  by  our  Lord  (John  xv.) ;  and  the  desolation  of  it,  caused  by  locusts, 
fitly  sets  forth  that  condition  of  the  Church  which  is  brought  about  by  its  numberless 
enemies.  When  fruit-bearing  has  ceased,  and  life  is  enfeebled,  and  God's  paradise 
becomes  a  wilderness,  there  is  need  for  the  penitential  prayer  called  for  in  our  text. 
Ecclesiastical  history  reveals  to  us  periods  when  the  Church  seemed  thus  to  lie  undei 
a  curse;  and  in  our  own  day  there  Is  enough  of  spiritual  barrenness  to  call  for  heart- 
searching  and  earnest  supplication.  It  only  needs  that  God  should  send  showers  of 
blessing,  and  then  eyen  the  wilderness  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  rose.  The 
subject  suggested  liy  our  text  is  religious  reformation,  and  some  of  its  characteristics 
which  are  here  hinted  at  demand  consideration. 

I.  The  acknowledgment  of  God's  claims.  The  priests  were  to  take  the  lead  in 
this  act  of  national  repentance.  Insensibility  to  the  presence  and  the  power  of  the 
Most  High  was  being  removed  by  signs  and  wonders  which  even  the  most  carnally 
minded  would  understand.  Now  they  were  summoned  to  a  true  turning  to  him  in 
prayer.  They  were  not  called  upon  merely  to  "  appoint "  a  fast,  but  to  "  sanctify  " 
a  fast.  In  other  words,  they  were  to  hallow  their  abstinence  by  an  acknowledgment 
of  God ;  they  were  to  bring  forth  fruits  worthy  of  repentance.  Fasting  is  never  accept- 
able in  itself,  but  only  when  it  is  employed  as  a  sacrifice  unto  God.  Depriving  one's  self 
of  food  or  of  pleasures  may  be  practised  for  the  good  of  one's  health  or  for  the  sake  of 
winning  notoriety,  and  when  it  is  so  there  is  no  moral  or  religious  worth  about  it. 

II.  The  peaotioe  of  sblf-bestbaint     "Fasting"  is  a  word  which  ought  to  h»va 


CH.  I.  1— 20.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  .  16 

given  to  it  the  widest  signification.  Generally  used  to  denote  abstinence  from  food,  it 
may  be  as  iairly  applied  to  any  refusal  of  indulgence  to  animal  appetite,  however 
innocent  such  indulgence,  under  other  circumstances,  may  be.  The  keeping  of  a  fa.'it 
in  mere  deference  to  a  social  custom  or  to  ecclesiastical  ordinance  is  of  no  great  valuo. 
But  true  fasting  is  inculcaied  by  our  Lord  himself,  though  he  personally  refused  to 
keep  the  ecclesiastical  fasts  of  his  own  day.  The  restraint  of  apiietite,  the  curbing  of 
the  animal  nature,  is  essential  to  the  doing  of  great  works  lor  him.  Of  the  lunatic  boy 
Jesus  said  to  his  disci])les,  "  This  kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer  and  fasting."  This 
has  its  application  to  indulgence  in  strong  drink.  Total  abstinence  has  a  part  to  ]lay 
as  well  as  prayer  in  driving  out  the  demon  of  drunkenness.  Such  fasting  would  do 
much  to  remove  a  curse  which  is  as  terrible  as  was  the  devastation  of  the  land  of  Judah 
by  locusts. 

IlL  The  cultivation  of  religious  fellowship.  The  "  solemn  assembly  "  which 
was  to  be  summoned  was  a  religious  gatheiingof  the  people.  Their  nntional  unity 
was  greatly  fostered  by  the  anntial  feasts,  which  brought  the  nation  together  in  one 
place.  The  sin  of  Juroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  was  this — that  he  erected  calves 
at  Bethel  a,nd  D^n,  not  only  leading  the  people  to  idolatry,  but  breakin;  up  their 
national  unity.  It  was  la'gely  apolitical  manojuvre  on  his  part,  fur  he  could  not  have 
established  a  separate  kingdom  of  Israel  if  all  continued  to  go  up  to  the  same  temple 
at  Jerusalem.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation  we  are  exhorted  not  to  forsake  the 
assemblin.'  of  ourselves  together.  When  we  meet  lor  worship,  the  faith  and  prayer  of 
one  raise  the  faith  and  i^rayer  of  another.  Sepurate  embers  die  out,  but  fiathered 
together  they  blaze.  Public  worship  will  be  wonderfully  revived  in  a  real  religious 
reformation. 

IV.  The  kecognition  of  special  responsibility.  "The  elders"  were  to  be  summoned. 
Through  them  Moses  first  made  his  appeal  to  the  enslaved  Israelites.  They  were  the 
witnesses  of  the  first  flowing  of  water  from  the  rock.  Their  oflerings  represented 
the  dedication  of  the  whole  congregation  of  the  people.  Longer  experience  and  ofHoial 
status  gave  them  jirivileges,  with  accompanying  re.sponsibilities.  Leaders  of  men 
now  in  society,  in  Uierature,  in  political  life,  have  peculiar  responsibilities,  and  are 
summoned  by  true  prophets  to  lead  the  people  to  repentance  and  to  righteousness. 
The  Elector  Frederick  understood  this  in  Luther's  day,  but  he  needed  a  lowly  bom 
Ltither  to  inspire  him  first.  Here  we  may  fairly  appeal  to  the  eldest  in  a  family,  to 
the  captain  of  the  school,  to  the  leading  merchants,  to  influential  writers,  etc.,  to  be 
the  first  to  return  to  the  Lord,  and  henceforth  to  lead  others  in  his  service. 

V.  The  general  acknowledgment  of  sin.  "All  the  inhabitants  of  the  land" 
were  called  upon  torejient.  They  could  not  serve  God  by  proxy.  The  service  of  the 
elders  and  of  the  priests  would  not  relieve  them  of  responsibility.  Each  had  to  repent 
of  his  own  sin  and,  for  himself,  return  to  the  Lord.  No  better  meeting-place  can  be 
found  for  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men  than  the  Church.  There  the  rich  and  the 
poor  meet  together,  remembering  that  the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  all.  The 
recognition  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood  must  precede  the  realization  of  the  human 
brotherhood. 

VI.  The  presentation  or  earnest  prater.  Those  who  "  cry  unto  the  Lord"  are 
not  satisfied  with  listless  and  foimal  petitions.  Sobs  and  sighs  are  sometim' s  the 
sweetest  music  to  the  Hearer  of  prayer.  These  precede  the  blessedness  of  pardon  in 
the  history  of  each  believer.  The  Church,  too,  must  know  what  it  is  to  pri  sent  strong 
supplications,  with  crying  and  tears,  and  then  she  shall  be  endued  with  power  from  on 
high.     The  prayer  of  Pentecost  must  precede  the  benediction  of  Pentecost. — A.  R. 

Vers.  1 — 4. — National  calamity.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Joel  the  son 
of  Pethuel.  Hear  this,"  etc.  Th.  se  verses  lead  us  to  look  upon  some  aspects  of  that 
terrible  nationsil  calamity  which  »as  the  great  burden  of  the  prophet's  miciistry.  We 
learn  from  the  passage — 

I.  That  this  calamity  was  divinely  revealed  .^.t  first  to  the  mind  ok  one 
MAN.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Joel  the  son  of  Pethuel."  No  one  knew 
at  first  what  a  sad  calamity  was  coming  on  the  country  but  Jehovah  himself.  No 
sage,  seer,  or  priest  knew  anything  of  it.  The  Eternal  selects  one  man  to  whom  to 
impart  the  intelligence,  and  t^at  one  man  seems  to  have  been  so  undis'.inguished  and 


16  •  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  [ch.  i  1—20. 


obscure,  that  history  takes  scarcely  any  notice  of  him.    Such  a  fact  as  this  sr.ggests : 

1,  The  distinguishing  faculty  of  man.  Of  all  the  creatures  on  earth,  man  alone  can 
receive  cummunications  from  heaven.  Man  alone  can  take  in  a  "  word "  from  the 
Lord.  We  know  not  how  the  word  came  unto  him.  The  great  Father  of  spirits  has 
many  ways  of  striking  his  thoughts  into  the  souls  of  his  children.  Sometimes  by 
awakening  a  train  of  suggestions,  sometimes  by  articulate  utterances,  sometimes  by 
dreams  at  night  and  visions  in  the  day.  He  has  divers  ways.  Souls  are  ever  acces- 
sible to  him.  2. 'jf%6  manifest  sovereignty  of  God.  Why  did  he  select  Joel  more  than 
auy  other  man  ?  There  is  no  proof  that  he  was  greater  or  holier  than  many  others  in 
his  country.  No  reason  can  be  assigned  for  the  selection  but  the  grand  reason  that 
explains  the  creation  of  the  universe.  It  was  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will — 
according  to  his  good  pleasure. 

II.  That  this  calamity  was  uitpkecedentbd  in  histoby.  "  Hear  ye  this,  ye  old 
men,  and  give  ear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Hath  this  heen  in  your  days,  or 
even  in  the  days  of  your  fathers?"  He  means  to  say  that  such  a  disastrous  event  the 
oldest  man  amongst  them  had  never  seen,  nor  had  they  learnt  from  the  histories  of  the 
past  of  anythinj;  equal  to  its  terrific  character.  Terrible  judgments  had  fallen  on  Judah 
before ;  but  this,  according  to  Joel,  was  the  greatest  of  all.  Observe :  1.  That  no 
Divine  judgments  have  heen  so  great  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  greater.  The  penal 
resources  of  the  righteous  Judge  are  unbounded.  Tlie  most  tremendous  thunderbolts 
that  he  has  thrown  upon  the  world  are  only  as  atoms  compared  with  the  massive 
mountains  he  might  hurl.     Great  as  your  afflictions  have  been,  they  can  be  greater. 

2.  That  the  greater  the  sins  of  a  people,  the  greater  the  Judgments  to  be  expected.  It  is 
probable  that  Judah's  sins  were  greater  at  this  time  than  they  had  ever  been  before, 
and  that,  consequently,  severer  penalties  were  to  come.  Eternal  justice  requires  that 
the  sufferings  of  individuals  and  communities  should  be  in  proportion  to  the  nnmler 
and  aggravation  of  their  sins.  Take  care,  sinner ;  in  every  sin  you  commit  you  are 
treasuring  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath. 

III.  That  this  calamity  was  so  TREMENnous  as  to  command  the  attention  of 
ALL  generations.  "  Tell  ye  your  children  of  it,  and  let  your  children  tell  their 
children,  and  their  children  another  generation."  The  terrible  events  of  God's  judi- 
cial providence  have  a  bearing  beyond  the'  men  in  whose  history  they  occur.  Those 
that  occur  in  one  age  and  land  demand  the  study  of  men  in  all  ages  and  lands.  They 
are  not  confined  to  individuals,  "they  have  a  bearing  on  the  race ;  not  confined  to  men, 
they  embrace  humanity  even  to  remotest  times.  Hence  the  importance  of  history. 
Truthful  history  is  the  Bible  written  by  Providence  to  the  world.  But  why  should 
such  an  event  as  this  be  transmitted  to  posterity  ?  1.  Because  it  shows  that  God  rides 
the  world.  It  is  not  controlled  by  chance  or  necessity;  it  is  under  the  control  of  One 
who  is  not  only  All-mighty  and  All-wise,  but  All-just,  who  will  not  at  all  clear  the 
guilty.  2.  Because  it  shows  that  God  takes  cognizance  of  the  worid^s  sin,  and  abhors  it. 
These  facts  will  be  of  interest  and  importance  to  the  generations  that  are  unborn,  even 
to  the  end  of  time. 

IV.  That  this  calamity  was  inflicted  by  the  most  insignifioant  of  God's 
cbbatdbes.  "  That  which  the  palmer-worm  hath  left  hath  the  locust  eaten ;  and  that 
which  the  locust  hath  left  hath  the  canker-worm  eaten ;  and  that  which  the  canker- 
worm  hath  left  hath  the  caterpillar  eaten."  There  is  no  authority  for  the  opinion  tliat 
the  creatures  here  mentioned  were  symbols  of  hostile  armies  who  were  about  to  invade 
Judah.'  The  locust  belongs  to  the  genus  of  insects  known  amongst  entomologists 
as  gryllii,  which  include  the  different  species,  from  the  common  grasshopper  to  the 
devouring  locusts  of  the  East.  The  creatures,  therefore,  mentioned  in  the  verse  seem 
to  be  from  different  species  of  locusts  rather  than  from  different  kinds  of  insects.  And 
the  words  may  be  paraphrased,  "  That  which  one  swarm  of  locusts  hath  left,  a  second 
swarm  hath  eaten ;  and  that  which  the  second  swarm  hath  left,  a  third. swarm  hath 
eaten ;  and  that  which  the  third  left,  a  fourth  swarm  hath  eaten."  To  punish  sinner.s, 
God  does  not  require  to  hurl  thunderbolts  from  his  throne,  or  flash  lightnings,  or 
despatch  Gabriels  from  his  heavens.    No;  he  can  make  insects  do  it.     He  can  kill 

'  For  a  description  of  these  locusts,  etc.,  see  the  Biblical  Diotionaries,  eithei  Smith's, 
Fairbaiiu'B,  or  Kitto's. 


CH.  1. 1— 20.]  THE   BOOK  OF  JOEL.  17 

men  by  a  moth.     He  can  smite  a  nation  by  a  gust  of  wind.     He  can  perform  hia 
purposes  by  an  army  of  locusts  as  easily  as  by  a  hienirchy  of  angels. — D.  T. 

Ver.  5. — A  call  to  drunkards.  "  Awake,  ye  drunkards,  and  weep !  and  howl,  all 
ye  drinkers  of  wine,  because  of  the  new  wine !  ibr  it  is  out  off  from  your  mouth."  The 
words  imply  that  the  wine  used  in  Judah.  was  of  an  intoxicating  character,  that  men 
in  that  country  used  it  to  an  inebriating  extent,  and  that  such  men  should  humble 
themselves  in  deep  penitence  on  account  of  the  great  calamity  that  was  coming  upon 
the  lanil.  A  more  contemptible  character,  a  more  injurious  member  of  the  human 
family,  exists  not  upon  earth  than  a  drunkard.  Drunkenness  is  the  chief  curse  of 
England  to-day.  Despite  the  earnest  and  praiseworthy  efforts  of  temptv;ince  reformers, 
establishments  for  creating  and  supplying  the  intoxicating  beverage  are  increasing  in 
size  and  multiplying  in  number  on  all  hands.  The  beer-house  has  become  one  of  the 
most  influential  estates  of  the  realm.  A  lew  years  ago  there  were  only  three  estates — 
the  throne.  Parliament,  and  the  Church.  Not  long  since  journalism  was  added  to 
the  number,  and  now  we  must  add  the  beer-house.  This  beer-house  bids  fair  to 
control  the  House  of  Commons,  sport  with  Cabinets,  and  even  to  govern  the  nation. ' 
The  prophet  here  thunders  in  the  ears  of  the  drtmkards  of  his  country.  Why  should 
these  drunkards  now  weep? 

I.  Because  they  were  to  be  deprived  op  the  blessing  thby  prized  the  most. 
What  does  the  drunkard  value  most  ?  'i'he  intoxicating  cup.  For  this  he  will  sell  his 
country,  his  self-respect,  his  health,  his  wife,  his  children,  his  all.  By  the  intoxicatins; 
cup  you  can  buy  him  over  to  any  cause.  But  these  drunkards  in  Judah  were  to  lose 
that.  Joel  says, "  For  it  is  cut  off  from  your  mouth."  The  locusts  were  to  destroy  the 
vine,  and  there  would  be  no  grapes,  and  theiefoie  no  wine.  God  will  sooner  or  later 
take  from  every  sitmer  that  which  he  values  most,  that  which  he  esteems  his  greatest 
jileasure  or  enjoyment.  He  will  take  power  from  the  ambiiious,  wealth  from  the  miser, 
pleasure  from  the  voluptuary,  the  intoxicating  cnp  from  the  drunkard. 

II.  Because  they  were  to  lose  the  Br.EssiNa  thby  had  abused.  God  will  not 
have  his  gifts  abused.  He  who  abuses  his  blessings  shall  inevitably  lose  them.  He 
dried  up  the  vine  now  in  Judah  because  men  had  abused  it.  And  I  am  disposed  to 
think  it  would  be  a  blessed  thing  for  England,  ay,  and  a  blessed  thing  for  drunkards, 
were  all  the  spirit-distilleries,  all  the  breweries,  all  the  beer-hoise^,  dried  up  as  this 
vine  now  was.  I  scarcely  know  which  is  the  worse,  the  drunkard  or  the  drunkard- 
makers. 

Conclusion.  "  Awake,  ye  drunkards  I "  Awake  from  your  sottish  stupidity !  Reflect 
upon  what  you  are,  and  what  a  self-ruinous  course  you  are  pursuing.  Awake  1  You 
are  sleeping  on  the  bosom  of  a  volcanic  hill  about  to  burst  and  engulf  you.  "  And 
weep."  Because  of  the  blessings  you  have  abused,  because  of  the  injuries  you  have 
inflicted  upon  your  own  natures  as  well  as  others ;  weep  because  of  the  sins  you  have 
committed  against  yourself,  society,  and  God.  "  Howl,- all  ye  drinkers  of  wine ! "  Ah  ! 
if  )'ou  were  aware  of  your  true  situation,  you  would  howl  indeed — ^howl  out  your  soul 
in  confession  and  prayer. 

**  O  thon  invisible  spirit  of  wine. 
If  thou  hast  no  name  to  be  known  by,  let 
Ub  call  thee  devil." 

(Shakespeare.) 

D.  T. 

Vers.  19,  20. — The  influence  of  national  calamities  on  the  minds  of  the  good.  "0 
Lord,  to  thee  will  I  cry,"  etc.  In  the  verses  extending  from  the  sixth  to  the  eighteenth, 
the  prophet  described  with  great  vividness  and  force  the  attributes  of  these  "  locusts  " 
and  the  terrible  devastations  they  would  effect,  and  he  called  upon  various  members  of 
the  community  to  attend  to  the  calamity.  The  old  men  and  the  young  people,  the 
drunkards  and  the  farmers,  the  priests  and  the  laity,  all  are  summoned  to  reflection, 
penitence,  and  reform.  Here  he  cries  out  to  the  Lord  himself  on  account  of  the  calamity, 
which  he  describes  with  reraaikable  force.  "The  fire  hath  devoured  the  pastures  of 
the  wilderness,  and  the  flame  hath  burned  all  the  trees  of  the  field."  It  is  a  question 
whether  the  fire  and  flame  are  to  be  taken  literally  as  burning  the  grass,  which  <^t«n 

WEL.  0 


18 


THE   BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  n,  1— 3a 


happens  in  extreme  heat,  or  whetlier  they  are  used  figuratively.  The  reference,  I  think, 
is  to  the  burning  heat  in  drought  which  consumes  the  meadows,  scorches  the  trees, 
nnd  dries  up  the  water-hrooks.  Our  subject  is  the  influence  of  national  calamities  on 
the  rtdnds  of  the  good.  The  effect  on  Joel  was  to  excite  him  to  prayer,  to  compel  him 
to  lay  the  case  before  the  Lord.  Having  called  the  attention  of  all  classes  of  the 
community  to  the  terrible  judgments,  he  turns  his  soul  in  a  devout  supplication  to 
Almighty  Go^. 

I.  This  was  bight.  "  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  we  should  make 
known  our  wants  to  God."  Prayer  is  right :  1.  Ood  requires  it,  "  For  all  these  things 
will  I  be  inquired  of ;"  "Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,"  etc.  2.  Christ  engaged  in  it.  He 
prayed,  prayed  often,  prayed  earnestly,  prayed  "  without  ceasing."    He  is  our  Example. 

II.  This  WAS  wise.  Who  else  could  remove  the  calamity  and  restore  the  ruin? 
None.  All  men  were  utterly  helpless.  When  all  earthly  resources  fail,  where  else  can 
we  go  but  to  him  who  originates  all  that  is  good,  and  controls  all  that  is  evil  ?  True 
prayer  is  always  wise,  because  (1)  it  seeks  the  highest  good ;  (2)  by  the  best  means. 

,  III.  This  was  natubal.  "  The  beasts  of  the  field  cry  also  unto  thee."  "  The 
young  lions  roar  after  their  prey,  and  seek  their  meat  from  God."  "  What  better," 
says  an  old  author,  "  are  they  than  beasts,  who  never  cry  to  God  but  for  corn  and 
wine,  and  complain  of  nothing  but  the  wants  of  sense  ?  " 

Conclusion.  It  is  well  when  our  trials  lead  us  in  prayer  to  God.  The  greatest 
calamities  are  termed  the  greatest  blessings  when  they  act  thus.  Hail  the  tempests, 
if  they  drive  our  bark  into  the  quiet  haven  of  prayer. 

"  There's  a  power  which  man  can  wield. 

When  mortal  aid  is  vain. 
That  eye,  that  arm,  that  love,  to  leaoh. 

That  listening  ear  to  gain : 
That  power  is  prayer,  which  soars  on  high, 
And  feeds  on  bliss  beyond  the  sky." 


D.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  n. 


Vers.  1 — 11. — These  verses  contain  a 
further  description  of  the  calamity  occa- 
sioned by  the  locusts  and  the  appearance 
presented  by  them;  the  calling  of  a  con- 
gregational meeting  for  penitence  and 
prayer ;  the  reason  assigned  in  the  coming 
of  the  day  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  1. — Blow  ye  the  trumpet  (margin, 
cornet)  in  Zion,  and  sound  an  alarm  (or, 
cause  U  to  sound)  in  my  holy  mountain. 
The  shophar,  or  far-sounding  horn,  and 
probably  the  chatsots  rah,  the  Itazar  or  silver 
trumpet,  were  calUd  into  requisition.  The 
priests  are  urged  with  great  vehemence,  as 
tiqu  shophar  and  hariv,  imply,  to  apprise  the 
people  that  the  day  of  Jehovah's  terrible 
judgment  was  near  at  hand,  and  to  prepare 
for  it.  This  alarm  was  to  be  sounded  from 
Zion,  the  dry  or  sunny  hill,  the  holy  moun- 
tain. The  noun  qadoah,  like  teadiq,  is  ap- 
plied to  persons,  therefore  the  noun  qodshe  is 
used.  It  rose  to  an  elevation  of  253U  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea. 
It  was  the  place  of  the  ark  in  David's  day, 
and  so  of  the  visible  symbol  of  the  Divine 
presence,  and  therefore  the  holy  mountain, 


though  subsequently  Moriah  was  chosen  as 
the  temple-hill.  Let  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  laud  tremble :  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
Cometh,  for  it  is  nigh  at  hand.  The  effect 
here  precedes  the  cause,  as  if  what  is  upper- 
most in  the  heart  comes  first  to  the  lips ; 
while  the  abruptness  may,  perhaps,  express 
the  excitement  and  intensity  of  feeling. 
But  how  could  the  Lord's  day  be  said  to 
hare  come  (6o  is  perfect),  and  yet  to  be  near 
at  hand?  Hengstenberg  replies  that,  in 
the  intuition  of  the  prophet,  it  had  already 
come,  though  in  reality  it  vas  only  drawing 
near.  Keil's  solution-  of  the  difficulty  is 
more  satisfactory :  every  particular  judg- 
ment that  takes  place  in  the  history  of  God's 
kingdom  is  the  day  of  the  Lord,  and  yet 
only  approaching  as  far  as  the  complete 
fulfilment  was  concerned. 

Ver.  2. — A  day  of  darkness  and  of  gloomi- 
ness, a  day  of  clouds  and  of  thick  darkness. 
It  was,  indeed,  a  day  of  Divine  judgment, 
a  day  of  sore  distress.  Besides  the  common 
terms  for  "  darkness "  and  "  cloud,"  there 
aie  two  other  terms,  rhm,  thick  and  dense 
darkness,  such  as  ensues  after  sunset ;  the 
root  haH,  though  not  used  in  the  Hebrew, 
is  cognate  with  the  Arabic  a/ala,  properly. 


cii.  It.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF   JOEL. 


19 


to  "set  as  the  sun;"  oompiire  nafhal, 
nahhal,  abhal;  wliile  hiny  is  blended  from 
the  triliterals  <^ny,  a  cloud,  and  hs^,  to  be 

dark  (compare  op<pvos  and  oppuii),  darkness 
of  clouds,  thick  clouds.  (1)  Some  under- 
stand this  darkness  literally,  as  in  the 
desoriptidu  of  the  plague  of  locusts  in 
Egypt  it  is  written,  "They  covered  the 
face  of  the  whole  earth,  so  that  the  land 
was  darkened."  (2)  Others  understand  it 
figuratively,  as  light  denotes  prosperity,  and 
darkness  adversity.  Thus  Kimchi  says, 
"  Affliction  is  likened  to  darkness,  as  joy  is 
likened  to  light."  At  the  same  time,  he 
m(  ntions  the  literal  exposition:  "Or,"  he 
says,  "  through  the  multitude  of  the  locusts 
the  land  is  darkened ;  "  and  refers  to  Exod. 
X.  15,  "For  they  covered  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth,  so  that  the  land  was  darkened." 
As  the  morning  spread  upon  the  mountains, 
(1)  Some  explain  this  of  the  locust-army 
stretching  far  like  the  morning  light,  as  it 
breaks  over  the  hills.  Thus  Pococke,  "  If 
ehachar  be  rendered,  as  most  generally,  the 
morning,  and  the  light  thereof  meant,  then 
the  meaning  thereof  seems  to  express  the 
sudden  coming  and  the  widespread  ing  of 
the  thing  spoken  of,  so  as  not  to  be  hindered, 
in  that  resembling  the  morning  light,  which 
in  a  moment  discovers  itself  on  the  tops  of 
the  mountains  (on  which  it  first  appearetli), 
though  at  never  so  great  a  distance  one 
from  another."  The  wide  and  quick  diffu- 
eion  of  this  plague,  like  that  of  the  morning 
light,  is  tlie  thing  meant.  But  (2)  Keil 
understands  shachar  of  the  yellow  light 
which  proceeds  from  swarms  of  locusts  as 
they  approach,  and  translates,  "  Like  morn- 
ing dawn  spread  over  the  mountains  is  it " 
(i.e.  the  glimmer  on  their  wings).  "  The 
prophet's  meaning,"  he  adds,  "is  evident 
enough  from  what  follows.  He  clearly 
refers  to  the  bright  glimmer,  or  splendour, 
which  is  seen  In  the  sky  as  a  swarm  of 
locusts  approaches,  from  the  reflection  of 
the  sun's  rays  fiom  their  wings."  Thus  the 
subject  is  neither  yom  not  'am,  which  the 
Vulgate,  contrary  to  the  accents,  joins  to  it. 
(i!)  Others,  again,  connect  tlie  expression 
dosely  with  the  "darkness"  preceding, 
and  translate,  "  Like  the  morning  twilight 
Bfiread  upon  the  mountains,"  that  is,  before 
it  descends  into  the  valleys.  Eatlier,  as 
Wiinsche,  "  Like  the  gray  of  the  morn- 
ing," etc.  (comp.  Exod.  x.  15  and  ninBi  and 
■nn'tsf).  Exposition  (1)  is  confirmed  by 
Rashi,  who  says,  "The  locusts  and  the 
palmer-worms  are  spread  over  the  mountains, 
as  the  morning  dawn  is  spread  through 
(in)  all  the  world."  Similarly  Aben  Ezra, 
"  Like  the  dawn  which  is  diffused  in  an 
instant."  Kimchi's  comment  is  fuller,  but 
to  the  siime  effect ;  "  As  the  morning  dawn 


which  is  spread  over  the  mountains  as  in  an 
instant,  for  there  is  called  the  beginning  of 
the  sun  in  his  going  forth,  because  of  tlieir 
height ;  bo  then  the  locusts  are  spread  and 
extended  over  the  land  in  an  instant."  With 
this  exposition  of  the  clause  we  may  com- 
pare Virgil's — 

"Postera   vix   summos   spargebat    Inmine 
montes 
Orta  dies." 

"  The  following  daybreak  had  scarce  begun 
to  BOW  the  mountain-tops  with  light." 

There  hath  not  been  ever  the  like,  neither 
shall  be  any  more  after  it,  even  to  the  years 
of  many  generations.  This  is  a  hyperbolic 
mode  of  speech,  to  denote  the  extraordinary 
and  unusual  severity  of  the  disaster.  The 
Hebrew  commentators  are  at  pains  to  recon- 
cile what  appears  to  them  a  discrepancy. 
They  say,  "  It  was  never  known  before  or 
since  that  four  kinds  of  locusts  came  to- 
together  ; "  as  for  the  plague  of  Egypt,  tlieie 
was  but  one  sort  of  them,  they  say.  The 
correct  explanation  is  that  the  like  had  not- 
been  in  the  tame  country,  that  isj  the  land 
of  Judaja,  though  elsewhere  there  might 
have  been  the  like,  as  in  Egypt  before,  or 
in  other  countiies  since. 

Ver.  3. — A  fire  devoureth  before  them; 
and  behind  them  a  flame  hnmeth.  (1)  The 
fire  was  the  extreme  drought  preceding 
them ;  and  the  flame  refers  to  the  devasta- 
tion of  the  locusts,  for  the  places  laid  waste 
by  them  presented  the  appearance  of  being 
burnt  with  fire,  the  locusts  conisuming  not 
only  the  grain  and  grass,  but  the  very  roots. 
(2)  Or  it  may  refer  to  the  locusts  themselves ; 
their  destructive  power  being  as  though  iire 
spread  along  before  them,  and  flame  swept 
the  ground  behind  them.  (3)  Or  the  fire 
may  have  been  literally  such,  the  people,  in 
self-defence,  kindling  it  to  stop,  or  turn  aside, 
or  drive  away  the  advance  of  the  locust- 
army.  (4)  Keil  explains  this  burning  heat, 
heightened  into  devouring  flames  of  tire,  as 
accompaniments  of  the  Divine  Being  "as 
he  comes  to  judgment  at  the  head  of  his 
army,"  like  the  balls  of  fire  whioli  attended 
his  manifestation  in  Egypt,  and  the  tiiunder 
and  lightning  amid  which  he  descended  at 
Sinai.  The  land  is  as  the  garden  of  £den 
before  them,  and  behind  them  a  desolate 
wilderness.  This  reference  by  the  first  of 
the  prophets  to  the  first  book  of  the  Dible 
is  noteworthy.  The  country  before  them, 
with  its  fertile  fields  and  valuable  vineyards, 
its  fruit  trees,  and  pleasant  plants,  and 
various  cereals  resembled  a  paradise.  As 
they  proceeded  the  corn  was  consumed,  fruit 
trees  and  forest  trees  alike  stripped  of 
loaves  and  left  barked  and  bare,  the  grass 
an'l  verdtu-e  withered;  so  that  after  them 


20 


THE  BOOK   OF  JOEL. 


[cH.  n.  1—32. 


notbing  was  to  be  seeu  but  a  desolate  wilder- 
ness. Yeai  and  nothing  shall  escape  them. 
(1)  That  is,  either  nothing  shall  escape  the 
locusts ;  or  (2)  Keil  contends  that  the  mean- 
ing is  that  "  even  that  which  escaped  did 
not  remain  to  it,"  and  refers  lo  to  the  land. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — These  verses  describe  the 
appearance  of  the  locusts  and  tlie  alarm 
which  their  presence  causes. 

Yer.  4. — The  appearance  of  them  is  as 
the  appearance  of  horses.  They  are  said 
to  resemble  horses  in  the  shape  of  the  head  ; 
hence  the  Germans  call  them  Heupferde,  or 
hay-horses,  and  the  Italians  cavalette.  This 
resemblance  had  been  noticed  long  ago  by 
Theodoret,  who  says,  "  If  any  one  should 
examine  accurately  the  head  of  the  iooust, 
he  will  find  it  exceedingly  like  that  of  a 
horse."  And  as  horsemen,  so  shall  they 
ran.  In  rapidity  of  motion  they  resembled 
running  horses  ( parashim).  Zike  the  noise 
of  chariots  on  the  tops  of  mountains  shall 
they  leap.  This  is  the  next  circumsttmce 
noticed  about  them,  viz.  the  noise  of  their 
.  motion.  Their  motion  was  peculiar ;  it  was 
springing  or  leaping,  and,  when  they  sprang 
or  leaped,  the  noise  they  made  resembled 
the  rattling  of  a  jerky  two-wheeUd  war- 
chariot  over  a  rough  mountain-road. 

Ver.  5. — The  first  clause  may  be  under- 
stood (1)  according  to  the  Authorized  Ver- 
sion, whereby  the  leaping  is  attributed  to  the 
loer.sts  or  (2)  asper  may  be  understood  after 
chariots,  and  then  the  leaping  is  predicated 
of  the  chariots.  The  last  clause  of  the  sumo 
verse  is  capable  of  three  constructions, 
namely  (1)  "They  shall  leap  (yeraqg'dim 
being  supplied)  as  a  strong  people  set  in 
battle  array ; "  or  (2)  "  The  noise  (qol  under- 
stood) shall  be  as  the  noise  of  a  strong  people 
set  in  battle  array ; "  or  (3)  "  They  are  as  a 
strong  people  set  in  battle  array."  Kimchi 
interprets  according  to  (2),  "As  a  strong 
people  that  is  set  in  array  to  figlit  with  the 
people  who  is  opposed  to  them,  who  make  a 
great  noise  and  shouting  in  order  to  sti  ike 
terror  into  their  enemies."  Like  the  noise 
of  a  flame  of  fire  that  devoureth  the  stnbble. 
This  was  the  noise  made  by  them,  not  when 
they  were  properly  in  motion,  but  when 
alighting  on  a  district  they  devoured  every 
green  thing  in  plant,  or  shrub,  or  tree — the 
noise,  in  fact,  wliich  they  made  when  feeding. 
It  resembled  the  craokiing  of  flame  over  a 
field  of  grain  or  stubble  set  on  fire.  Such 
was  the  noise  they  made  when  marching, 
and  such  the  noise  they  made  when  foraging 
— the  one  was  like  the  rattling  of  a  chariot, 
the  other  the  crackling  of  fire.  Cyril  notices 
tills  peculiarit/  as  follows :  "  They  say  that 
their  aliglitiug  in  the  fields  is  effected  not 
without  noise ;  but  that  a  certain  shrill 
noi&e  is  produced  by  their  teeth,  while  they 
chew  into  p'.eces  the  prostrate  grain,  as  of 


wind  scattering  flame.''  Thus  Thomson 
also  says,  "  The  noise  made  in  marching 
and  foraging  was  like  that  of  a  heavy  shower 
on  a  distant  forest."  As  a  strong  people 
set  in  battle  array.  Their  progress  is  thus 
described:  "Their  steady  though  swift 
advance  and  regular  order  resembled  an 
army  well  equipped  and  in  battle  array  on 
its  line  of  march."  Cyril  says  of  them, 
"  By  reason  of  their  innumerable  multitude, 
not  easy  to  be  encountered,  but  rather  very 
dangerous  to  be  met  with."  Again  he  says, 
"  They  are  an  irresistible  thing,  and  alto- 
gether invincible  by  men."  Here  again 
the  prophet's  description  is  confirmed  by 
the  observation  of  intelligent  eye-witnesses. 
Referring  to  Solomon's  statement,  "  The 
locusts  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  forth  all 
of  them  by  bands,"  Dr.  Thomson  says, 
"  Nothing  in  their  habits  is  more  striking 
than  the  pertinacity  with  which  they  all 
pursue  the  same  line  of  march,  like  a  dis- 
ciplined army.  As  they  have  no  king, 
they  must  be  influenced  by  some  common 
instinct." 

Ver.  6.—  Before  their  face  the  people  shall 
he  mnch  pained :  all  faces  shall  gather  black- 
ness. Peoples  or  nations  writhe  in  pain  or 
tremble  at  the  sight  of  them,  lest  they  should 
settle  on  their  fields  and  gardens,  destroy- 
ing the  "  golden  glories  "  of  the  one,  and  the 
"  leafy  honours "  of  the  other.  In  the 
second  member  the  word  inss  is  (1)  gene- 
rally connected  with  ^^B,  a  pot,  rad.  ^^s,  to 
break  in  pieces,  and  translated  accordingly. 
Thus  the  Septuagint:  "  Every  face  is  as 
the  blackness  of  a  pot ; "  the  Syriao  also : 
"  Every  face  shall  be  black  as  the  blackness 
of  a  pot ; "  in  like  manner  the  Chaldee  : 
"All  faces  are  covered  with  soot,  so  that 
they  are  black  as  a  pot."  (2)  But  Aben 
Ezra  connects  the  word  with  ^^«s,  to  beau- 
tify, glorify,  adorn,  and  translates,  "They 
withdraw  (gather  to  themselves)  their  red- 
ness (ruddiness);"  that  is,  they  become 
pale.  The  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  adopts 
this  view  of  the  expression,  and  illustrates 
it  by  Shakespeare's  fancy  of  the  blood  being 
summoned  from  the  face  to  help  the  heart 
in  its  death-struggle — 

"  Being  all  descended  to  the  labouring  heart ; 
Who,  in  the  conflict  that  it  holds  with 

death, 
Attracts  the  same  for  aidance  'gainst  the 

enemy : 
Wiiich  with  the  heart  there  cools  and  ne'er 

returneth 
To  blush  and  beautify  the  obeek  again." 

The  parallel  usually  cited  in  favour  of  asaph 
being  employed  in  the  sense  of  wUhdraiving 
is,  "And  the  stars  shall  witlidraw  their 
shining  "  (ch.  ii.  10  ;  iii.  16).    This  proceeds 


oil,  n.  1—32.] 


TllE  BOOK  Of  JOEL, 


21 


on  the  supposition  that  asayh  and  qdbhatg 
have  the  same  meaning  of  "  gathering  " — 
gathering  up,  gathering  in,  withdrawing. 
Bat  D.  Kimchi  quotes  his  father  (Joseph 
Kimchi)  as  objecting  to  this  rendering,  on 
the  ground  of  the  distinction  wliich  he 
asserts  to  prevail  between  them.  Asaph, 
he  says,  "  is  used  of  gathering  together,  or 
in,  that  which  is  dispersed,  or  not  present ; 
but  qabhats  is  not  so  used." 

Vers.  7 — 9. — The  prophet,  having  men- 
tioned the  consternation  and  terror  occa- 
sioned by  the  approach  of  locusts,  proceeds 
to  compare  tiiem  to  an  army  well  equipped 
and  overcoming  all  impediments. 

Ver.  7. — They  shall  run  like  mighty  men. 
This  either  refers  to  their  extreme  nimble- 
uess  or  rapidity  of  motion  (compare  the 
Homeric  ir65as  wKbs  *Ax*AA.6t5s,  TroddpKTiSy 
and  the  like),  or  describes  their  running  to 
an  assault  with  intrepid  valour  and  un- 
wearied vigour.  They  shall  olimb  the  wall 
like  men  of  war.  This  marks  the  success 
of  their  assault;  they  scale  the  walls  and 
make  good  their  attack.  And  they  shall 
march  every  one  on  his  ways,  and  they  shall 
not  break  their  ranks.  Their  march  is  as 
irresistible  as  it  is  orderly.  In  their  on- 
ward march  each  pursues  his  way,  allowing 
no  obstacle  to  arrest  or  retard  his  course ; 
while  in  a  collective  body  tliey  proceed  and 
maintain  tlieir  serried  ranks  unbroken.  The 
verb  azy  is  probably  cognate  with  naj),  to 
twist,  and  thus  to  turn  aside.  Thus  the 
LXX. :  "They  shall  not  turn  aside  their 
tracks ; "  so  also  the  Syriao  and  Jerome 
translate  it;  but  the  Chaldee  compares  it 
with  BUj;,  a  pledge,  and,  as  the  deposit  is 
detained  till  the  pledge  is  redeemed,  takes 
in  the  meaning  of  delay.  Eosenmiiller  ex- 
plains it  in  the  sense  of  change  or  ex- 
change, from  the  Qal,  signifying  "to  receive 
on  loan,"  and  tlie  Hiph.,  "  to  give  on  loan." 
Otherwise  it  is  to  "  interweave  "  (equivalent 
to  nnj)),  "  change."  The  sense  of  the  whole 
is  their  not  diverging  to  either  side,  nor 
straggling  out  of  rank. 

Yer.  8. — Neither  shall  one  thrust  another; 
they  shall  walk  every  one  in  his  path.  "  And 
not  one  shall  stand  aloof  from  bis  brother." 
This  is  either  the  sequence  of  their  not  break- 
ing rank,  or  perhaps  it  is  a  co-ordinate  par- 
ticular in  the  detail.  They  neither  straggle 
away  from  each  other,  and  so  fall  out  of  rank, 
nor  do  they  crowd  and  crush  and  press  each 
other  while  keeping  rank.  The  order  of 
their  march  is  pertiect,  every  one  keeping 
his  proper  place  and  in  the  proper  path. 
And  when  they  fall  upon  the  sword  (margin, 
dart),  they  shall  not  be  wounded.  The 
meaning  is  either  (1)  that  the  weapons  shall 
not  wound  them,  or  intransitively,  as  in  the 
text,  they  shall  not  be  wounded,  ysa,  to 
cut,  or  break  in  pieces,  being  here  synony- 


mous with  psB,  to  wound ;  or  (2)  tliat  tJiey 
do  not  cut  off,  break  off,  or  inteiTupt  their 
course.  No  force  of  arms  can  stay  their 
progress  or  stop  their  advance.  On  this 
clause  Kimchi  remarks,  "  This  army  is  not 
like  other  enemies,  which  you  may  hinder 
by  the  sword  from  coming  upon  you ;  but 
tliese  light  upon  the  swords,  and  are  not 
wounded  by  reason  of  their  lightness."  He 
also  remarks  on  Xii,  "Because  he  com- 
pares them  with  men  and  heroes,  he  uses 
t2i,  although  this  word  does  not  apply 
except  to  the  sons  of  men." 

Yer.  9.— They  shall  run  to  and  fro  in  the 
oity  (or  rush  to  the  assault  of  the  city. 
Wunsche,  and  so  LXX.,  "  They  shall  seize 
upon  the  city  "} ;  they  shall  run  upon  the 
wall,  they  shall  climb  up  upon  the  houses ; 
they  shall  enter  in  at  the  windows  like  a 
thief.  In  the  first  clause  the  comparison 
with  an  army  still  continues.  The  attack  has 
succeeded,  the  city  has  been  taken  by  assault, 
the  victorious  troops  are  running  to  and  fro 
in  the  oity ;  so  far  the  locusts  are  fitly  repre- 
sented by  an  army  vigorous  in  its  advance, 
steady  in  its  march,  resistless  in  its  assault, 
victorious  in  its  attack,  and  masters  of  the 
captured  city.  The  remainder  of  the  ninth 
verse  is  not  equally  applicable  to  the  figure 
and  the  fact  in  common,  but  belongs  exclu- 
sively to  the  locusts  themselves ;  they  creep 
up  the  wall,  climb  up  upon  the  houses,  and 
find  inf;ress  even  at  the  windows.  "  There 
is  no  road,"  says  Jerome,  "impassable  to 
locusts :  they  penetrate  into  fields,  and  crops, 
and  trees,  and  cities,  and  even  the  recesses 
of  the  bedchambers ; "  while  Theodoret  re- 
marks of  locusts  that "  not  only  when  flying, 
but  by  cri  e[iing  along  the  walls,  they  pass 
through  the  windows  into  the  houses  them- 
selves." Thus  there  was  no  spot  to  which 
they  could  not  find  access,  and  no  place 
secure  from  their  assault.  Yashnqqu.  Aben 
Ezra  and  Kimchi  both  connect  this  word 
with  shoq,  a  leg.  The  latter  says,  "  It  hag 
the  signitication  of  ehoq,  a  leg,  and  he  men- 
tions this  word  in  respect  to  tlie  locust, 
because  its  legs  are  long;  and  further,  be- 
cause it  is  continually  going  and  seldom 
resting;  and  thus  he  (Isaiah)  says,  'As  tlie 
running  to  and  fro  of  locusts  shall  he  run 
upon  them,'  as  if  he  said, '  a  continual  going 
up  and  down.' " 

Yers.  10,  11. — These  verses  picture  tho 
dreadful  consequences  of  the  then  present 
and  temporary  visitation  of  the  locusts,  and 
of  the  future  and  final  judgment  of  which 
it  was  a  type.  The  earth  shall  quake  before 
them ;  (1)  the  locusts.  The  heavens  tremble. 
The  alighting  of  the  locusts  on  the  earth 
would  make  it  quake,  and  their  flight 
through  the  heavens  would  make  it  tre- 
mulous. As  applied  to  the  visitation  of 
locusts,  the  language  would  be  hyperbolical. 


22 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


[cH.  u.  1—32. 


unless  we  accept  Jerome's  explanation  as 
follows :  "  It  U  not  that  the  strength  of  the 
locusts  is  so  great  that  they  can  move  the 
heavens  and  shake  the  earth,  but  that  to 
tliose  who  suffer  from  such  calamities,  from 
the  amount  of  their  own  terror  the  heavens 
appear  to  shake  and  the  earth  to  reel."  (2) 
Before  him;  i.e.  Jehovah  himself  amid  the 
Sturm ;  and  all  in  aooord:inoe  with  fact.  But 
a  greater  judgment  than  that  of  the  locusts 
is  typified  hy  the  language  of  the  prophet. 
Kimchi  observes  on  this  (tenth)  verse  that 
"  all  the  expressions  are  parabolical,  or  figu- 
rative, to  set  forth  the  greatness  of  a  cala- 
mity ;  for  this  is  the  usage  of  Scripture,  as, 
'  'J'lie  sun  shall  be  darkened  in  his  going 
forth,'  and  the  like."  So  also  Abarbanel 
on  this  verse :  "  Wldeh  all  is  a  parabolical 
expression  of  the  calamities  of  the  Jews." 
Aben  ~  Ezra  underotanJs  it  differently : 
"  Men  of  the  eai  thquake."  Eashi :  "  'I'he 
heavens  quake  and  tremble  because  of 
the  punibliment  that  comes  upon  Israel." 
The  second  part  of  the  verse,  as  also  the 
verse  following,  appear  to  us  to  indicate 
this.  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be  dark, 
and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining : 
and  the  Xord  shall  utter  his  voice  before  his 
army.  That  a  storm  succeeded  and  put 
an  end  to  the  plague  of  locusts,  and  that 
the  darkening  of  the  sun  and  ,moon  and 
stars  signified  the  obscuration  of  the  heavenly 
luminaries  by  the  storm-clouds  that  over- 
spread the  heavens  and  darkened  the  face 
of  day,  would  fall  short  of  expressions  of 
such  solemn  grandeur  as  are  here  employed 
by  the  prophet.  Besides,  our  Lord  applies 
language  of  the  same  impDrt  to  the  last 
judgment  in  the  Gospels:  "The  sun  shall 
be  darkened,  and  the  moon  shall  not  give 
her  light,  and  the  stars  shall  fall  from 
i.eaven,  and  the  powers  of  the  heavens  shall 
be  shaken  :  and  then  shall  appear  the  sign 
of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven."  Thunder, 
no  doubt,  is  tlie  voice  of  the  Lord,  which 
he  utters  while  marching  at  the  Iiead  of 
his  army  to  LXecute  judgment  and  manifest 
his  wrath  against  his  enemies.  For  Ms 
camp  is  very  great;  for  he  is  strong  that 
exeouteth  his  word :  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
is  great  and  very  terrible ;  and  who  can 
abide  it  1  Three  reasons  «re  here  assigned 
for  the  preceding  sublime  description  of 
Jehovah  coming  to  judgment  at  the  head 
of  his  hosts.  These  are  the  following:  the 
greatness  of  his  army  in  number  and  might; 
the  power  with  which  his  army  executes  his 
word  of  command ;  and  the  terrible  character 
of  the  day  of  judgment  when  the  vials  of 
Divine  wrath  shall  be  poured  forth. 

Vers.  12^-14. — The  judgment  of  the  locusts 
was  typical  of  the  great  day  of  judgment. 
The  terrors  of  that  day  were  designed  to 


bring  the  people  to  repentance.    Thus  judg- 
ment was  mingled  with  mercy. 

Ver.  12. — Turn  ye  even  to  me  with  all 
your  heai-t,  and  with  great  fasting,  and  with 
weeping,  and  with  mourning.  At  this  period 
of  sore  judgment  God,  by  the  prophet,  calls 
upon  the  people  to  return  and  repent,  to  fast 
and  to  weep,  to  grieve  inwardly  and  mourn 
outwardly  for  sin.  He  also  instructs  them 
how  to  engage  in  the  duty  of  humiliation 
aright  and  acceptably.  The  humiliation 
was  to  be  that  of  the  heart — sorrow  of  heart 
for  the  sins  by  which  they  had  offended 
God,  inward  sljame  on  account  of  those  ini- 
quities by  which  they  had  wronged  their 
own  souls  and  marred  their  own  best  in- 
terests. But  while  there  behoved  to  be  tliis 
inward  contrition,  outward  expressions  of  it 
were  also  required.  Genuine  sorrow  and 
shame  for  sin  were  to  be  accompanied  by 
fasting,  tears  of  penitence,  and  other  indica- 
tions of  mourning.  With  all  your  heart. 
Kimchi  comments  thus :  "  That  your  repent- 
ance be  not  with  a  heart  and  a  heart." 

Ver.  13. — And  rend  your  heart,  and  not 
your  garments,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  your 
God.  Wliere  there  is  real  contrition  of  spirit 
because  of  sin,  outward  manifestations  are 
both  suitable  and  proper,  though  not  by 
way  of  display  or  fol-  sake  of  ostentation. 
But  they  were  reminded,  on  the  other  liand, 
that  mere  outward  manifestations  avail  no- 
thing unless  there  also  exist  the  deep  inward 
feelings  which  are  in  harmony  with  and 
naturally  underlie  those  manifestations.  Out 
of  such  inward  feelings  those  outward  ex- 
pressions properly  originate ;  hence,  after 
the  exhortation  to  fasting  and  weeping  and 
mourning,  it  is  added,  "  Rend  your  heart, 
and  not  your  gaimeuts."  To  rend  the  gar- 
ments, among  the  Jews,  was  a  token  of  great 
grief,  and  imported  that  the  individual  who 
did  so  was  overwhelmed  with  excessive  sor- 
row, or  had  encountered  some  terrible  cala- 
mity. Thus  we  read  of  Jacob,  on  receiving 
his  son  Joseph's  coat  of  many  colours,  rend- 
ing his  clothes,  putting  sackcloth  on  his 
loins,  and  mourning  for  his  son  many  days 
(comp.  also  2  Oliron.  xxxiv.  27).  In  tliose 
instances  the  sorrow  was  deep  and  genuine 
and  bitter.  It  was  possible,  however,  to 
exhibit  the  external  signs  of  grief  without 
any  such  corresponding  inward  feeling  of 
sorrow;  just  as  it  is  slill  possible  for  men  to 
draw  near  to  God  with  their  lips  while  the 
heart  is  far  from  him.  To  prevent  suth 
hypocritical  pretence  they  are  commanded 
to  rend  their  hearts,  and  not  their  garments 
only.  There  was  no  impropriety  in  rending 
their  garments  in  token  of  great  grief  for 
sin  and  of  great  indignation  against  them- 
telves  for  their  folly,  but  the  command  im- 
ports that  they  were  uot  to  rest  in  the 


OH.  u.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


23 


outwarrl  sif^i  witliout  the  reality  of  the 
thing  signified.  For  he  is  gracious  and 
meroifol,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kind- 
ness, and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil.  To  the 
exhortation  he  subjoins  the  encouraging 
manifestation  of  the  Divine  character  ^USh 
which  God,  ages  befure,  had  favoured  Moses, 
substituting  for  "truth"  the  trait  of  cha- 
racter best  suited  to  the  present  emergency. 
He  is  not  an  absolute  God  or  an  inexorable 
God,  but  their  covenant  God  and  Father 
wlio  invites  them  even  to  himself,  against 
whom  they  had  so  heinously  sinned  and 
whom  they  had  so  grievously  offended. 

Ver.  14. — Who  knoweth  if  he  will  retnm 
and  repent ;  that  is,  return  from  and  repent 
of  his  purpose  of  executing  judgment.  And 
leave  a  blessing  behind  Mm;  that  is,  leave 
behind  him  when  returning  from  the  exer- 
cise of  judgment  to  resume  his  seat  on  the 
heavenly  throne,  the  blessing  being  a  re- 
placement of  the  harvest  fruits  which  the 
locusts  had  consumed,  even  a  meat  offering 
and  a  drink  offpring,  for  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary  as  well  as  sustenance  to  supply 
the  "people's  own  bodily  wants.  Jerome 
explains  the  question  of  ver.  14  with  much 
judgment  as  follows:  "Lest  perchance  they 
might  either  despair  on  accoupt  of  the  mag- 
nitude of  their  crimes,  or  the  greatness  of 
the  Divine  clemency  might  make  them  care- 
less." Besiiles  (I)  the  interrogative  render- 
ing, there  is  (2)  that  of  the  Ohaldee,  followed 
by  Bashi  and  Kimchi  Tbe  latter  says, "  He 
that  knows  the  way  of  repentance,  let  him 
repent,  and  God  will  repent  of  this  evil." 
Also  in  addition  to  (1),  that  is.  Authorized 
Version,  he  (i.e.  God)  "  sliall  leave  a  bless- 
ing," there  is  (2)  that  of  Eashi  and  Aben 
Ezra,  who  explain  as  follows :  "  Perhaps 
God  will  repent,  and  that  army  shall  leave 
a  blessing,  out  of  which  they  may  make  a 
meat  offering  and  a  drink  offering." 

Vers.  15—17.—"  The  harsh  blast  of  the 
consecrated  ram's  horn  called  an  assembly 
for  an  extraordinary  fast.  Not  a  soul  was 
to  be  absent.  Like  the  fiery  cross,  it  con- 
vened old  and  young,  men  and  women, 
mothers  with  infants  at  their  breasts,  the 
bridegroom  and  the  bride  on  their  bridal 
day.  All  were  there  stretched  in  front  of 
the  altar.  The  altar  itself  presented  the 
dreariest  of  all  sights — a  hearth  without  its 
sacred  fire,  a  table  spread  without  its  sacred 
feast.  The  priestly  caste,  instead  of  gather- 
ing as  usual  upon  its  steps  and  its  platform, 
were  driven,  as  it  were,  to  the  further  space; 
they  turned  their  backs  to  the  deqiil  altar, 
and  lay  prostrate,  gazing  towards  tlie  In- 
visible Presence  within  the  sanctuary.  In- 
stead of  the  hymns  aud  music  which,  since 
the  time  of  David,  liad  entered  into  their 
prayers,  there  was  nothing  lieard  but  the 
passionate    sobs    aud   the    loud    dissonant 


howls  such  as  only  an  Eastern  hierarchy 
could  utter.  Instead  of  tl;e  mass  of  white 
mantles  which  they  usually  presented,  they 
were  wrapt  in  black  goat's-hair  sackcloth, 
twisted  round  them,  not  with  tlie  brilliant 
sashes  of  the  priestly  attire,  but  with  a 
rough  girdle  of  the  same  texture,  which 
they  never  unbound  night  or  day.  What 
they  wore  of  their  common  dross  was  rent 
asunder  or  cast  off.  With  bare  breasts  they 
waved  their  black  drapery  towards  the 
temple,  aud  shrieked  aloud,  'Spare  thy 
people,  O  Lofd !  ' "  Such  is  Dean  Stanley's 
vivid  picture  of  the  circumstances  and  scene 
described  by  the  prophet  in  the  above  verses. 
A  scene  exceedingly  similar  occurs  in  the 
commencement  of  the  'CEdipus  Tyrannus' 
of  Sophocles — 

"Why  sit  ye   here,  my  children,  younger 
brood 
Of  Cadmus  famed  of  old,  in  solemn  state. 
Your  hands  thus  wreatlifed  with  the  sup- 
pliants' boughs  ? 
And  all  the  oity  reeks  with  incense. 
And  all  re-echoes  with  your  hymns  and 

groans ; 
And  I,  my  children,  counting  it  unmeet 
To  hear  report  from  others,  i  have  come 
Myself,  whom  all  name  (Edipus  the  Great." 

Vers.  18—27  form  the  sequel  of  this 
chapter  in  the  Hebrew,  but  five  additional 
verses  make  up  the  chapter  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version.  These  are  divisible  into  two 
parts.  In  the  first  division  the  prophet 
assures  his  countrymen  of  the  bestowal  of 
temporal  mercies,  and  in  tbe  second  of  the 
promise  of  spiritual  blessings. 

Ver.  18. — The  futures  of  this  verse  with 
vav  conseo.  are  properly  taken  as  perfects; 
nor  is  there  any  inconsistency,  provided  we 
understand,  as  following  ver.  17  and  preced- 
ing ver.  18,  the  fact  that  the  priests  had  en- 
gaged in  the  penitence  enjoined,  and  offered 
the  supplication  to  which  they  had  been 
summoned;  neither  is  the  omission  of  any 
express  men  I  ion  of  the  circumstance  tlais 
supposed  to  intervene  between  these  verses 
any  valid  objection,  especially  as  the  gram- 
mar favours  the  view  in  question.  Then 
follows  a  manifestation  of  God's  mercy  in 
answer  to  the  assumed  penitence  and  prayer 
of  his  servants.  God's  jealousy  aud  pity 
are  both  eugaged^his  jealousy  for  his  land, 
and  his  compassion  for  his  people.  His 
jealousy  is  figurative,  and  the  allusion  is 
probably  to  that  of  a  husband  who  is  jealous 
on  account  of  any  dislionour  done  to  his 
wife,  and  who  resents  it  more  keenly  than  a 
dishonour  offered  to  himself.  The  pity  is 
such  as  God  ever  manifests  to  his  people 
when  penitent ;  for  "  Like  as  a  fatlier  pitieth 


2i 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  II.  1— 3a 


hia  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that 
fear  him." 

Ver.  19. — ^Yea,  the  lord  will  answer  and 
say  unto  his  people,  Behold,  I  will  send  you 
com,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  ye  shall  be 
satisfied  therewith.  The  Lord's  answer 
comes  in  the  shape  of  a  promise  of  relief  of 
which  man  and  beast  were  so  sorely  in  need. 
The  promise,  with  deliverance  from  distress, 
couples  ample  abundance.  The  com  and 
the  wine  and  the  oil — the  three  great  tem- 
poral blessings,  equivalent  to  food,  refresh- 
ment, and  ornament — which  the  locusts  had 
destroyed,  as  we  read  in  ver.  10,  God  here 
promises  to  restore,  and  to  restore  not  merely 
to  the  extent  that  was  barely  necessary,  but 
in  full  and  abundant  measure,  so  that  they 
would  be  satisfied  therewith.  (1)  The  verbs 
of  fulnesa  or  want,  clothing  and  wwlothmg, 
going  or  coming  and  dwelling,  govern  an 
aooubative ;  hence  pnty  has  the  accusative 
here ;  sometimes  it  is  constructed  with  3  or 
D.  (2)  There  are  two ,  constructions  of  a 
participle  with  a  pronoun  as  subject — that 
in  which  the  pronoun  is  written  in  its  sepa- 
rate form  in  immediate  connection  with  the 
participle,  and  that  in  which  it  is  appended 
as  a  sufBx.  (3)  The  words  dagan  from 
dagah,  to  multiply;  yitshar  from  tsahar, 
to  shine;  and  tirosh  from  yarash,  to  take 
possession  of  the  brain,  have  each  the 
article  prefixed,  to  emphasize  the  products 
restored  by  the  Divine  mercy.  The  article, 
no  doubt,  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  classes 
of  objects  generally  known.  And  I  will  no 
more  make  yon  a  reproach  among  the 
heathen.  No  more  would  they  be  a  re- 
proach or  byword  among  the  heathen, 
sneered  at,  as  though  God  had  abandoned 
them  in  his  sore  displeasure,  or  through 
sheer  impotence  had  been  unable  to  help 
them.  All  this  God  promised  to  do  in 
answer  to  the  prayers  of  his  people.  Such 
was  the  result  of  penitence,  and  such  the 
power  of  prayer.  Cherpath  is  a  second  ac- 
cusative, or,  more  correctly,  an  appositional 
accusative  to  ethlcem.  The  construction  with 
J"  frequently  takes  the  place  of  the  second 
accusative,  as  in  the  seventeenth  verse  of 
the  same  chapter. 

Ver.  20. — But  I  will  remove  far  off  from 
yoi^  the  northern  army,  and  will  drive  him 
into  a  land  barren  and  desolate,  with  his 
face  toward  the  east  sea,  and  his  hinder  part 
toward  the  utmost  sea.  This  verse  promises 
the  destruction  of  "the  devastator.  The  pro- 
phet here  specifies  the  means  by  which  the 
Eternal  was  going  to  restore  the  blessings 
of  harvest.  The  order  of  sequence  is  inverted 
— the  effect  preceding  the  cause ;  thus,  re- 
storation of  prosperity  and  plenty  goes  be- 
fore, and  the  cause  thereof,  being  relief  from 
invasion  and  loss,  follows  alter.  Nor  is  there 
anything  singular  in  this,  as  men  are  more 


alive  to  recovery  from  a  distressful  state  o( 
any  kind  than  to  the  remedy  which  effects  it. 
The  "  army  "  of  this  verse  we  still  hold  to 
be  the  tribes  of  locusts,  which,  like  an  invad- 
ing army,  with  its  numerous  regimental 
divisions,  had  overrun  the  land,  scattering 
dismay  and  distress  wherever  it  advanced  ; 
yet  from  this  very  verse,  and  the  expression 
"  northern  "  in  particular,  it  has  been  argued 
that  it  cannot  refer  to  locusts,  but  to  human 
invaders  symbolized  by  locusts  and  the  havoc 
wrought  by  them.  (1)  The  north  is  not  the 
native  land  of  locusts;  it  is  rather  the  south 
—the  Arabian,  Lybian,  or  Egyptian  desert. 
But  (2)  "  northern  "  may  denote  the  quarter 
from  which  the  locusts  appeared  to  the  pro- 
phet in  vision  to  enter  the  laud ;  or,  driven 
upward  by  a  south  wind  which  regularly 
blows,  as  we  are  informed,  in  those  regions 
during  spring,  and  then  to  the  north  of 
Palestine  by  an  east  wind  which  blows  with 
similar  regularity  in  summer,  and  again  into 
and  ultimately  out  of  Palestine  by  the  north 
wind  blowing  in  the  autumn.  "In  this  case," 
says  a  writer  in  the '  Speaker's  Commentary,' 
"the  northern  plague  would  have  been  a 
natural  expression  for  an  inhabitant  of  Jeru- 
salem to  use  in  speaking  of  the  locu;^ts ;  as 
natural  as  it  would  be  for  a  Londoner  to 
speak  of  a  pestilence  that  had  commenced  its 
ravages  in  Great  Britain  at  Edinbur!>:h,  as 
coming  to  him  from  the  north,  though  it  were 
originally  imported  from  France  or  Spain." 
The  word  (3)  may  symbolically  denote 
"  calamitous,"  according  to  the  explanation 
of  some,  since  calamity  is  so  frequently 
represented  as  coming  &om  the  north,  so 
that  the  north  is  more  or  less  identified 
with  diasaster ;  thus  we  read  in  Jer.  iv.  6, 
"  I  will  bring  evil  from  the  north,  and  a 
great  destruction."  It  may,  however,  be 
safely  admitted  that,  by  the  loLiist,  the 
northern  or  Assyrian  enemies  of  Judah,  who 
advanced  from  the  north  as  the  most  ac- 
cessible quarter  for  attack,  are  in  a  sub- 
sidiary sense  represented.  The  expulsion 
of  these  enemies  brings  relief;  they  are 
driven  into  a  parched,  and  so  desert  and 
desolate,  land ;  *'  and  there,"  as  Kimchi  ob- 
serves, "they  shall  die  because  they  shall 
find  nothing  to  eat"  Tliat  land  may  be 
either  tho  Idumasan  desert  south  of  Judah 
or  Arabia  Deserta.  Thus  the  main  body 
of  the  gi'eat  locust-army  perishes  in  the 
soutliern  desert ;  while  the  van  of  the  army 
is  driven  into  the  Diad  Sea,  and  the  rear 
of  it  into  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Or,  more 
literally,  the  face  of  this  locust-host  was 
towards  the  east,  or  front  sea,  that  is,  as 
already  intimated,  the  Dead  Sea  eastward ; 
his  hinder  part  toward  the  west,  or  hinder 
sea,  that  is,  the  Mediterranean  westward. 
Thus  they  were  driven  in  every  other  direc- 
tion than  that  by  which  they  came,  namely, 


CH.  n.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


25 


Bouth,  east,  and  west.  In  marking  the 
quarters  of  the  world,  the  Jews  faced  the 
east,  80  that  the  west  was  behind  tliem, 
the  south  on  their  right  hand,  and  the  north 
on  their  left.  We  have  thus  a  most  vivid 
picture  of  the  speedy  and  total  destruction 
of  the  locusts  After  expulsion,  no  danger 
was  to  be  apprehended  from  them,  for,  blown 
into  the  sea  or  desert,  they  perished  at  once 
and  for  ever.  The  terms  employed  are  very 
graphic ;  thus,  ine'alelcem  is  much  more  than 
mikkem,  woxild  be,  and  imply  that  a  heavy 
burden  was  lifted  froi/n  uprni,  or  up  off  the 
face  of  a  desolated  land,  and  the  heart  of  a 
distressed  people.  And  Ms  stink  shall  oome 
up,  and  his  ill  savour  shall  come  up,  be- 
cause he  hath  done  great  things ;  margin, 
magnified  to  do.  The  sti  nch  emitted  from 
the  putrefying  bodies  of  those  locusts  would 
be  sickening  and  stifling — sufficient  to  oc«a- 
siou  a  pestilence.  Many  testimonies  from 
travellers  and  others  prove  the  reality  of 
both  circumstances — the  ill  savour  and  its 
pestiferous  nature.  Several  expressions  in 
this  verse  are  applicable  enough  to  an 
ftrmy,  as  in  the  last  clause,  where  he  is  said 
to  do  great  things,  or  literiilly,  "  magnified 
to  do,"  that  is,  magnified  himself  in  his 
doings ;  it  may,  however,  apply  equally  well 
to-  the  great  destruction  by  tlie  locust-army. 
There  is  no  doubt  the  superadded  notion  of 
haughtiness  along  with  that  uf  great  doings. 
It  really  means  that,  as  an  instrument  of 
God,  tliey  had  effected  a  fearfully  violent 
desolation,  and  tin's  is  assigned  as  a  reason 
fdi'  the  total  destiurtioM  of  those  locusts. 

Vers.  21 — 23  — In  these  verses  the  land 
and  beasts  and  men  are  addressed  respec- 
tively. Thus  tlie  promise  is  fully  developed. 
In  ver.  21  tiie  prophet  summons  the  earth ; 
in  ver.  22  the  beasts  of  the  field;  and  in 
ver.  23  the  sons  of  Zion ;  all  are  called  to 
joy  and  gladness  on  account  of  the  great 
deliverance  from  destruction  which  tlie 
Lord  had  wrouglit  for  them.  They  are  all 
called  on  to  rejoice  in  the  great  deliverance ; 
the  laud,  personified,  is  summoned  to  exult 
and  rejoice  for  the  great  things  God  now 
promises  to  do  or  is  doing  to  it.  If  the 
locusts  liad  done  great  things  in  destruction, 
God  will  do  great  things  in  deliverance. 
Tlie  bi  asis  wee  also  personified,  and  forbidden 
to  be  afraid ;  for  whereas  they  had  groaned 
and  cried  for  want  of  herbage  when  the 
pastures  were  burnt  up,  those  pastures  are 
now  beginning  to  spring,  and  the  fruit  Irees 
yield  their  strength.  The  children  of  Zion 
are  invited  to  rejoice,  not  only  in  the  de- 
livered land,  or  springing  pastures,  or  fruitful 
figs,  or  blooming  vines,  or  other  trees  how- 
ever useful  or  ornamental ;  but,  as  became 
them  with  their  superior  intelligence,  in  the 
fjoid  their  God,  as  the  Father  of  mercies 
and  the  Giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift, 


whether  temporal  or  spiritnal.  At  the  same 
time,  their  temporal  wants  would  be  attended 
to,  and  their  land  fertilized  by  the  suitable 
and  sustaining  shower.  The  prophet  indi- 
vidualizes the  earth,  the  beasts  of  the  field, 
and  the  sons  of  Zion. 

Yer.  21. — fear  not,  0  laud ',  be  glad  and 
rejoice :  for  the  Lord  will  do  great  things. 
The  land  had  sufiered  severely  from  the 
drought  connected  with  the  locusts ;  but  is 
now  summoned  to  joy  and  gladness.  The 
prophet  assigns  for  this  an  appropriate 
reason :  the  locusts  had  done  great  things 
in  damaging  it ;  Jehovah  now  does  great 
things  in  their  destruction.  When  the  earth 
clothes  itself  with  verdure,  and  brings  forth 
its  fruits  and  fiowers  and  various  products, 
it  is  said,  by  a  bold  but  beautiful  personiBca- 
tion,  to  rejoice  and  even  exult.  Thus  tlie 
Latins  said  in  like  manner,  Rident  arva, 
ridet  ager.  Things  are  now  reversed.  In- 
stead of  mourning,  is  exultation ;  instead  of 
mourning  and  its  visible  emblem  in  girding 
with  gladness,  there  is  joy  and  gladness; 
instead  of  the  day  of  the  Lord,  very  great 
and  terrible  or  fearful,  is  "  Fear  not."  S'- 
machi  is  fem.  imper.  Qal  in  pau=e  for  the 
ordinary  simchi. 

Yer.  22. — Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the 
field.  The  dumb  animals  had  groaned  in 
distress  for  food,  but  now  they  too  have 
cause  to  rejoice,  and  are  here  called  on  to 
do  so ;  and  tbe  suitable  cause  in  their  case 
is  also  specified.  It  is  as  follows :  For  the 
pastures  of  the  wilderness  do  spring,  for 
the  tree  beareth  her  frnit,  the  fig  tree  and 
the  vine  do  yield  their  strength.  He  tlius 
specifies  the  ground  of  gladness  in  their 
case  also,  pointing  to  the  fresh  green  of  the 
pastures  and  the  fruit  hanging  in  rich 
abundance  and  variety  on  the  trees.  The 
fruits  of  vines  and  fig  trees  are  not,  it  is 
true,  the  food  of  the  beasts  of  the  fields; 
but  the  revival  of  vegetation  in  trees,  the 
higher  and  larger  growths,  the  chief  factor 
in  which  is  moisture,  comprehends  the  re- 
vival of  the  smaller  growths  of  herbs,  grasses, 
and  plants,  the  proper  sustenance  of  cattle. 
Kimehi's  explanation  is  that  "as  the  tree 
bears  its  fruit  in  the  inhabited  part  of  tlie 
world,  so  in  the  wilderness  the  places  of 
pasture  grow  green."  Aben  Ezra,  who  never 
loses  an  opportunity  of  directing  attention 
to  contrasts  wherever  they  exist,  contrasts 
"  Bo  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field,"  in 
this  verse  with  "  the  beasts  of  the  field  cry 
also  unto  thee  "  at  the  close  of  the  preceding 
chapter ;  also  "  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness 
do  spring"  with  "the  fire  hath  devoured 
the  pastures  of  the  wilderness;"  likewise 
"the  tree  beareth  her  fruit "  with  "all  the 
trees  of  the  field  are  withered."  It  has 
been  observed  that  all  plants,  even  shrubs 
and  trees,  spring  up  at  the  first  as  the  fresh 


26 


THE  BOOK   OF  JOEL. 


[CH.  TI.  1—32. 


young  juicy  green  of  plants,  St^5 ;  then  they 
develop  into  pT  or  Txn,  grass ;  into  herb, 
3K:y ;  and  into  tree,  yy.  nto  is  not  the  plural 
for  on'^,  but  singular,  after  the  analogy  of 
'OB'  (Pb.  xcvi.  12).  Nasap'ri,  equivalent  to 
"  lift  up,  bear,"  is  more  poetical  than  caah 
p'ri,  equivalent  to  "  make  fruit ; "  so  in  Latin, 
surgunt  f rages.  The  expression,  "  yield  their 
Btrength,"  puts  the  caune  for  the  effect;  the 
strength  of  tlie  tree  produces  the  fruit  and 
centres  in  it. 

Ver.  23. — Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of 
Ziott,  and  rejoice  in  the  lord  your  Ood. 
They  had  keenly  fi  It  and  deeply  bewailed 
the  unparalleled  catastrophe  which  had  be- 
fallen land  and  cattle  and  inhabitants,  and 
also  themselves  among  the  number.  The 
BODS  of  Zion  are  the  inhablt;ints  of  Jeru- 
salem, tht!  capital,  in  which  waa  the  nutional 
sanctuary  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Not 
only  are  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  in- 
cluded, but,  as  the  capital  often  stood  for 
the  whole  country,  all  tlie  inhabitants  of 
Jiidiih  are  comprehended  under  the  "children 
of  Zion."  The  ground  of  their  gladness  and 
joy  in  God  is :  For  he  hath  given  yon  the 
former  rain  moderately  (margin,  a  teacher  of 
righteousneu,  or  for  righteousness),  and  he 
wiU  cause  to  oome  down  for  yon  the  rain, 
the  former  rain,  and  the  latter  rain  in  the 
first  month.  Omitting  for  the  present  the 
disputed  word  hammoreh,  we  have  the  great 
blessing  whlfh  was  so  much  needed.  The 
blessing  bestowed  was  twofold — negative  in 
the  deotruction  of  the  locusts  and  deliver- 
ance from  their  ravages ;  and  positive  in  the 
plentiful  rainfall,  geshem,  the  great  and 
beneficent  fertilizer  of  tlie  dried-np  and 
desolated  land.  But  this  abundant  rain  is 
more  closely  particularized  as  the  early  or 
October  rain,  moreh,  wliich,  fulling  at  tlie 
seed-time  in  autumn,  promoted  the  germina- 
tion and  growth  of  tlie  seed  just  sown ;  and 
as  the  latter,  or  March  rain,  malqosh,  which, 
bestowed  in  the  spring  season  a  ^hort  time 
before  harvest,  matured  the  crops.  The 
geshem,  or  shower,  may  be  regarded  here  as 
the  generic  name,  and  of  these  the  two 
species  are  the  moreh  and  malqoi'h.  from 
laqash,  to  be  ripe  or  late,  just  explained. 
The  word  hamfnoreh  in  the  early  part  of  the 
verse  is  translated  (1)  "teacher"  in  the 
Chaldee  and  Vulgate,  by  Jerome,  by  Abar- 
banel  among  the  Hebrew  commentators,  who 
refers  it  to  Messiah ;  among  modem  com- 
mentators by  Hofman,  refeiring  it  to  Joel 
himself,  by  Heugstenberg,  who  understands 
it  of  the  ideal  teacher  or  collective  body  of 
messengers  from  God.  Keil  also  renders, 
"  the  teacher  for  righteousness,"  and  applies 
tlie  eipression  to  the  instructions  of  Moses, 
the  priests,  and  the  prophets,  not  excluding 
Messiah  himself.     He  also  undcr^tandB  the 


prophet  to  speak  of  both  spiritual  and 
material  blessings,  giving  a  fuller  exposi- 
tion of  the  latter  in  vers.  23 — 27,  and  of 
the  former  in  vers.  28 — 32  and  in  the  last; 
chapter.  The  two  considerations  that  seem 
to  have  most  weight  with  Keil  in  inclining 
him  to  this  exposition  are  the  presence  uf 
the  article  with  moreh,  and  the  non-physical 
sense  of  Utsdaqah;  hence  Ewald's  "rain  for 
righteousness,  i.e.  a  sign  from  God  of  tlioir 
being  adopted  again  into  righteousness. 
But  weight-stones  and  scales  have  tsedeq  at- 
tached in  the  physical  sense  of  correctness, 
while  ethical  Tightness  ts  only  an  iiiforeneo 
or  subordinate  notion  (see  Lev.  xix.  H6; 
Pb.  xxiii.  3).  The  translation  (2)  of  "  rain  " 
is,  we  think,  justly  entitled  to  the  preference 
from  the  context.  Among  promises  of  le- 
paiiiiig  the  damage  done  by  the  locusts,  it 
would  be  obviously  out  of  place  to  introduce 
the  notion  of  "a  teacher."  Of  the  Hebrew 
expositors,  Aben  Ezra  and  Kimchi  both  un- 
derstand the  word  in  the  sense  of  rain ;  the 
former  siys,  "In  ray  opinion  it  is  the  same 
as  yoreh  ;  "  and  the  latter, "  Hammoreh  is  the 
same  as  yoreh."  So  also  Calvin,  Bosenmiiller, 
Hitzig,  and  Wttnsohe.  The  etymology  also 
is  favourable  to  this  view,  for  both  yoreh 
and  moreh  are  from  the  verb  yorcth,  to  throw 
(Hiph.,  cause  to  throw),  throw  down  as 
drops,  wet,  besprinkle,  equivalent  to  pnr,  and 
as  the  Qal  and  Hiph.  sometimes  coincide  in 
meaning,  we  may  safely  conclude  moreh  syno- 
nymous with  yoreh,  the  meaning  of  which 
is  unquestionably  "rain,"  specially  verls 
irpdi/jios.  (a)  Rain  in  right  measure,  then,  we 
take  to  be  the  true  meaning;  nrt  (h)  rail 
according  to  righteousness,  as  th(ugh  God, 
in  accordance  with  his  righteousness,  re- 
pented of  the  evil  he  thought  to  do  unto 
them,  and,  in  consequence  of  their  forsaking 
their  sins,  sent  the  fi.Ttilizing  rains.  Ag  lin, 
harishm  is  rendered  by  some  (a)  as  if  kha- 
rishon  were  equivalent  to  "as  in  the  former 
time;"  thus  the  LXX.,  Ka8i>s  e/iirpoaSey ; 
Vulgate,  SicuH  in  prinnipio.  But  we  prefer 
(6)  the  rendering,  "in  the  first  mnnth ; "  so  the 
Chaldee,  "  In  the  month  Nisan,  or  March." 
The  Hebrew  commentators  explain  it  in 
like  manner;  thus  Eashi,  "In  the  first 
month — in  Nisan;"  Aben  Ezra,  "And  the 
meaning  of  'in  the  first'  is  in  the  first 
month;"  Kimchi,  "The  explanation  of  the 
rain  that  is  called  moreh,  he  sends  it  down 
to  you  in  its  season,  which  is  Marchesvan  (or 
October),  and  he  causes  to  descend  to  you 
in  like  manner  the  malqosh  (the  latter  rain) 
in  its  season  in  the  first  month,  which  is 
Nisan."  The  blessing  of  the  rain  was  thus 
greatly  enhanced  by  being  sent  in  the  right 
measure  and  at  the  suitable  season. 

Vers.  24 — 27. — In  these  verses  the  pro- 
phet pictures  the  blessed  effects  of  the  abun- 
dant rain  on  the  parched  and  barren  land. 


OH.  II.  1—32.] 


THE   BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


27 


Ver.  24  presents  a  contrast  to  vers.  10—12 
of  oh.  i. ;  while  tlie  promise  of  com  an  1  vvino 
and  oil  in  ver.  19,  with  which  the  present  is 
closely  connected,  is  performed.  The  per- 
fects exhibit  the  Divine  promise  as  nctually 
aooomplished.  (1)  The  word  na,  from  nna,  to 
separate,  denotes  the  pure  grain  separated 
from  the  husk  or  chaff  and  straw.  (2)  piB' 
is  "  to  run,"  and  in  Hiph.,"  to  cause  to  rim  "  as 
of  fluids,  then  overflow;  and  Pilel  in  Ps.  Ixv. 
10,  slwqeq,  "to  cause  to  overflnw."  (3)  3p% 
equivalent  to  np:,  is  a  vessel  bored  or  hewn 
out,  then  the  vat  into  which  the  wine 
trodden  out  in  the  wine-press,  or  the  oil 
liodden  out  in  tlie  oil-press,  flows;  while  m 
is  the  press  in  which  wine  or  oil,  especially 
the  former,  is  trodden  out.  I  will  restore 
to  you  the  years.  This  denotes  either  (1) 
the  greatness  and  violence  of  the  destruc- 
tion made  by  the  locusts,  or  (2)  it  implies 
that,  only  for  tlie  timely  interposition  of 
Jehovah  in  destroying  the  locusts,  the 
people  would  have  had  to  sustain  the  loss 
of  the  harvest,  not  of  one  year  only,  but 
of  several— ^in  other  words,  the  disastrous 
effet;ts  of  their  ravages  would  have  been 
felt  for  a  number  of  years ;  but  (3)  not  that 
the  locusts  invaded  the  land  several  suc- 
cessive years.  The  absence  of  the  copula 
before  yeleq,  and  its  presence  before  the  last 
two  names,  viz.  chasil  and  gazam,  prove  that 
these  three  names,  being  thus  co-ordinated, 
are  either  epithets  or  species  of  'arbeh ;  thus, 
the  lo.-ses  of  the  years  which  the  locust,  or 
multitudinous  one,  hath  eaten — the  licker 
and  the  devourer  and  the  biter  (or  gnawer) 
— were  compensated.  Abarbanel  maintains 
these  names  of  the  locusts  to  refer  to  the 
four  world-powers  that  one  after  another 
desolated  Palestine :  "  For  they,"  he  says, 
"were  the  army  of  Jehovah  and  the  mes- 
sengers of  his  providence  to  punish  Israil 
by  their  means."  The  eflect  of  the  plentiful 
supply  of  their  wants  and  of  the  full  satis- 
faction enjoyed  thereby  becomes  the  occasion 
of  devout  acknowledgment  of  God  as  their 
Protector  and  Patron,  and  of  the  warmest 
expressions  of  gratitude  for  his  goodness,  so 
they  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord  their  Ood, 
that  had  dealt  woudronsly  with  them ;  lite- 
rally, had  acted  towards  them  even  to  the 
doing  of  wonders.  Then  follows  the  prac- 
tical conclusion,  very  poetically  expressed, 
and  comprising  the  assurance  of  the  prestnce 
of  God  among  his  people,  his  sole  Divinity 
and  sure  protection  of  them,  a  guaraotee  of 
his  grace  to  them  at  all  times,  freedom  from 
reproach  and  shame  evermore.  Thus  closes 
the  promise  of  temporal  or  material  bless- 
ings. "  Ye  shall  recognize,"  says  Kiraohi, 
"tliat  I  am  in  your  midst,  hearing  your 
cries." 

Vers.   28  —  32.  —  These    verses    form   a 


chapter  (the  third)  by  themselves  in  the 
Hebrew  text,  but  in  the  LXX.  and  the 
Authorized  Version  they  conclude  ch.  ii. 
In  them  the  prophet  pabses  on  to  spiritual 


Vers.  28,  29. — And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
afterward  (^aeharelchen).  This  intimates  the 
time  when  the  promised  blessing  is  to  be 
bestowed,  and  must  be  read  in  the  light  of 
New  Testament  exposition;  for  Peter,  in 
quoting  the  words  (Acts  il.  17,  etc.),  varies 
the  prophet's  note  of  time  by  substituting 
an  explanatory  phrase,  viz.  iv  -rais  taxarms 
ri/iepais,  "  in  the  last  days  " — an  expression 
which,  as  is  acknowledged,  refers  to  the 
days  of  the  Messiah  or  the  last  days  of  the 
old  dispensation.  The  apostle  thus  defines 
more  closely  the  somewhat  indefinite  expres- 
sion of  the  Hebrew.  After  this  specification 
of  the  time,  he  proceeds  to  state  the  blessinrj 
to  be  bestowed.  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit 
upon  all  flesh.  The  word  shaphah,  employed 
by  the  prophet  to  express  the  outpouring  of 
the  Spirit,  implies  the  bestowal  of  the  gift 
in  great  abundance,  as  Calvin  clearly  pointed 
out :  "  For  shaphak,"  he  says,  "  does  not 
mean  merely  to  give  in  drops,  but  to  pour 
out  in  great  abundance.  But  God  did  not 
pour  out  the  Holy  Spirit  so  abundantly  or 
copiously  under  the  Law,  as  he  has  since  the 
manifestation  of  Christ."  The  Spirit  was 
indeed  communicated  in  Old  Testament 
times,  but  that  communication  was  restricted 
in  two  ways — in  quantity,  and  in  the  number 
of  recipients  ;  the  former  was  comparatively 
scanty  and  the  latter  few,  whereas  the  word 
here  applied  to  its  communication  implies  a 
rich  supply,  like  a  copious  rainfall.  After 
the  specification  of  the  time,  and  the  mention 
of  the  blessing,  with  its  implied  plentifulness, 
comes  its  wide  diffusion,  or  general  distribu- 
tion— "all  fl(  sh,"  or  "all  mankind,'  as  tlie 
Hebrew  expression  denotes ;  and  that  with- 
out regard  to  age,  or  sex,  or  state.  And 
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  pro- 
phesy, your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams, 
your  young  men  shall  see  visions :  and  also 
upon  the  servants  and  upon  the  handmaids 
in  those  days  will  I  pour  out  my  Spirit. 
Sons  and  daughters  without  distinction  of 
sex;  old  men  and  young  men  without 
reference  to  age;  servants  and  handmaids 
without  regard  to  social  position,  'i  hus  it 
is  with  the  Spirit  of  God  as.  with  the  Son  of 
God,  of  whom  the  apostle  says,  "  There  is 
neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor 
uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bond 
nor  free :  but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  The 
blessing  of  salvation  through  the  Son  of 
God  and  by  the  Spirit  of  God  is  wide  as 
the  world  in  its  ofter,  and  free  to  all  who 
accept  it — without  national  distinction,  for 
there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek;  without 


28 


THE   BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  II.  1—32. 


social  distinction,  for  there  is  neither  bond 
nor  free;  without  sexual  distinction,  for 
there  is  neither  male  nor  female;  without 
ceremonial  distinrtion,  for  there  is  neither 
circumcision  nor  unoircumcision ;  without 
intellectual  or  educational  distinction,  for 
Ihe  barbarian  and  even  the  Scythian,  the 
lowest  type  of  barbarian,  are  free  to  share 
the  blessing.  The  vegam  before  the  "  ser- 
vants" and  "handmaids,"  rendered  iu  the 
.citation  by  Peter,  not  as  in  the  LXX.  by  a 
simple  Kol,  but  by  /col  ye,  and  in  the  Autho- 
rized Version  "and  also,"  ia  an  emphatic  ad- 
dition to  the  previous  enumeration,  equiva- 
lent to  "  nay  more  "  and  implying  something 
extraordinary  and  unexpected,  that  not  only 
the  weaker  sex,  but  the  meanest  of  both 
sexoB,  were  to  participate  in  the  blessing. 
"  Not  a  single  case,"  says  Keil,  "  occurs  in 
the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  of  a  slave 
receiving  the  gift  of  propliecy."  The  mode 
in  which  spiritual  communioaiion  is  (1) 
according  to  some  is  that  of  visions  to  the 
young,  whose  fancy  is  more  vigorous;  that 
of  dreams  to  the  old,  in  the  decadence  of 
their  mental  powers ;  while  to  the  sons  and 
(laughteis  tlie  gift  is  prophesying.  Others 
more  correctly  (2)  understand  prophecy  as 
the  general  term  for  speaking  under  the 
Spirit's  influence  or  instructing  by  Divine 
inspiration;  wliile  the  two  forms  of  pro- 
phetic revelation  are  dreams  when  the 
mental  "  faculties  are  suspended  by  natural 
causes,"  and  visions  or  trances  when  "  sus- 
pended by  supernatural  causes,"  the  com- 
munication in  either  case  being  supernatural. 
This  prediction  began  to  be  fulfilled  on  the 
Day  of  Pentecost. 

Ver.  30. — And  I  will  show  wonders  in  the 
heavens  and  in  the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and 
pillars  of  smoke.  Along  with  the  wonderful 
distribution  of  gifts  and  graces  at  the  Day 
of  Pentecost,  attention  is  directed  to  portents 
of  destructive  viaitation;  after  a  dispensa- 
tion of  mercy  follows  a  dispensation  of 
wrath;  mercy  and  judgment  thus  succeed 
each  other  in  the  providence  of  God.  The 
visitation  of  mercy  may,  by  way  of  contrast, 
suggest.that  of  judgment ;  or  the  connection 
of  this  and  the  following  verses  with  the 
preceding  may  be  the  plague  of  the  locusts, 
ttie  mind  passing  on  from  that  visitation  to 
the  visitation  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem, 
as  kIso  to  that  which  shall  take  place  at  the 
judgment  of  the  last  day.  Our  Lord,  in  the 
twenty-fourth  chapter  of  Matthew,  seems  to 
mingle  the  portents  which  were  to  precede 
tlie  destruction  of  Jerusalem  with  those  that 
shall  usher  iu  the  judgment-day.  There 
may  be  some  doubt  whetlier  the  expressions 
before  us  are  to  be  understood  literally  or 
figuratively.  In  either  case  coming  events 
were  castins;  their  shadows  before;  and  the 
appearances  enumerated,  whether  taken  in 


a  literal  or  figurative  sense,  were  symbolical 
of  great  revolutionary  changes.  The  ex- 
pressions themselves  reflect  the  miracles  of 
Egypt.  Of  the  wonders  on  eartli  which  the 
prophet  first  mentions,  the  blood  brings  to 
mind  the  changing  of  the  Kile-water  into 
blood;  the  fire  reminds  us  of  the  firo  that 
ran  along  upon  the  ground,  mingled  with 
the  hail ;  while  the  mwhe  carries  back  our 
thoughts  to  the  wonderful  events  of  the 
wilderness  and  of  the  encampment  at  Sinai, 
when,  as  Jehovah  descended  upon  tli.; 
mount,  "  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a 
smoke,  because  the  Lord  descended  upon  it 
in  fire :  and  the  smoke  thereof  ascended  as 
the  smoke  of  a  furnace." 

Ver.  31. — The  son  shall  be  turned  into 
darkness,  and  the  moon  into  blood,  before 
the  great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  oome. 
These  wonders  in  the  heavens  tbllow  the 
wonders  on  earth,  and  these  obscurations 
of  the  heavenly  bodies — the  darkening  of 
the  sun  and  the  dull  blood-like  appearance 
of  the  moon — were  portents  of  coming  judg- 
ment. These  miraculous  phenomena,  if  lite- 
rally employed,  may  refer  to  tliose  porten- 
tous sights  which,  as  the  Jewish  historian 
Josephus  and  the  Eoman  historian  Tacitus 
testify,  were  witnessed,  both  by  besiegers 
and  besieged,  during  the  siege  and  before 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  But  taken 
symbolically,  as  is  preferable,  blood  sym- 
bolizes bloodshed;  fire,  the  firing  of  a 
town  in  time  of  war ;  and  pillars  of  smoke, 
the  clouds  of  smoke  rolling  up  to  heaven 
from  the  burning  or  smouldering  ruins  of 
a  town  or  city  set  on  fire  by  the  enemy ; 
while  the  darkening  of  the  sun  and  the  turn- 
ing of  the  moon  into  a  dull  blood-red  woalJ 
portend  approaching  judgment,  and  a  change, 
political  and  ecclesiastical,  in  the  existing 
constitution  of  things.  More  particularly, 
by  reading  Joel's  prophecy  in  the  light  of 
the  New  Testament,  we  shall  understand 
with  tolerable  clearness  the  meaning  of  the 
symbols  of  the  sun  and  moon.  The  sym- 
bolic language  of  Joel's  prediotiun  found  its 
fulfilment,  at  least  in  part,  within  less  than 
half  a  century  from  the  time  when  Peter 
spoke.  Scarce  forty  years  from  that  Pente- 
costal outpouring  and  the  ruling  powers,  civil 
and  ecclesiastical,  of  the  Jewish  nation  came 
to  an  end.  The  Jewish  Church  and  Hebrew 
commonwealth  went  out  in  darkness.  Tlie 
moon  of  the  latter  began  to  wane  from  the 
first  day  the  Eoman  power  was  set  up  iu 
Palestine,  but  at  the  destruction  of  the 
capital  the  light  of  that  moon  was  extin- 
guished for  ever ;  the  sun  of  the  former  was 
long  getting  obscured  by  clouds,  but  at  last 
it  underwent  a  total  and  final  eclipse.  But 
why,  it  may  be  asked,  are  sun  and  moon 
thus  symbolic  of  rulers  superior  and  inferior, 
or  of  rulers  of  greater  and  less  importance, 


cn.  II.  1—32.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


29 


or  of  mleis  in  Ohnroh  and  state  ?  By  the 
original  constitntion  of  these  luminaries,  as 
speoifled  in  the  record  of  Creation,  they  were 
actually  appointed  to  this,  and  so  naturally 
enough  the  physical  here,  as  elsewhere, 
underlies  the  syraholic,  as  we  read,  "  God 
made  two  great  lights;  the  greater  light  to 
rule  the  day,  and  the  lesser  liglit  to  rule  the 
night."  Thus  what  was  commenced  when 
Judsea  became  a  Roman  province  was  com- 
pleted when  Jerusalem  was  destroyed  and 
the  temple  burnt  by  the  Bomaii  army  under 
Titus.  "The  day  of  the  Lord"  is  an 
expression  very  common  with  the  prophets, 
and  always  expressive  of  some  severe  visita- 
tion or  special  judgment.  Thus  we  read  in 
tbU  lame  Book  of  the  Prophet  Joel,  "  The 


day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand,  and  as  a  de- 
struction from  the  Almighty  shall  it  come." 
Again  in  Amos  v.  18,  "The  day  of  the 
Lord  is  darkness,  and  not  light."  But  other 
days  of  judicial  visitation  were  not  to  be 
compared  with  this.  The  day  of  Babylon's 
destruction  is  called  by  Isaiah  simply  "  the 
day  of  the  Lord ; "  so  Jeremiah  speaks  of 
the  day  of  the  destruction  of  Piiaraoli's 
army  at  the  Euphrates  as  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord;"  and. Joel  himself  designates  the 
day  of  Jerusalem's  destruction  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar as  "  the  day  of  the  Lord."  But 
the  day  mentioned  in  the  text  before  us  is 
"  that  great  and  notable  day  of  the  Lord," 
and  so  it  was  the  day  of  the  final  destruction 
and  desolation  of  Jerusalem. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Uie  purposes  for  which  a  trumpet  was  blown  and  an  alarm  sounded. 
I.  The  pabticulab  pubposb  on  this  ocoAsioiir. 
IL  The  place  where  the  warning  was  given. 

III.  The  peibbts  who  were  to  sound  the  alarm.  We  are  informed  in  Numb.  x.  8 
that  it  was  the  "  sons  of  Aaron,  the  priests,"  that  were  to  blow  with  the  trumpets, 
either  in  sounding  the  alarm  of  war,  or  convening  an  assembly  of  the  people,  or  for  the 
journeying  of  the  camps.     Similar  is  the  duty  of  the  ministers  of  religion. 

IV.  The  persons  to  whom  the  warning  is  addressed.  They  are  all  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  land  without  exception,  for  all  more,  or  less  add  their  quota  to  the  national 
sin,  share  consequently  in  the  national  danger. 

V.  The  pbcdliaritibs  of  the  circumstances  so  vividly  pictured  by  the 
PROPHET.  While  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  visitation  which  the  prophet  por- 
trays intensify  the  approaching  disaster,  they  at  the  same  time  emphasize  his  preceding 
exhortation.  In  this  fdcture  of  the  prophet  we  have  (1)  his  description  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord,  and  (2)  the  destruction  that  succeeded.  The  description  represents  that  day 
as  a  day  of  dar>ness  and,  by  way  of  gradation,  of  gloominess,  that  is,  of  still  greater 
darkness ;  as  a  day  of  clouds  and  of  densely  dark  clouds ;  as  the  morning  gray,  the 
darkesf  hour  between  midnight  and  dawn,  spread  upon  the  mountains.  The  locust- 
people  that  made  it  so  were  great  in  number  and  great  in  strength,  unequalled  in  the 
past  and  unparalleled  in  the  future,  through  all  the  rolling  years  of  many  generations. 
The  destruction  was  terrible  in  the  extieme,  as  if  a  devouring  lire  went  before  them 
and  a  burning  flame  followed  them.  The  havoc  they  made  reduced  a  garden  to  a 
desert,  and  Eden  itself  to  a  wilderness  ;  in  a  word,  it  was  unescapable. 

Vers.  4— 'll. — T/ie  way  in  which  Ood  executes  his  judgments.  In  these  verses  we 
are  taught  many  important  and  solemn  lessons  in  connection  with  the  Divine  judgments 
and  their  execution. 

I.  The  agents  employed.  1.  ■  These  may  appear  to  ns  in  themselves  very  insignifi- 
cant ;  but  when  executing  his  commission  and  armed  with  his  wrath  they  are  truly 
terrible.  To  the  eye  arid  to  the  ear  that  terror  made  its  appeal ;  the  sight  of  them  was 
awe-inspiring,  the  sound  of  them  frightful.  Both  on  the  march  and  wliilu  feeding 
they  caused  sounds  harsh  and  horrible.  2.  The  natural  effect  of  their  approach  was 
pain  and  fear.  The  people  to  whom  they  came  were  affrighted  by  their  appearance, 
but  still  more  were  they  alarmed  for  their  property,  which  they  well  knew  was  exposed 
to  havoc  and  utter  destruction.  How  men  should  stand  in  awe  of  the  judgments  of 
God,  and  especially  of  sin  as  that  which  brings  down  those  judgments  I  "  Stand  in  awe, 
and  sin  not ! " 

II.  The  AoroMPLisHMBNT  OF  their  mission.  1.  The  ministers  of  the  Divine  ven- 
geance do  their  work  speedily.     Never  did  mighty  men  do  their  work  more  speed!  y, 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [en.  ii.  1—32 

anil  never  did  men  of  war,  with  all  their  training  and  organization,  do  it  more  thoroughly. 
They  do  their  worlc  systematically,  each  marching  according  to  the  appointed  plan, 
while  none  leaves  his  proper  path  or  quits  his  allotted  rank.  Without  either  struggling 
or  jostling,  they  advance  directly  and  determinedly  to  accomplish  the  work  assigned 
them.  They  in  consequence  do  their  work  surely.  Resistance  is  in  vain  and  escape 
impossible ;  it  is  thus  with  the  agents  and  instrumentalities  which  God  employs  for 
the  purposes  of  deserved  wrath.  2.  Should  not  men,  when  sent  as  messengers  of  his 
mercy,  observe  like  order  and  regularity,  like  system  in  arrangements  and  speed  in 
execution  ?  It  is  thus  with  the  heavenly  messengers ;  for  God  makes  his  angels  swift 
as  the  winds  and  strong  as  the  fiery  flames  in  bearing  God's  messages  and  in  ministering 
to  God's  saints. 

III.  The  alarms  of  minor  judgments.  Weak  and  mean  as  the  instruments  of  his 
wrath  were  individually,  God  made  them  by  their  multitudinous  masses  a  mighty 
engine  for  spreading  desolation  and  terror.  It  needs  but  a  slight  touch  of  his  finger 
to  lay  men's  possessions,  or  comforts,  or  enjoyments  in  the  dust. 

Vers.  12 — VI. — These  verses  summon  the  people  to  humiliation  for  sin,  and  thanks- 
giving for  mercy.  God,  by  his  prophet,  does  not  forbid  the  outward  Bign  of  sorrow, 
so  customary  among  Orientals  and  common  among  the  Jews ;  he  rather  insists  upon 
the  presence  of  the  thing  signified,  without  which  the  sign  was  more  a  mockery  than 
a  reality. 

I.  The  occasion  of  the  humiliation.  It  was  an  earnest  time  with  the  people  of 
the  southern  kingdom.  Terrible  desolation  had  been  made  in  the  land  of  Judah.  An 
army  of  locusts  had  been  the  agents  of  Divine  vengeance  ;  sin  had  been  the  cause ; 
the  author  of  the  punishment  was  God.  "  The  prophet  had  described  at  length  the 
coming  of  God's  judgments  as  a  mighty  army.  But,  lest  amid  the  judgments  men 
should  (as  they  often  do)  forget  the  Judge,  he  represents  God  as  commanding  this  his 
army,  gathering,  ordering,  marshalling,  directing  them,  giving  them  the  word  when 
and  upon  whom  they  should  pour  themselves.  Their  presence  was  a  token  of  this. 
They  should  neither  anticipate  that  command  nor  linger.  But  as  an  army  awaits 
the  command  to  move,  and  then,  the  word  being  given,  rolls  on  instantly,  so  God's 
judgments  await  the  precise  moment  of  his  will,  and  then  fall." 

II.  The  nature  of  the  humiliation. 

III.  The  motives  to  humiliation. 

IV.  The  method  of  their  humiliation.  1.  A  great  variety  of  cijcumstances  is  to 
1  e  attended  to.  (1)  There  is  the  signal  to  be  given :  "  Blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion." 
(2)  Serious  preparation  made  for  a  fast :  "  Sanctify  a  fast."  (3)  The  summoning  of  a 
solemn  assembly :  "  Call  a  solemn  assembly."  (4)  The  convocation  of  the  people  : 
"  Gather  the  people  "  Qam) ;  and,  (5)  when  they  were  thus  convened  and  in  consequence 
came  together,  they  were  consecrated  into  a  solemn  assembly  (gahaV) :  "  Sanctify  the 
congregation."  (6)  The  constituent  elements  of  the  assembly  embraced  the  oldest  and 
the  youngest,  with  ages  intermediate — elders  and  sucklings,  and  even  children  of  tender 
years ;  nor  could  the  newly  married,  who  at  other  times  were  exempted  from  war  or 
pressing  duties,  claim  exemption  now ;  nay,  on  the  very  day  of  tlieir  bridal,  the  bride- 
groom was  called  forth  out  of  his  chamber  and  the  bride  out  of  her  closet  to  join  the 
multitude  of  mourners,  and  share  in  the  public  humiliation  and  national  sorrow.  2. 
The  services  of  the  occasion  were  to  be  conducted  in  an  orderly  and  becoming  manner. 
Everything  connected  with  the  house  and  service  of  God  requires  to  be  done  decently 
and  in  good  order.  Thus,  in  the  passage  before  us,  nothing  is  left  to  haphazard;  nor 
did  anything  remain  to  be  improvised  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  and  after  the 
assembly  met.  (I)  The  persons  who  were  to  conduct  the  solemn  service  were 
appointed — the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord ;  (2)  the  place  they  were  to  occupy 
was  pointed  out — between  the  porch  and  the"  altar ;  (3)  the  part  they  were  to  take  in 
the  duties  of  the  day  was  assigned  them — weeping  for  their  own  sins  and  the  sins  of 
the  people ;  (4)  the  prayer  they  were  to  pray  was  prescribed  to  them.  3.  The  prayer 
itself  (1)  pleads  for  sparing  mercy  re-echoed  in  the  petitions  of  the  liitany,  "  Remember 
not,  Lord,  our  offences,  nor  the  offences  of  our  forefathers ;  neither  take  thou  vengeance 
of  our  sins :  Sjiare  us,  good  Lord,  spare  thy  people,  whom  thou  hast  redeemed  with  thy 
most  precious  blood,  and  be  not  angry  with  us  for  eve;'."     fhe  second  petition  of  \\\^ 


CH.II.1— 32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  31 

prayer  deprecates  the  prospect  of  God's  heritage  heooming  a  reproach,  and  being  ulti- 
mately enslaved  by  their  heathen  neighbours  through  feebleness  and  destitution  which 
had  been  occasioned  by  the  famine.  (2)  The  plea  suggested  by  the  prophet  to  the 
people  is  twofold,  and  forms  the  ground  of  each  petition.  It  is  "thy people,  0  Lord; 
thj/  heritage."  They  were  still  God's  people,  punished,  severely  punished,  and,  it  must 
be  added,  severely  punished  for  their  sins,  but  now  penitent  and  petitioning  for  pardon. 
They  were  still  more ;  they  were  God's  heritage,  his  peculiar  treasure,  segregated  from  the 
surrounding  nations  and  set  apart  for  the  communication  of  his  revelations,  and  to  be 
the  conservators  of  his  oracles.  Nor  was  there  any  presumption  in  reminding  God  of 
this ;  they  were  only  acting  as  God's  remembrancers  in  relation  to  both  his  purpose  and 
his  promise.  Tlie  glory  of  God  as  well  as  the  good  of  his  people  was  impe'-illed. 
"  Wherefore  should  they  say  among  the  people.  Where  is  their  God  ?  "  In  this  way 
the  heathen  used  to  boast,  as  we  learn  from  the  boastful  words  of  Sennacherib  when 
he  asks,  "Where  are  the  gods  of  Hamath  and  Arphad?"  Even  such  aie  the  words 
of  Jehovah  himself  when  he  asks,  in  relation  to  the  vanities  of  the  heathen,  "  Where 
are  now  their  gods,  their  rock  in  whom  they  trusted  ?  " 

Vers.  18 — ^20. — These  verses  prove  the  efficacy/  of  prayer.  No  one  who  believes  in 
a  personal  God,  no  one  who  believes  in  a  God  who  rules  and  governs  all,  and  no  one 
especially  who  believes  in  the  Bible  as  the  Word  of  God,  can  doubt  or  deny  the  efficacy 
of  prayer. 

Here  follows  in  a  series  God's  eegakd  to  his  people  and  response  to  thi^ir 
PRAYERS.  He  regards  their  impoverished  condition,  he  repairs  their  losses,  he  removes 
their  reproach,  and  he  repels  the  immediate  cause  of  their  desolation.  1.  The  restora- 
tion of  amicable  relations  is  promised.  The  first  promise  here  is  of  a  general  nature, 
and  includes  God's  acceptance  of  and  affection  for  penitents.  He  graciously  acknow- 
ledges his  covenant  relation  to  them  and  special  interest  in  them.  Both  their  persons 
and  their  property  ar»  owned  by  him.  The  people  are  his  people ;  their  land  is  his 
land.  The  land  of  promise  was  his  in  a  peculiar  sense ;  but  God  has  respect  to  the 
possessions  of  his  people,  wherever  situated ;  their  concerns  and  i  njoyments  are  precious 
in"  his  esteem.  The  consequence  is,  the  implied  avowal  of  a  twofold  relationship, 
marital  and  paternal.  "Thou  shalt  be  called  Hephzi-bah,  and  thy  land  Beulah  :  for 
the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy  land  shall  be  mariied ; "  these  words  of  the 
Prophet  Isaiah  distinctly  exfiress  the  former  of  the  two  nlations  referred  to,  while  the 
feeling  of  jealousy  springs  therefrom.  Thus,  as  a  husband  is  jealous  of  the  honour 
of  his  wife  and  of  himself,  and  ready  to  resent  any  insult  or  injury  offered  to  his 
partner,  so  the  Lord  promises  to  be  jealous  for  his  land — that  land  to  which  he  admits 
by  implication  such  an  endearing  and  delicate  relation.  And  "as  a  father  pitieth  his 
children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him."  Like  a  tender,  compassionate 
parent,  he  pities  his  people  in  any  season  or  circumstances  of  distress,  and  pledges  hig 
Ipve  and  power  for  their  relief.  2.  A  rich  supply  of  tempered  blessings  is  guaranteed. 
This  would  naturally  suggest  itself  as  a  practical  and  particular  result  of  the  general 
statement  of  the  dual  relationship  already  avouched.  (1)  This  supply  is  very  com- 
prehensive ;  it  includes  at  once  all  that  is  requisite  for  nourishment,  for  refreshment, 
and  for  ornament — corn,  wine,  and  oil.  (2)  It  is  very  satisfactory  ;  for  the  supply, 
either  from  its  abundance  or  the  accompanying  blessing,  is  fully  adequate  to  the 
requirements  of  the  case — they  shall  be  satisfied  therewith.  Plenty  of  itself  does  not 
always  produce  satisfaction :  the  blessing  of  God  is  needed  to  make  men  content ; 
hence  '^godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain."  (3)  It  is  very  comfortable;  for  it  comes 
in  answer  to  prayer,  and  thus  brings  with  it  a  token  of  God's  good  pleasure.  Tlie 
promise  is  not  introduced  by  "  The  Lord  will  say,"  but  by  "  The  Lord  will  answer  and 
say,"  clearly  connecting  it  with  the  prayers  of  his  people,  and  evidencing  at  the  same 
time  his  love  to  and  interest  in  them.  (4)  It  is  very  observable ;  attention  is  drawn 
to  it  by  a  "Behold."  God  will  have  his  people  to  take  notice  of  his  hand  in  the  mercies 
ho  bestows,  and  to  mark  the  contiast  in  their  condition  which  hismercitul  interposition 
brings  about.  The  hand  that  smote  them  now  salves  their  wounds ;  they  had  suffered 
from  distress  and  want,  now  they  are  blessed  with  plenty.  3.  The  rolling  away  of 
their  reproach  is  an  additional  blessing.  The  heathen  had  exulted  over  them  in  the 
day  of  their  calamity;  their  reputation  had  suffered  by  the  visible  marks  of  the  Divine 


32  THE  BOOK   OF  JOEL.  [oh.  n.  1—32. 

displeasure  upon  them,  from  which  the  inference  had  been  either  that  they  had  forsaken 
God,  or  that  he  had  forgotten  them  ;  and  that  there  had  been  unfaithfulness  on  his 
side  or  on  theirs,  or  on  both.  Now,  however,  they  have  returned  to  him  in  penitence, 
and  he  has  received  them  in  mercy;  and  thus  tlieir  reproach  is  rolled  away,  and  their 
reputation  retrieved.  4.  The  removal  of  all  cause  of  fear.  The  promise  of  plenty  is 
backed  by  the  assurance  that  the  power  which  plagued  them  is  doomed  to  destruction. 
The  invading  army  that  had  destroyed  so  much  is  now  in  turn  to  be  dispersed  and 
defeated.  (1)  'J'hey  had  made  a  fruitful  land  barren  and  desolate,  and  now  they  are  to  be 
driven  away  into  a  land  barren  and  desolate,  there  to  perish  for  ever.  (2)  They  had 
been  the  rod  in  Grod's  hand  for  the  punishment  of  a  sinful  people ;  and  now  that  that 
rod  hns  done  its  work,  it  is  brokpn  in  pieces  and  flung  away.  Nothing  is  left  of  those 
pestilent  swarms  save  the  stench  of  their  putrefyina;  ciircases ;  so  with  those  wicki-d 
instiuments  which  a  wise  Providence  sometimes  employs  for  the  chastisement  of  his 
disobi'dient  children,  nought  shall  remain  of  them  except  the  ill  odonr  of  their  memory. 
(3)  The  relief  is  complete.  "When  an  affliction,"  it  has  been  observed,  "has  done 
its  work,  it  shall  be  removed  in  mercy,  as  the  locusts  of  Canaan  were  from  a  penitent 
people,  not  as  the  locusts  of  Egypt  were  removed  in  wrath  from  an  impenitent  piince, 
only  to  make  room  for  another  plague."  They  had  done  great  things  to  the  detriment 
of  God's  people,  and  dealt  much  mischief  to  their  possessions  and  property ;  now  God 
does  yet  greater  tilings  for  the  benefit  of  his  people,  and  in  the  destruction  of  their 
enemies. 

Vers.  21 — 27. — Loss  repaired.  These  verses  contain  an  amplification  of  the  pre- 
ceding promises  by  way  of  stronger  assurance  and  greater  comfort  to  his  people.  There 
is  also  an  application  of  the  same,  in  wliich,  by  a  bold  but  beautiful  personification, 
the  land  iti-elf,  beasts  of  the  field,  as  well  as  the  children  of  Zion,  arc  called  to  joy  and 
gladness. 

I.  Rejoicings  enjoined.  1.  The  call  to  joy  is  addressed  to  things  animate  and 
inanimate,  to  auimals  rational  and  irrational;  while  the  expression  for  joyfulness  is 
suitably  and  sufficiently  raised.  Negatively,  it  is  the  absence  of  fear;  positively, 
it  is  glidness  and  exultation.  2.  The  contrast  is  also  very  expressive.  When  the 
plague  of  locusts  was  approaching  or  had  actually  arrived,  the  land  mourned ;  now  it 
is  called  on  not  only  to  lay  aside  fear  and  divest  itself  of  all  apprehension,  but  to  leap 
for  joy  and  rejoice. 

II.  Reasons  assigned.  In  each  case  the  cause  of  rejoicing  is  subjoined.  1.  First 
comes  the  general  statement,  "  Foi-  the  Lord  will  do  great  things ; "  more  correctly, 
"hath  done  jireat  things."  He  had  done  great  things  and  terrible  in  chastising  his 
erring  children  and  punishing  his  enemies;  but  much  greater  things  and  more  gracious 
he  did  when  he  repelled  the  invader  and  relieved  his  distressed  people.  Great  things 
does  God  do  in  wrath,  greater  still  in  mercy. 

"And  though  his  arm  be  strong  to  smite, 
'Tis  stronger  still  to  save." 

to  2.  The  next  reason  a- signed  for  rejoicing  contains  several  particulars  relating 
the  pasture-gronnds  and  fruii;  trees.  The  pastures  had  been  devoured  as  by  fire; 
now  they  spiing  into  new  life,  and  are  clothed  with  frish  young  grass.  The  vine 
was  dried  up,  the  fig  tree  languislied,  the  pomegranate,  palm,  and  apple  tree,  yea, 
all  the  trees  of  the  field,  were  withered;  now  they  yield  their  strength,  and  are 
become  vigorous  and  fruitful.  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  his  enemies 
are  at  peace  with  him,  and  the  very  stones  of  the  field  are  in  league  with  him; 
in  like  nianner,  when  God  is  at  peace  with  his  people  and  they  with  him,  through 
mutunl  reconciliation  cemented  by  the  blood  of  the  cross,  all  the  creatures  of  God  are 
their  servants.  3.  The  third  reason  assigned  is  the  gift  of  rain,  suitable  and  seasonable 
— the  former  lain  and  the  latter  rain,  with  the  necessary  results,  namely,  floors  full  of 
wheat,  and  vats  overflowing  with  wine  and  oil.  Pusey  follows  those  who  understand 
moreh  in  the  sense  of  "  teacher,"  as  the  Targum,  which  renders  the  clause,  "  Has 
restored  to  you  your  instructor  [or,  'instructors']  in  righteousness;  "  and  the  Vulgate, 
"  Teacher  of  righteousness ; "  the  Septuagint,  followed  by  the  Syriac  and  the  Arabic, 
*'  The  foods  unto  righteousness."     His  comment  is,  "  It  seems  most  probable  that 


OH.U.  1— 32J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


the  prophet  preflxea  to  all  the  other  promises  that  first  all-containing  promise  of  the 
coming  of  Christ.  Such  is  the  wont  of  the  prophets,  to  go  on  from  past  judgments 
and  deliverances  to  him  who  is  the  Centre  of  all  this  cycle  of  Grod's  dispensations,  the 
Son  manifest  in  the  flesh.  ...  Him  Joel  speaks  of  as  the  Subject  of  rejoicing:  'Exult 
and  joy  in  the  Lord  thy  God;  for  he  giveth  [or,  'will  give']  thee  the  Teacher  unto 
righteousnesis,'  i.e.  the  result  and  object  of  whose  conjing  is  righteousness."  He  further 
adds,  "The  early  and  latter  rain,  coining  respectively  at  the  seed-time  and  the  harvest, 
represent  the  beginning  and  the  completion;  and  so,  by  the  analogy  of  earthly  and 
spiritual  sowing,  growth,  and  ripeness,  they  represent  preventing  and  perfecting  grace ; 
the  ibspiration  of  good  purposes  and  the  gift  of  fin&l  perseverance,  which  brings  the 
just  to  glory  consummated  ;  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  the  going  oa 
unto  perfection." 

in.  Ebpabation  FOB  YBAK3  OF  LOSS.  1.  Sin  had  been  the  oause  of  Israel's  Calamity ; 
the  instruments  that  brought  about  the  calamity  were  commissioned  by  God,  and 
therefore  called  his  great  army.  Small  and  insignificant  as  the  individuals  composing 
that  army  were,  by  their  multitude  they  became  great,  and  by  the  Divine  commission 
they  became  mighty.  The  loss  inflicted  was  consequently  great.  It  had  continued 
for  several  successive  years,  the  change  in  the  order  of  these  instruments  of  destruction 
implying,  according  to  some,  not  the  order  of  attack,  but  the  successiveness  of  the 
inroads  made,  and  that  for  year  after  year.  2.  The  losses  sustained  are  now  to  be 
repaired,  such  is  the  graoiousness  of  God's  dealings  with  his  people  when  penitent. 
Years  of  plenty  are  to  succeed  the  years  of  famine,  and  the  losses  of  the  latter  are  to 
be  counterbalanced  by  the  abundance  of  the  former.  It  is  no  unusual  thing  with  God 
to  restore  double,  even  as  he  promises,  saying,  "Even  to-day  do  I  declare  that  I  will 
render  double  unto  thee."  Thus  he  did  with  Job ;  the  Lord  gave  the  patriarch  twicd 
as  much  as  he  had  before,  and  blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  the  beginning. 
Men's  sins  deserve  all  the  chastisement  that  comes  upon  them;  it  is  not  because  of 
man's  merit,  but  in  virtue  of  God's  great  goodness,  that  any  compensation  whatever  is 
made  them.  3.  Thus  it  is  with  afflictions  in  general  when  we  have  the  sanctified  use 
of  them.  In  such  a  CAse  we  are  gainers,  not  losers,  by  affliction.  When  wj  retnrn  to 
him  by  means  of  repentance,  he  returns  to  us  in  the  way  of  restitution.  He  repents 
him  concerning  his  servants;  he  makes  them  glad  according  to  the  days  wherein  he 
has  afflicted  them,  and  the  years  wherein  they  have  seen  evil. 

IV.  Ebtobn  of  pbaise  to  God  fob  his  goodness.  1.  God's  goodness  takes  visible 
shape  when  he  bestows  the  great  abundance  of  good  things  promised  to  his  people  ; 
that  goodness  is  greatly  enhanced  when  the  sufficiency  of  food  and  of  temporal  good 
things  is  accompanied  with  satisfiction.  Men  sometimes  have  a  sufficiency  and  eat, 
but  are  not  satisfied ;  again  they  eat,  and  are  satisfied,  but  forget  their  Benefactor, 
and  fail  to  thank  him  for  his  bounties.  2.  The  return  which  God  expects,  and  man 
is  bound  to  make,  is  praise  to  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  Ttiis  return  of  praise  includes 
several  items  here  clearly  expressed  or  implied.  There  is  (1)  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  privilege  of  having  the  Lord  for  our  God  in  covenant — a  covenant  well  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure ;  there  is  (2)  an  acknowledgment  of  his  providence  in  so  won- 
drously  dealing  with  us ;  there  must  be  (3)  an  acknowledgment  of  the  performance 
of  his  promises,  so  his  people  who  trust  in  him  have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed,  and 
are'  never  put  to  shame;  there  must  be,  moreover,  (4)  an  acknowledgment  of  his 
presence  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  to  provide  for,  protect,  and  preserve  his  people ; 
there  must,  in  addition  to  all  this,  be  (5)  an  acknowledgment  of  tti&  peculiarity  of  his 
relation  to  us — the  Lord  our  God,  and  none  else,  so  that  we  have  reason  to  rejoice,  not 
only  in  the  good  things  he  gives  us,  but  in  the  good  hand  that  gives  them,  even  the 
hand  of  a  father  who  corrects  us  when  we  offend,  and  comforts  us  when  we  repent, 
and  who  intertwines  our  good,  temporal  and  spiritual,  with  his  own  glory. 

Vers.  28 — 32. — The  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  The  prophet  had  exhibited  the  wisdcm 
and  mercy  of  the  Divine  dispensations — God's  pity  for  penitents,  and  the  happiness  of 
all  who  seek  and  serve  him.  "  He  will  be  jealous  for  them,  and  have  compassion  on 
them;  he  will  plead  their  cause,  avert  his  judgments,  drive  away  their  enemies,  answer 
their  prayers,  and  supply  their  wants ;  and  the  greatness  of  those  things  that  have 
been  done  against  them  shall  only  enhance  their  gratitude  for  the  still  greater  things 
JOEm  D 


8*  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  [ofl.  ii.  1— 32. 

thiit  he  will  do  for  them."    AcoorJiiigly,  he  now  passes  from  temporal  benefits  to 
spiritual  blessings. 

I.  The  dispensation  op  the  gospel  is  a  spihitoal  dispensation.  To  a  sorely 
chastened  people  such  temporal  mercies  as  are  promised  in  the  preceding  verses  must 
have  been  very  delightful,  and  the  great  change  of  their  condition  consequent  on 
repentance  must  have  been  as  marvellous  as  it  was  merciful.  But  the  prophet,  looking 
away  foi  w;irrl  into  the  future,  foretells  the  coming  of  a  far  more  eventful  era — an  era 
marked  by  the  bestowal  of  far  richer  and  more  abundant  bl<ssiags,  1.  The  period 
referred  to  was  to  be  subsequent  to  the  calamities  already  endured,  and  the  comforting 
compensations  that  followed.  Long  after  the  storm  of  adversity  then  present  would 
be  overpast,  and  after  the  state  of  peace  and  prosperity  that  would  succeed,  theie 
would  come  a  time  of  unparalleled  blessing.  The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  began 
at  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  2.  TJie  plenitude  of  blessing.  Then  the  dioppings  of  the 
Spirit,  that  had  been  vouchsafed  to  patriarchs  and  prophets  and  the  people  of  God 
under  the  old  economy,  would  give  place  to  a  downpouring  of  the  Spirit  without  stint 
and  without  restriction.  This  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  in  his  gifts  and  graces  and 
consolations,  would  extend  to  all  nationalities,  Grentile  as  well  as  Jew  •  and  to  both 
sexes,  daughters  and  sons  alike;  and  to  all  ages,  both  young  and  old;  and  to  all 
classes,  bond  as  well  as  free,  servants  and  handmaids  together.  Not  to  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  nor  to  the  land  of  Israel,  would  the  blessing  be  confined,  but  all  fljsh  would 
be  permitted  to  see  the  glory  ol  the  Lord,  and  the  inhabitants  of  all  lands  would  be 
privileged  to  come  and  worship  before  him.  Peter  himself  scarcely  comprehended  the 
full  extent  of  the  blessing  until  he  was  specially  commissioned  to  opi'n  the  door  of  faith 
to  the  Gentiles.  3.  Particular  instances  of  the  fulfilment  present  themselves — in  the 
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Gentile  Cornelius,  the  lioman  centurion,  and  his 
iriends;  in  the  pruphesyin<j  of  the  four  daughters  of  Philip  the  evangelist,  as  in  that 
of  Agabus ;  in  the  vision  of  Peter  in  Joppa,  and  in  that  of  Coriielius  in  Csesarea  some 
short  space  previously,  as  also  in  those  wonderful  visions  and  revelations  vouchsafed  to 
Paul  when  he  was  caught  up  into  Paradise,  and  heard  unspeakable  words.  4.  Prolon- 
gation of  the  blessing.  If  we  consider  the  effects  produced,  we  shall  find  that  the 
blessing  did  not  cease  at  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  By  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  no 
doubt,  ai  ostles  and  evangelists  received  such  discoveries  of  Divine  things  as  fully  fitted 
them  for  writing  the  New  Testament  Scriptures,  for  declaring  things  secret,  distant, 
and  future,  for  foundina  the  Christian  Church,  and  ordering  all  things  aright  therein. 
These  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  confined  to  apostolic  times,  and  in 
part  to  sub-apostolic  times,  and  perhaps  a  generation  after;  but  the  ordinary  operations 
and  influences  of  the  Spirit  have  never  ce.ised  from  then  till  now.  The  extraordinary 
manifestations  of  the  Divine  will  produced  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Siiirit  were  only 
a  partial  accomplishment  of  the  promise,  and  meant  as  a  means  for  the  full  accom- 
plishment of  the  same.  Besides,  it  was  not  intended  that  all  who  receive  the  Spirit, 
and  thereby  learn  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel  and  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  talva- 
tion,  should  assume  the  power  of  prophesying,  or  exercise  the  function  of  the  gospel 
ministry  ;  for  Paul,  speaking  of  spiritual  gifts,  says,  in  relation  to  persons  possessing 
such  gifts,  "Are  all  apostles?  are  all  prophets?  are  all  teachers?"  Nor  are  the  reve- 
lations vouchsafed  something  without  the  Word  of  God,  or  beside  it,  or  any  way  inde- 
pendent of  it;  for  in  the  most  solemn  and  signal  fulfilment  of  this  promise,  when  the 
Spirit  was  poured  out  at  Pentecost,  Peter  all  along  appeals  to  Scripture,  and  directs 
his  audience  theieto  in  order  to  justify  the  change  wrought  on  them,  and  vindicate  the 
doctrines  he  addressed  to  them.  By  "  prophesy  "  and  "visions "  and  "  dreams,"  we  may 
understand  the  prophet  as  speaking  of  " gospel  times  and  meicies,  in  terms  borrowed 
from  the  times  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  the  meaning  is  that,  as  of  old,  the  excellent 
way  and  measure  of  the  knowhdge  of  God  was  by  prophecy,  vision,  and  dreams 
(Numb.  xii.  6);  so,  under  the  New  Testament,  beside  what  was  extraordinary,  all 
who  get  the  Spirit  of  God  may,  for  knowing  the  mysteries  of  salvation,  be  compared 
with  these  ancient  prophets.  And  as  of  old,  by  these  ways  of  manifestation,  men 
attained  to  the  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  God,  so  should  they  by  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  the  use  of  ordinary  means."  5.  Perfect  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  Wonderful 
as  the  Pentecostal  period  was  for  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  such  power  and 
plenty,  and  superior  in  energy  and  extent  as  the  Divine  influences  then  were  to  those 


C&.  II.  1—32.]  TUB  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  35 

enjuyed  during  the  ages  that  had  preceded,  yet  they  were  but  droppings  to  the  full 
flood  of  gospel  light  aud  gospel  holiness  that  shall  bless  our  earth  in  the  glory  of  the 
latter  day,  when  all  that  "  see  the  light  or  feel  the  sun "  shall  know  the  Lord,  and 
walk  before  him  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Thus  the  blessing  commenced  at  Pente- 
cost, continuing  ever  since,  shall  be  consummated  in  that  day  when  "  the  knowledge  of 
the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 

II.  Days  of  trial  fbeqcentlt  follow  times  or  spiBrraAL  BLBSsma.  The  people 
had  experienced  a  merciful  relief  after  the  plague  of  locusts  or  prostration  of  their 
enemies;  bat  they  are  warned  against  carnal  security,  or  the  vain  supposition  that  all 
troubles  shall  be  for  ever  henceforth  banished  from  their  borders.  1.  Even  after  the 
great  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  in  Messianic  tiines,  and  specially  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost, 
there  would  be  great  commotions  and  terrible  convulsions.  These  took  place,  as  we 
know,  before  the  dreadful  day  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem ;  and  similar  gatastrophes, 
whether  literal  or  figurative,  shall  occur  before  the  still  greater  and  more  terrible  day 
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment.  Through  all  the  interval,  times  of 
special  spiritual  blessing  have  been  in  the  past,  and  shall  be  in  the  future,  followed 
by  severe  testing-times ;  •'  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord "  shall 
not  exempt  us  from  such ;  even  God's  own  dear  children  are  not  to  look  for  a  con- 
tinuance of  halcyon  days  on  earth.  2.  Many  causes  contribute  to  this.  After  a  time 
of  reformation,  or  religious  revival  and  refreshing,  Satan  will  seek  to  sift  them  like 
wheat,  and  stir  up  all  his  rage  against  them.  Opposed  to  the  progress  of  the  truth, 
he  will  array  all  the  power  he  possesses  and  all  the  agents  he  can  command  against 
the  Church.  God  himself  will  permit  such  a  winnowing-time  as  will  separate  the 
wheat  from  the  chaff,  try  the  faith,  and  prove  the  graces  of  his  people.  We  never  know 
our  real  strength  or  points  of  weakness  till  the  day  of  trial  comes.  But  God  will  also 
manifest  the  greatness  of  his  displeasure  against  sin  by  humbling  on  the  one  hand  those 
who,  during  a  time  of  rich  spiritual  blessing,  refuse  the  offers  of  his  grace  and  resist  his 
Sjarit,  and  by  punishing  on  the  other  hand  all  the  enemies,  public  or  secret,  of  himself 
and  of  his  people.  3.  The  coming  of  Christ  to  judgment.  Whether  the  wonders  in 
the  heaven  and  in  the  earth,  blood  knd  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke,  with  eclipses  of  the 
sun  and  moon,  be  understood  literally  of  the  precursors  and  presages  of  on-coming 
calamities,  or  figuratively  of  the  calamities  and  catastrophes  themselves,  the  second 
coming  of  the  Lord  at  the  general  judgment,  of  which  his  coming  to  the  destraction 
of  Jerusalem  was  a  sort  of  dim  foreshadow,  shall  abound  with  comfort  to  the  saint, 
as  it  shall  be  fraught  with  terror  to  the  sinner.  To  the  one  his  coming  shall  be  a  day 
greatly  desired,  to  the  other  it  shall  be  a  day  of  distress  and  despair;  for  while  he  shall 
come  to  take  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God  and  obey  not  the  gospel  of  his 
grace,  he  will  come  to  be  glorified  in  the  saints,  and  admired  in  all  them  that  believe. 

III.  Deliveeancb  fob  the  servants  of  God.  1.  The  persons  delivered  are  (1) 
those  who  call  upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  These  are  the  worshippers  of  God,  who 
worship  him  in  private  as  well  as  in  public,  with  heart  as  well  as  head,  and  the  con- 
fession of  whose  lips  echoes  the  confidence  of  the  heart.  "  This  calling  on  God  supposes 
knowledge  of  him,  faith  in  him,  desire  towards  him,  dependence  on  him,  and,  as  an 
evidence  of  the  sincerity  of  all  this,  a  conscientious  obedience  to  him ;  for  without 
that,  crying,  '  Lord,  Lord,'  will  not  stand  us  in  any  stead."  (2)  They  are  described  as 
"  called  of  God ,"  "  effectually  called  " — called  not  only  by  the  common  and  ordinary  call 
of  the  gospel,  but  called  specially  into  fellowship  with  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit. 
Such  are  effectually  called  "from  sin  to  God,  from  self  to  Christ,  from  things  below 
to  things  above."  The  apostle  explains  the  first  characteristic  as  pertaining  to  the 
Gentiles ;  the  second,  some  restrict  to  the  Jews.  We  had  better  refer  both  to  the 
saints  of  God,  whether  Gentile  or  Jew.  (3)  The  persons  spoken  of  in  this  Scripture 
are  further  particularized  as  persons  escaped  from  destruction,  and  as  a  remnant  left 
after  some  fierce  fight  or  terrible  judgment.  The  expression  "  remnant,"  so  often  used 
by  the  prophets,  originally  referred  to  those  captives  who  had  survived  their  brethren 
who  had  died  in  exile,  or  who  formed  a  contrast  to  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem ;  subse- 
quently the  expression  contained  the  germ  of  the  New  Testament  "election  of  grace.'' 
This  remnant  is  composed,  not  only  of  the  small  number  of  Jews  that  believed  in  Christ 
at  his  first  coming,  but  of  "the  little  flock"  (Jew  and  Gentile)  to  whom  God  gives  the 
kingdom ;  the  "  few  that  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate ; "  the  "  little  city  "  and  few  men 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [ch.  u.  1—32. 

in  it,  delivered  by  "  the  poor  wise  man."  2.  The  place  of  deliverance.  This  was 
Mount  Zion  and  Jerusalem  literally,  but  in  a  very  limited  sense,  if  the  reference  be  to 
those  who  escaped  from  the  miseries  and  calamities  of  the  final  and  fearful  siege  of  the 
holy  city,  as  also  fiom  its  ruin  and  destruction ;  such  as  believed  in  Christ  and  were  in 
the  city  having  escaped  to  Fella,  and  thus  survived  the  common  calamity.  It  is 
ruther  Zion  and  Jerusalem  in  the  spiritual  sense  of  the  Church  of  Christ  where  the 
Deliverer  is  found,  whence  salvation  proceeds,  or  rather  where,  according  to  the  alterna- 
tive rendering,  the  delivered,  or  such  as  have  escaped,  are  found.  3.  The  privileges 
of  such  are  manifold.  They  have  experienced  tokens  of  God's  love  upon  them, 
teachings  of  God's  Spirit  within  them,  the  usefulness  of  God's  Word  and  ordinances 
to  them ;  they  are  favoured  with  a  spiritual  frame  of  soul,  and  spread  the  savour  of 
godliness  around  them. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — "  Sound  an  alarm  I "  The  trumpet-call  was  used  among  the  Israelites  both 
in  their  religious  solemnities  and  in  the  conduct  of  war.  The  directv>n  here  given  is 
that  a  summons  should  be  addressed  to  the  nation,  callmg  upon  all  classes  to  give  heed 
to  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  to  learn  the  lessons  taught  by  his  awful  judgments. 
We  are  thus  tauftht  that  the  silver  sound  of  the  gospel  trumpet  is'  not  the  only  note 
that  reaches  our  human  race ;  there  is  also  the  loud  call,  the  startling  alarm,  which  ig 
especially  intended  for  sinful  and  inattentive  man. 

I.  Sin  and  false  SEcnaiTT  aeb  often  associated.  The  tempter  not  only  leads 
men  into  sin ;  he  persuades  them  that  sin  will  have  no  evil  consequences.  The  voice 
of  conscience  is  silenced ;  the  solemn  assurance  of  Scripture  is  disregarded  or  dis- 
believed.    Men  sin  without  foreboding  and  without  fear. 

II.  Hence  the  need  of  a  solemn  and  faithful  note  of  alakm  and  wabnino. 
Ezekiel  was  taught  that  one  especial  function  of  the  prophet  is  to  give  the  people 
warning.  The  watchman  who  sees  the  approach  of  danger  is  botmd  to  blow  the 
trumpet,  that  they  may  not  be  surprised  and  taken  unawares.  Those  who  are  entrusted 
witli  a  message  from  God  to  their  fellow-men  are  directed,  whether  men  hear  or  forbear, 
to  deal  faithfully  with  souls. 

III.  The  bebponsibilitt  of  giving  heed  to  the  alabm  bests  with  those  who  abb 
WAENED.  The  warning  may  be  disregarded,  the  penalty  may  be  incurred,  the  judgment 
may  be  experienced.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  alarm  may  not  be  sounded  in  vain. 
Repentance  may  prove  its  reality  by  sincere  resolutions  and  prayers,  and  a  new  heart 
may  produce  a  new  life.  Then  not  only  does  the  prophet  deliver  his  soul ;  the  sinner 
finds  acceptance  and  salvation. — T. 

Ver.  11. — "  Who  can  abide  it  ? "  It  is  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  which  the  prophet 
here  refers ;  the  day  when  the  Lord  visits  the  earth,  examines  his  people,  inquires  into 
their  conduct,  and  especially  into  the  manner  in  which  they  have  dealt  with  his  mes- 
sengers and  their  message.  Then  a  test  shall  be  applied  to  the  inmost  nature,  and  to 
the  outward  life  of  men  ;  and  it  is  a  serious  inquiry,  "  Who  can  abide  it?  " 

I.  None  can  eesist  the  omnipotence  of  the  Divine  Judge. 

II.  None  can  elude  his  omniscient  scrutiny  into  the  hbabts  and  lives  of 
men. 

III.  None  can  question  the  phinoiples  of  justice  upon  which  he  pboceeds. 
IV   None  can  show  confobmity  to  the  standard  of  righteousness  which  he 

APPLIES. 

V.  None  can  evade  the  authoritative  sentence  which  he  pronounces. 

Application.  If  none  can  abide  the  judgment  of  the  future,  it  will  be  wise  now 
to  seek  by  repentance  and  faith  reconciliation  and  acceptance.  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he 
be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."— T, 

Ver.  12. — Oonversion.  God  is  not  satisfied  to  utter  threateninga  and  to  foretell  evil. 
It  is  truly  characteristic  of  him  that  he  adds  words  of  gracious  entreaty,  expostulation, 
and  counsel.     He  would  be  deserving  of  our  adoring  gratitude  did  hu  merely  express 


CH.  II.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK   OF  JOEL.  37 

his  willingness  to  receive  the  returning  sinner ;  but  in  this  passage  he  deigns  to  invite 
and  beseech  those  who  have  rebelled  and  who  are  in  danger  of  perdition,  that  they 
convert  and  ■repent. 

I.  "Who  ABE  THEY  WHO  ARE  THUS  ADMONISHED?  They  are  such  as  have  been  highly 
favoured,  and  have  nevertheless  disobeyed  the  Puther  who  has  oared  for  them,  rebelled 
against  the  King  who  has  been  gracious  to  them.  Who  amongst  men  must  not  be 
included  in  this  class  ? 

II.  To  WHOM  ABB  THEY  INSTRUCTED  TO  EBTUBN  ?  "  To  me,"  saith  the  Lord.  It 
is  the  offended  One,  who  himself  condescends  to  invite  transgressors  to  reverse  their 
steps,  to  renounce  their  disobedience,  to  cleave  unto  himself.  This  is  a  miracle  of 
grace. 

III.  What  kind  op  conversion  does  God  require  ?  In  this  passage  we  have 
as  clear  a  statement  as  even  the  New  Testament  can  supply  of  the  spirituality  of  true 
religion.  God  does  not  ask  for  verbal,  formal  submission  ;  he  asks  for  the  return  of 
the  heart.  Here  is  involved  true  penitence — heart-sorrow  for  sin.  Here  is  involved 
true  faith — heart-attachment  to  God.  The  heart  is  emphatically  God's,  and  it  is  the 
heart  be  asks. 

IV.  What  tokens  of  sincerity  in  conversion  dobs  God  expect  ?  The  true  con- 
version is  within;  but  there  will  be  appropriate  evidences  that  sin  is  loathed  and 
forsaken.  For  this  purpose  the  tears  and  mourning,  etc.,  here  described,  are  to  be 
desired  by  God  and  presented  by  man. — ^T. 

Ver.  13i — Spiritual  repentance.  Throughout  the  Scriptures  the  one  indispensable 
condition  of  man's  forgiveness  and  of  his  acceptanoe  with  God,  which  is  insisted  upon 
by  all  inspired  writers,  is  repentance.  It  is,  therefore,  of  great  importance  to  have 
a,  right  view  of  this  exercise  or  posture  of  the  soul. 

I.  True  repentance  dobs  not  consist  in  any  bxtbenal,  cbebmonial  obsbevancb. 
In  the  Bast  especially  it  has  always  been  common  to  practise  rites  of  a  symbolical 
character  in  connection  with  the  religious  life.  Sorrow  and  penitence  are  expressed  by 
the  rending  of  the  garments.  Now,  it  is  in  accordance  with  human  nature  that  the 
sign  .should  be  substituted  for  the  thing  signified,  the  outward  observance  and  ceremony 
for  the  feeling.  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  divinity  and  spirituality  of  the  religion  of 
the  Old  Testament  that,  in  this  as  in  other  passages,  the  mere  symbol  should  be 
disparaged  in  comparison  with  the  emotion  which  it  represents. 

II.  True  and  acceptable  repentance  is  spiritual.  1.  Its  seat  is  the  heart.  A 
broken  and  a  contrite  heart  will  not  be  despised  by  him  who  cares  nothing  for  rent 
garments,  for  sackcloth  nnd  ashes,  for  loud  and  repeated  lamentations.  2.  Its  essence 
is  turning  unlo  the  Lord,  i.e.  away  from  sin  and  away  from  self,  to  him  against  whom 
the  sinner  has  offended,  and  by  whom  alone  the  sinner  can  be  justified. 

III.  True  repentance  is  prompted  by  just  thoughts  of  God  as  merciful  and 
FORGIVING.  1.  In  disposition  (if  language  so  human  may  be  allowed  concerning  the 
Siijireme)  God  is  gracious,  merciful,  forbearing.  If  his  only  principle  of  government  had 
been  the  strict  retribution  which  some  have  attributed  to  him,  there  would  be  no 
encouragement  to  the  sinner  to  repent  of  sins  which  could  never  be  forgiven.  2.  In 
his  treatment  of  men,  God  is  characterized  by  great  kindness,  such  as  our  poor,  stricken, 
clinging  hearts  especially  need  and  crave  for.  3.  In  regard  to  threats  and  promises, 
God  makes  himself  known  as  repenting  of  the  evil.  The  threat  of  punishment  is  not 
idle.  But  the  revelation  of  mercy,  the  promise  of  grace,  is  far  deeper  than  all  threaten- 
ing. Denunciations  of  wrath  are  for  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving ;  but  when  sinners 
repent  of  their  sin,  God  repents  of  his  purpose  to  destroy. — T. 

Ver.  14. — The  hope  of  reconciliation.  This  language  «5  figurative,  and  may  be 
deemed  by  some  open  to  the  charge  of  anthropomorphism.  Yet  it  is  very  simple,  very 
natural,  and  very  expressive.  God  is  represented  as  a  king  and  warrior,  who  has  been 
oifended  by  his  subjects,  and  who  has  come  down  from  his  palace  at  the  head  of  his 
army,  to  chastise  the  rebellious;  but  who  has  been  met  with  the  language  of  sub- 
mission and  supplication,  and  whose  wrath  is  averted,  so  that  it  is  hoped  that,  instead 
of  punishing  he  may  show  mercy,  and  may  return  to  his  palace,  leaving  behind  him 
some  tokens  of  his  favour  and  forgiveness. 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  n.  1— d2. 

I.  When  men  think  of  their  own  ill  deseets,  they   may  well  peak  the 

CONSEQUENCES   OF   God's   NOTICE   AND    ACTION. 

n.  But  when  they  think  of  God's  character  and  promises,  thbt  mat  well 

CHElilSH   THE   HOPE   THAT   HE   WILL   HAVE   MERCY   UPON   THEM. 

III.  When  faithful  and  repentant,  men  may  look,  not  merely  fob  the 
remission  op  jostly  threatened  penalties,  but  foe  the  enjoyment  op  unde- 
served blessings. 

Application.  If  we  were  to  think  ctiiefly  of  our  own  sins  and  unworthiness,  the 
utmost  that  we  could  do  would  be  to  cherisli  some  faint  hope  tiiat  mercy  might  be 
extended  to  us.  Those  untaught  by  revelation,  if  they  have  any  sense  of  their  binfulr 
ness,  cannot  go  beyond  this :  " Who  can  tell  if  he  will  repent? "  But  those  who  are 
in  possession  of  the  glad  tidings  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  will  be  guilty  of  distrusting 
and  dishonouring  God,  if  this  be  their  mental  attitude.  They  have  the  express 
assurances  of  "him  who  cannot  lie,"  and  who  has  promised  that  the  penitent  and 
believing  sinner  shall  be  pardoned,  and  put  into  the  enjoyment  of  all  spij  itual  blessings. 
They  are  not,  therefore,  at  liberty  to  doubt,  but  are  bound  to  credit  and  to  act  upon 
the  revelation  of  a  faithful  and  merciful  God. — ^T. 

Ver.  16. — Elders  and  children.  The  occasion  is  serious.  National  disaster  seems 
imminent.  What  shall  be  done  to  turn  away  Divine  anger?  Let  the  people  be  sum- 
moned to  meet  in  solemn  assembly,  and  by  fasts  and  prayers  let  them  address  them- 
selves to  the  Divine  compassion.  And  that  it  may  be  a  truly  national  and  popular 
act  of  religion,  let  no  class,  no  sex,  no  a^e,  be  omitted  from  the  surami^ns,  or  exempted 
from  the  exercises  of  devotion  and  intercession.  Thus  elders  and  children  are,  upon 
Divine  authority,  associated  in  holy  services. 

L  Old  and  youno  are  alike  partakers  of  the  Divinb  bounty,  alike  objects 
OP  Divine  care. 

II.  Old  and  young  are  alike  possessed  of  spiritual  capacities  and  faculties. 
It  is  sometimes  taken  for  granted  that  children,  because  of  imperfect  knowledge  and 
undeveloped  intellect,  are  Incapable  of  any  serious  part  in  the  religious  exercises  of  the 
Church.  But  intelligence  is  relative.  Is  not  the  "  grey  barbarian  lower  than  the 
Christian  child  "  ?  Is  not  the  full-grown  man  but  a  babe  when  compared  with  heavenly 
intelligences?  Faith  is  often  stronger  and  prayer  is  often  more  genuine  in  the  child 
than  in  the  adult. 

III.  Old  and  youno  are  alike  necessary  to  the  completeness  of  social  life. 
It  has  often  and  justly  been  said,  that  a  community  without  children  would  be  scarcely 
human.  Providence  has  so  ordered  society  that  tliose  of  all  aiies  should  live  together 
in  mutual  intercourse.  And  no  religion  can  afford  to  leave  out  of  sight  those  who  are 
growing  up  to  be  the  men  and  women  of  the  next  generation.  It  would  indeed  be 
unwiso,  even  ruinous,  to  so  adapt  the  languaj;e  and  the  thoughts  in  prayer,  praise,  or 
meditation  to  the  capacities  of  the  young,  as  to  estrange  the  mature  and  intellectual 
from  the  services  of  tlie  Church.  Yet  there  must  be  milk  fur  babes,  as  well  as  meat 
for  strong  men.  The  admonition  of  the  text  should  reach  the  ears  especially  of 
Christian  ministers,  "  Gather  the  children." — T. 

Ver.  17. — Priestly  entreaty.  The  priests  of  the  old  covenant  occupied  a  position, 
relatively  to  religion  and  to  the  Church,  very  different  from  that  occupied  by  Christian 
ministers  of  any  special  order.  Their  office  was  partly  fulfilled  and  superseded  by  the 
ministrations  of  "  the  great  High  Priest  of  our  profession,"  and  partly  taken  up  by  the 
whole  body  of  the  faithful,  who  are  "  priests  unto  God." 

L  The  priestly  oppiob.  Priests  were :  1.  Ministers  of  the  Lord,  appointed  by  him 
to  serve  in  the  offices  of  religion.  2.  Representatives  of  the  people,  from  amongst  whom 
they  were  selected  by  Divine  wisdom.  3.  Mediators  between  the  laity  whom  they 
represented,  and  the  Eternal  whom  they  served  in  his  temple. 

II.  The  priestly  qbiep.  In  time  of  calamity  it  was  the  function  of  the  priests  to 
mourn.  They  were  men,  and  representative  men.  They  were  touched  with  a  feeling 
of  the  people's  infirmities.  They  bore  the  burden  of  the  nation  on  their  hearts.  Between 
the  porch  and  the  altar,  it  was  their  sacred  function,  clad  in  dark  sackcloth,  to  lift  up 
their  voices  and  to  weep. 


Hk.  n.  1— 32.i  Tnfi  BOOtt  Of  JOEL.  S9 

IIT.  Tub  priestly  exteeaty.  The  simple  and  touching  langua::e,  in  which  the 
Hobiow  priests  appealed  on  behalf  of  the  nation  to  the  mercy  of  high  Heaven,  has 
passed  into  the  Litany  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  supplication  for  pitj  and  deliver- 
ance is  urged  by  the  united  appeal  of  the  holy  assembly  in  the  words,  "  Spare  us,  good 
Lord ! " 

IV.  Thk  peiestly  flea.  The  text  does  not  urge  the  necessities  and  sorrows  of  the 
people  as  a  motive  for  Divine  interposition,  so  much  as  the  reputation,  the  honour,  of 
the  God  of  Israel.  If  God's  chosen  people  perish,  then  Jehovah  will  no  longer  be 
worshipped,  and  the  heathen  will  triumph  over  the  downfall  of  the,  true  faith.  This 
lesson  we  may  learn  from  this  plea,  that  to  a  rightly  judging  mind  the  glory  of  God 
himself  is  the  highest,  noblest  aim  that  can  be  sought  and  striven  and  prayed  for. — T. 

Vers.  18 — ^20. — Pity  and  relenting.  The  transitions  of  sentiment  with  which  we 
meet  in  the  Hebrew  prophets  are  remarkable,  but  not  unaccountable.  Threats  and 
promises  on  God's  part,  rebellion  and  penitence  on  man's  part,  succeed  one  another  with 
great  rapidity.  Tet  there  is  order  and  method  in  these  changes,  which  are  always 
dependent  upon  moral  and  spiritual  relations,  and  are  never  arbitrary  and  capricious. 

I.  The  occasion  op  Divine  kbi.entino.  The  deep-seatqd  cause  is  to  be  found  in  the 
character,  the  moral  nature,  of  God  himself.  He  is  merciful,  and  delights  in  mercy. 
Yet  tills  attiibute  can  be  exercised  only  upon  certain  conditions,  only  towards  those  in 
a  certain  attitude  of  heart.  Penitence,  humiliation,  contrition,  entreaty,  on  the  part  of 
Judah,  account  for  the  exercise  of  compassion  on  the  part  of  Gud. 

II.  Divine  relenting  leads  to  the  removal  of  qribvoits  evils.  The  northern 
army  of  locusts,  and  perhaps  also  a  hostile  force  figured  by  it,  should  be  driven  away, 
and  famine  and  pestilence  averted.  The  penalties  of  sin,  being  intended  mainly  for 
the  correction  of  offenders,  are  not  retained  when  their  purpose  is  accomplished.  In  the 
midst  of  wrath  God  remembers  mercy. 

III.  Divine  eelentino  proves  itself  by  an  abundant  beneficence.  The  Jews 
were  assured  that,  as  a  sign  that  the  storm-cloud  of  wrath  was  overpast,  they  should 
again  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  earth — "  corn,  wine,  and  oil."  Those  whom  God  pardons 
he  blesses  too ;  he  takes  away  the  wrath  to  bestow  the  loving-kindness  j  the  load  of 
trouble  itS  cast  into  the  sea,  and  "  he  loa  ieth  with  benefits." — ^T. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Joy  after  sorrow.  In  highly  figurative  language  the  prophet  apostro- 
phizes the  very  soil  of  Judah,  the  very  cattle  of  the  field.  By  poetic  imagining  he 
transfers  the  joy  of  the  people  to  the  objects,  inanimate  and  animate,  by  which  they 
are  surrounded.     General  mercies  awaken  general  joy. 

I.  The  FAVotTK  of  God  banishes  feab.  If  natural  calamities  have  power  to  excite 
alarm  and  foreboding,  much  more  is  this  the  case  with  the  displeasure  of  the  Ruler  and 
Judge  of  all.  Men  do  indeed  adopt  various  devices  to  silence  the  voice  of  lear,  to 
persuade  themselves  that  all  will  be  well  with  them.  But  there  is  no  true  remedy  for 
painful  foreboding  except  the  assurance  of  Divine  reconciliation  and  acceptance. 

II.  The  favour  op  Uod  creates  gladness.  When  the  Ibcusts  were  swept  away, 
the  scourge  removed,  and  when  the  earth  resumed  its  garb  of  fertility  and  uttered  its 
promises  of  fruitfulness,  a  universal  rejoicing  took  the  place  of  mourning,  distress,  and 
alarm.  And  in  the  spiritual  realm,  when  the  grace  and  love  of  God  are  realized,  it  is 
felt  that  the  blessing  of  God  maketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow.  And  the  inspired 
admonitions  are  lelt  to  be  congenial :" Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alwayj"  "Rejoice  ever- 
more."—T. 

Ver.  23. — Showers  of  blessing.  In  Palestine  the  hopes  of  the  people  for  an  abundant 
harvest  were  always  coimected  with  the  appointed  seasons  of  refreshing  and  vivifying 
rain.  This  is  in  Scripture  an  emblem  of  spiritual  effusions  enriching  and  fertilizing 
the  Church  of  God. 

I.  Showers  op  blessing  come  from  above. 

II.  Showers  of  blessing  fall  in  their  appointed  season. 

in.  Showers  op  blessing  respond  to  the  faith  and  entreaties  of  God'i 

HERITAGE. 

IV.  Showers  of  blessing  create  fertility  and  abundance, 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  u.  1—32. 

v.  Showers  of  blessing  awaken  the  voice,  the  bono,  of  thanksgiving  and  of 

JOT. 

Application.  There  is  nothing  arbitrary  in  the  bestowal  of  spiritual  blessing.  The 
dews  and  rains  from  heaven  are  bestowed  in  accordance  with  Divine  wisdom.  And 
spiritual  mercies  are  assured  in  response  to  faith  and  prayer.  And  God  has  said, 
"  Prove  me  now,  and  see  if  I  will  not  open  tlie  windows  of  heaven,  and  pour  you  out  a 
blessmg." — ^T. 

Ver.  27. — The  God  of  Israel,  No  doubt  the  less  enligl  tened  among  the  Jews  may 
have  cherished  superstitious  views  regarding  Jehovah,  and  have  regarded  him  as  their 
tutelary  Deity,  just  as  neighbouring  nations  thought  of  Baal  or  Ashtoreth.  But  the 
devout  and  intelligent  believed  both  in  the  imiversal  Lordship  of  Jehovah,  and  in  his 
special  interest  in  and  care  for  his  chosen  nation  Israel.  Thus  we,  as  Christians, 
holding  the  Supreme  to  be  God  over  all  the  earth,  yet  consider  him  to  be  in  a  very 
special  sense  the  God  of  his  own  Church,  purchased  with  the  precious  blood  of  his  Son. 

I.  The  evidence  which  convinces  ns  that  the  Lobd  is  our  God.  1.  As  in  the 
case  of  Israel,  so  in  our  ca^e,  God  is  known  by  his  delivering  mercy.  He  who  saved 
the  Jews  from  locusts  and  from  armies,  delivers  us  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  death. 
2.  And,  as  Jehovah  crowned  the  national  life  of  Israel  with  plenty  and  prosperity,  so 
has  he  made  all  provision  for  our  spiritual  well-being  and  happiness,  in  the  gift  of  his 
Son  and  in  the  dispensation  of  his  Spirit. 

n.  The  cokseqtjenoes  of  oue  conviction  that  the  Lobd  is  otje  God.  "My 
people,"  says  the  Lord,  "  shall  never  be  ashamed ; "  i.e.  because :  1.  They  sliall  never 
be  disregarded ;  their  prayers  shall  always  be  heard  with  favour.  2.  They  shall  never 
be  disappointed  ;  the  expectations  which  the  Lord  awakens  he  will  fulfil.  3.  They 
shall  never  be  forsaken ;  for  he  says,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee." — T. 

Vers.  28,  29. — The  outpouring  of  the  Spirit.  We  have  the  authority  of  St.  Peter  for 
applying  this  prediction  to  the  Messianic  dispensation.  Joel's  mind  was  lifted  up  by 
the  happy  prospect  in  the  immediate  future  fur  his  cjuntrymen,  and,  as  was  so  often 
the  case,  his  prophetic  gaze  pierced  the  dense  mists  of  futurity,  and  he  beheld  "the 
wonder  that  should  be." 

I.  The  period  of  the  gift  It  is  not  intended  to  teach  that  the  bestowal  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  was  deferred,  and  reserved  for  the  Messianic  age.  Yet  no  believer  in  the 
New  Testament  can  doubt  that  the  Day  of  Pentecost  witnessed  an  unprecedented  out- 
pouring of  Divine  energy  and  grace,  in  itself  the  herald  and  the  piomise  of  a  constant 
perennial  effusion  of  blessing  upon  all  the  Church  of  the  ascended  Eedeemer. 

II.  The  nature  of  the  gift.  It  was  an  invisible,  impalpable  grace ;  its  operation 
took  place  in  spiritual  natures.  The  Spirit  of  God  bestowed  those  special  gifts  of  inspira- 
tion, of  faith,  of  healings,  of  tongues,  which  were  peculiar  to  the  first  age  of  the  Ghurcli. 
The  same  Spirit  confeired  the  gifts  of  teaching  and  administration,  which  have  tended 
to  the  edification  and  increase  of  the  body  of  Christ.  But  the  choicest  and  richest  of 
spiritual  gifts  have  ever  been  those  of  character  and  principle,  of  disposition  and  habit, 
which  have  made  the  Church  the  true  representative  upon  earth  of  its  ascended  Lord. 
Of  these  gifts  the  chief  is  love. 

III.  The  abundance  ok  the  gift.  The  promise  is  not  of  scanty  drops,  but  of 
copious  showers.     The  great  Giver  delights  to  give  generously,  royally,  gloriously. 

IV.  The  recipients  of  the  gifts.  The  most  marvellous  part  of  this  magnificent 
projihecy  is  the  language  in  which  is  described  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  Church 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  1.  Among  these  recipients  of  spiritual  grace  are  men  and  women. 
"  Your  sons  and  your  daughters."  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  ueither  male  nor  female. 
2.  Old  and  young  are  alike  included  among  the  seers  of  visions  and  the  dreamers  of 
dreams;  for  upon  every  enlightened  soul  shall  stream  the  light  which  is  not  of  this 
world,  and  which  reveals  eternal  realities.  3.  Upon  bond  and  upon  free  the  graces  of 
the  Spirit  are  shed  without  distinction.  Servants  and  handmaids  are  participators  in 
the  Spirit;  for  all  are  free  in  Christ  Jesus.  4.  To  make  this  universality  explicit,  it  is 
expressly  said  that  the  outpouring  shall  be  upon  "  all  flesh,"  i.e,  upon  all  humanity. 
Beyond  a  prospect  like  this,  the  vision  of  inspired  prophets  could  not  extend ;  the  grace 
of  the  infinite  Giver  could  not  be  vaster  and  more  comprehensive. — T. 


CH.  11.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  41 

Ver.  32. — The  promise  of  salvation.  As  the  preceding  passnge  is  claimed  liy  St. 
Peter  in  the  Acts,  so  this  is  claimed  by  St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Roruans,  aa 
referring  to  the  dispensation  of  the  Messiah.  The  declaration  of  Joel  is  descriptive 
of  the  gospel — ^the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  adapted  and  published  to  all  mankind. 
Observe — 

I.  In  what  the  demvekance  consists.  Not  in  exemption  oi'  release  from  temporal 
calamity  or  disaster ;  but  iu  spiritual  rescue  and  emancipation — salvation  from  sin,  its 
bondage  and  its  penalty. 

II.  Upon  what  condition  the  delivebahce  is  proffered  and  promised.  Calling 
upon  the  Name  of  the  Lord  involves :  1.  A  sense  of  personal  need  and  danger.  2.  A 
conviction  of  the  power  of  God  to  save.  3.  Faith  in  his  declared  willingness  to  be 
the  Deliverer  of  his  people.     4.  The  cry  of  the  heart  to  God  the  Saviour. 

III.  To  WHOM  the  promise  op  dblivbbancb  is  addressed.  "Whosoever"  is  a 
wide,  all-embracing  term,  comprehending  not  only  every  class  of  society,  but  every 
nation,  and  every  grade  of  character.  St.  Paul  himself  scarcely  went  beyond  this, 
when  he  said  that  "  God  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them  that  believe." — T. 

Vers.  28,  29. — The  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  These  words  were  to  have  their 
fulfilment  after  the  purpose  expressed  in  the  twenty-third  verse  had  been  accomplished. 
The  marginal  translation  there  is  the  more  correct.  Joel  called  upon  the  children  of 
Zion  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  because  he  was  about  to  send  "  a  Teacher  of  righteousness." 
This  was  he  of  whom  Nicodemus,  the  ruler  of  the  Jews,  said,  "We  know  that  thou 
ait  a  Teacher  come  from  God :  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  which  thou  doest, 
oxcept  God  be  with  him."  We  must  look,  therefore,  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy 
in  our  text  after  the  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Peter  was  right  in  recognizing  it 
in  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  the  Church  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  16 — 21).  But 
the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  is  recurrent.  The  Church  has  known  many  a  Pentecost.  It 
is  within  our  reach  now,  and  we  all  sorely  need  it. 

I.  The  effects  of  the  effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost  may  be  briefly  suggested,  so 
far  as  they  are  alluded  to  in  our  text.  Amongst  them  may  be  mentioneil  the  following. 
1.  Bdief  in  the  supernatural.  "  Visions  "  and  "  dreams  "  were  the  means  of  Divine 
revelation.  We  read  of  them  in  the  history  of  Joseph,  Daniel,  Ezekiel,  and  others, 
mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament.  Under  the  new  dispensation  Peter  had  visions  of 
angels ;  Paul  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord  more  than  once ;  Stephen  beheld  Jesus  stand- 
ing at  the  right  hand  of  God;  John  gazed  on  the  glories  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  and 
rejoiced  in  visions  of  his  Lord.  If  such  special  manifestations  are  no  longer  given, 
spiritual  realities  around  us  are  not  the  less  confidently  believed  in  by  men  baptized 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  are  laughed  at  by  the  world  as  dreams  and  visions  are 
actual  truths  and  obvious  phenomena  in  Christian  experience.  Spiritual  truths  are 
spiritually  discerned.  2.  Fearless  enunciation  of  Divine'^truth.  "  Prophecy  "  is  used 
in  two  senses  in  Scripture.  As  the  faculty  of  foretelling  future  events,  it  was  prevalent 
in  the  Christian  Church.  Agabus,  and  the  daughters  of  Philip  the  evangelist,  were  not 
alone  in  their  gifts.  Even  now  coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before  on  the  sensi- 
tive souls  of  believers,  whose  answered  prayers  are  the  beginnings  of  the  Divine  purposes. 
But  if  we  take  the  phrase  in  its  more  ordinary  acceptation,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  gives  courage  and  power  for  utterance  of  Divine  truth.  This 
the  apostles  realized.  Feeble  and  trembling  before  Pentecost,  they  shook  the  world  by 
their  bold  preaching  after  it.  3.  The  extension  of  the  covenant.  "  I  will  pour  out  my 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh"  can  only  mean  the  inclusion  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  covenant 
blessings  And  it  was  the  fact  that  to  them  also  was  given  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
broke  down  the  prejudices  of  tbe  apostles  and  led  them  to  the  inclusion  of  these  iu 
the  Christian  Church.  Gcbd  put  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  nor  does  he 
now.  4.  The  exaltation  of  the  lowliest.  The  "  servants  "  and  the  "  handmaids,"  in 
other  words,  the  male  and  female  slaves,  were  not  to  be  exclu'led.  God  was  no 
respecter  of  persons.  Onesimus,  the  fugitive  slave,  was  as  true  a  convert  as  his  master, 
Philemon. 

II.  The  attitude  of  soul  necessary  to  the  reception  of  this  blessino.  This 
we  may  learn  from  a  comparison  of  the  passage  with  the  actual  experience  of  the 
apostles.     1.  The  Church  should  fed  profoundly  convinced  of  her  weakness.     Af 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [ch.  ii.  1— 32 

afBictions  brought  down  the  Jews,  so  the  departure  of  their  Lord  saddened  and  dis- 
heartened the  apostles.  They  had  no  strength,  and  they  knew  it.  Therefore  they 
could  only  tariy  in  Jerusalem  until  they  were  endued  with  power  from  on  high.  "  He 
that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  "My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 
2.  The  Church  should  cherish  strong  confidence  in  the^power  of  God.  All  that  puts 
natural  causes  in  the  place  of  the  Divine  energy  which  is  in  them,  weakens  this  faith. 
As  the  earth  is  dependent  on  the  rains,  and  "  lives  because  heaven  weeps  over  it,"  so 
is  the  Church  dependent  on  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  from  on  high.  According 
to  our  faith  so  it  will  be  unto  us.  3.  The  Chwrch  must  bestir  herself  to  hdieuing  arid 
importunate  prayer.  Compare  the  Lord's  parable  of  the  importunate  widow.  Becall 
the  promise,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,"  etc.  Above  all,  trust  to  this  explicit  decla- 
ration, "If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your  children,  how 
much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ? " 
—A.  R. 

Ver.  32. — The  call  of  the  convicted.  The  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  took  place  on 
the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Then  God  poured  out  his  Spirit  from  on  high,  and  the  despised 
disciples  were  inspired  to  speak,  while  multitudes  were  convinced  of  their  sin  against 
Messiah,  and  cried  not  in  vain  for  mercy  and  salvation.  Such  results  still  follow  the 
effusion  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  Church  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  the  faithful. 
We  will  consider  the  special  effect  alluded  to  in  our  text,  namely,  the  cry  of  those 
convicted  of  sin. 

L  The  condition  op  the  coijteite.  Tliey  are  in  danger,  or  they  would  not  require 
to  be  "delivered."  Those  who  heard  the  apostles  "were  pricked  in  their  heart,  and 
said  unto  Peter  and  to  the  lest  of  the  apostles.  Men  and  bretliren,  what  shall  we  do  ?  "  for 
they  knew  that  they  had  sinned  against  God  in  the  rejection  of  his  Son.  1.  Tftey  were 
guilty  of  sin.  Who  is  not?  Even  children  have  evil  tendencies  which  respond  to 
temptation.  The  heart  of  a  child  is  like  a  pool  of  water  which  seems  perfectly  clear, 
but  let  it  be  once  stirred,  and  it  is  at  once  beclouded.  Sin  is  a  terrible  thing.  lu 
Scripture  it  is  spoken  of  as  a  debt  we  cannot  pay,  as  a  burden  we  cannot  bear,  as  a 
thief  who  robs  us,  as  a  leprosy  which  corrupts  us,  and  as  a  poison  that  ends  in  death. 
Sin  has  insulted  God  and  robbed  him  of  his  children,  and  nailed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
to  the  cross.  But  however  widespiead  and  deadly  its  influence,  "whosoever  shall  call 
on  the  Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  delivered."  2.  ITiey  were  convicted  of  sin.  Unless 
they  had  been  they  would  not  have  called  upon  God.  It  is  not  simply  a  knowledge 
that  all  men  are  sinners  which  is  required,  but  a  sense  of  our  personal  responsibility  in 
regard  to  sin.  There  is  a  great  difference  between  knowing  that  fire  burns,  and  know- 
ing that  we  are  being  burnt.  3.  They  were  convicted  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Yet  he  is 
called  "the  Comforter."  He  is  likened  to  the  dove,  to  the  breath  which  Jesus 
breathed,  to  the  dew  that  lights  upon  the  grass,  and  to  the  oil  of  joy.  Nevertheless, 
it  is  his  work  to  "convince  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  a  judgmtnt  to 
cnme ; "  and  in  doing  so  he  overwhelms  sinners  with  a  sense  of  shame  and  peril.  But  for 
this,  there  would  W  no  cry  and  no  deliverance.  Pain  is  a  necessary  stage  of  cure  in 
such  a  disease  as  sin.  If,  a  wound  has  been  long  neglected,  the  wise  surgeon  will  lake 
off  all  the  coverings  which  have  been  wrapped  over  it  in  ignorance,  and  will  give  nuw 
agony  lor  a  time,  if  only  he  is  able  to  get  rid  of  the  venom.  But  after  that  he  will 
bind  it  up.  So  must  the  Holy  Spirit  wound  before  he  heals.  We  must  have  the 
broken  heart  before  God  can  bind  it  up.  Conviction  of  sin  shows  that  God  has  not 
given  us  up. 

II.  The  cry  op  the  contbite.  It  has  been  said  that  we  are  not  saved  by  prayer,  but 
we  cannot  be  saved  without  it.  Prayer  is  the  soul  going  to  its  refuge,  or  rather  it  is 
the  soul  laying  hold  on  the  hand  that  draws  it  into  the  refuge.  1.  Prayer  is  the  ordi- 
nance of  God.  It  is  as  much  a  law  as  is  the  law  of  gravitation,  and  is  proved  by 
experiment,  not  by  a  priori  argument  as  to  its  probability.  True,  God  is  our  loving 
Father;  but  unless  we  arise  and  go  to  him  as  the  prodigal  did,  we  shall  not  have  the 
welcome  and  the  kiss,  the  robe  and  the  music.  2.  Prayer  implies  faith  and  hope. 
We  must'  have  faith  in  the  character  of  God — in  his  "Name,"  to  use  the  phrase  in 
our  text — that  is,  in  what  he  has  made  known  of  himself.  For  example,  he  is  revealed 
to  us  as  the  Eoly  One;  so  that  we  can  only  go  to  him  when  we  are  really  wishing  to 


CH.  II.  1—32.]  TUE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  i3 

forsake  sin,  to  be  helped  out  of  it  instead  of  being  helped  in  it.  He  is  omniscient ; 
therefoie  thoroughness  in  confession  is  required,  for  he  knows  us  so  perfectly  that  we 
dare  not  dissemble,  nor  cloke  our  sins  before  him.  And  he  is  almighty — well  able  to 
give  us  the  pardon  and  deliverance  we  need.  His  "  name  "  is  "  Jesus,"  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins.  Add  to  faith  in  his  character  faith  in  his  nearness.  It  is 
useless  to  cry  to  one  who  is  out  of  hearing.  He  is  a  God  near,  arid  not  far  off.  3. 
Prayer  may  be  a  simple  call.  It  is  a  cry  rather  than  a  statement.  The  Pharisee  told 
God  much,  but  he  did  not  pray.  The  publican  smote  upon  his  breast  and  cried  for 
mercy ;  and  God  heard  his  prayer,  and  he  went  down  to  his  house  justified. 

III.  The  promise  to  the  contrite.  1.  They  shall  be  delivered :  (1)  From  the  fore- 
bodings of  doom.  (2)  From  the  terrors  of  an  awakened  conscience.  (3)  From  vain 
efforts  at  self-reform.  (4)  From  the  power  and  from  the  love  of  sin.  2.  Ddiveratice 
vtill  come  through  faith  in  the  crucified  Saviour.  To  this  the  Jews  were  brought  on 
he  Day  of  Pentecost.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 
3.  Delivera/nce  will  follow  on  the  cry  for  mercy.  All  are  encouraged  to  call  upon  the 
Lord — the  bcuikslider,  the  vmeducated,  the  child,  the  degraded  and  abandoned.  "  As  I 
live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth ;  wherefore  turn 
yourselves,  and  live  ye." — A.  B. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  ministry  of  alarm.  "Blow  ye  the  trumpet  in  Zion,"  etc.  Zion 
was  the  meeting-place  for  the  people  of  God,  and  may  be  fairly  taken  as  a  type  of  the 
true  Church  in  all  ages.  We  may  take  these  verses  as  setting  forth  one  aspect  of  the 
Church's  ministry,  namely,  the  ministry  of  alarm. 

I.  It  has  to  announce  a  judgment  that  is  terrible.  How  graphically  and 
appallingly  does  the  prophet  set  forth  the  tremendousness  of  the  calamity  that  was 
about  being  inflicted  on  Judah  I  It  was  a  day  of  "  darkness  and  gloominess,"  a  day  of 
"  clouds  "  and  of  "  thick  darkness,"  etc.  We  have  here  :  1.  The  executors  of  the  judg- 
ment. Whom  did  the  Almighty  Governor  of  the  world  now  employ  to  execute  his 
judgments'?  The  magnates  of  the  earth,  or  the  illustrious  legions  of  heaven?  No; 
locusts.  He  brings  them  out  by  millions,  and  marslials  them  as  his  battalions,  to  fight 
against  sin  and  crush  the  sinner.  So  dense  are  their  crowds,  that  they  darken  the  sun 
and  conceal  the  stars.  So  rapid  their  movement,  and  so  closely  do  they  jostle  together, 
that  their  noise  is  like  "  the  noise  of  chariots  on  the  top  of  the  mountains."  The  sun- 
beam falleth  on  their  glazed  wings,  so  that  they  appear  as  a  "  fire  that  falleth  before 
them,  and.  behind  them  as  a  flame  that  burneth."  They  move  with  such  order  and  force 
that  their  appearance  is  like  "  horses  "  and  "  horsemen."  The  meanest  insect  is  God's 
messenger ;  the  little  locust  he  employs  as  an  officer  of  his  justice.  2.  .7%e  effects  of  the 
judgment.  "  The  land  is  as  the  garden  of  Eden  before  them,  and  beliind  them  as  a 
desolate  wilderness."  Note  the  power  of  combination.  These  little  insects  singly 
were  comparatively  powerless;  in  combination  they  moved  with  a  resistless  energy. 
Unity  is  strength.  This  terrible  judgment,  however,  is  but  a  faint  shadow  of  that 
more  terrihle  judgment  that  awaits  this  wicked  world,  "  when  the  Son  of  man  shall 
come  in  all  his  glory,  with  his  holy  angels,"  etc.  "  I  saw,  and,  behold,  a  great  white 
throne,"  etc. 

II.  It  had  to  announce  a  judgment  that  was  approaching.  "  The  day  of  the 
Lord  Cometh ;  it  is  nigh  at  hand."  '1  his  terrible  army  of  insects  was  now  in  the  course 
of  formation,  and  was  gathering  together  for  the  fearful  work  of  desi  ruction.  'J  he 
Church  now  has  to  give  warning  of  a  judgment  that  ii  coming.  "  The  day  of  the 
Lord  wOl  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night,  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away,"  etc. 
Yes,  it  is  coming.  Its  dim  rays  of  dawn  are  seen  on  the  tops  of  the  distant  liills ;  the 
terrible  sun  will  break  forth  in  the  heavens  ere  long :  it  will  indeed  be  "  the  day  of  the 
Lord."  The  Church's  work  is  to  warn  every  man,  lo  blow  the  trumpet  of  alarm,  give 
it  a  blast  that  shall  startle  the  thoughtless  generation. — D.  T. 

Vers.  12,  13. — Soul-reformation.  "  Therefore  also  now,"  etc.  Observe  here  three 
things  in  relation  to  soul-reformation. 

I.  Its  process.'  Turning  to  the  Lord.  "  Turn  ye  unto  the  Lord  your  God."  The 
unregenerate  man  is  an  alien  from  God.  Like  the  prodigal  sou,  he  has  left  his  Father's 
h^vjse  and  gone  iiito  the  "far  country"  of  carnality  and  sin.     Befonii  i»  turning  and 


44  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [ch.  ii.  1—32. 

directing  his  steps  back  to  God.  Soul-reformation  is  not  turning  from  one  doctrine,  or 
Church,  or  habit  to  another,  but  turning  to  God,  going  back  with  all  its  deepest  love 
to  him.  But  in  turning  there  is  deep  moral  contrition ;  there  is  "  fasting,"  and  "weep- 
ing," and  "  mourning,"  and  the  "  rending  of  the  heart."  Soul-reformation  begins  in 
genuine  repentance  for  past  sins.  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  Heaven,  and  in  thj 
sight." 

II.  Its  urgbnot.  "  Therefore  also  now,  saith  the  Lord."  Yes,  now  is  the  time ; 
there  is  nothing  more  urgent ;  everything  must  make  way  for  tliis ;  until  this  is  done, 
nothing  is  done  properly.  Now ;  1.  Because .  the  work  is  of  the  most  paramount 
importance.  2.  Because  the  time  for  accomplishing  it  is  very  short.  Whatever  other 
work  you  adjourn  to  a  future  time,  for  your  soul's  sake  adjourn  not  this  for  a  single 
hour. 

III.  Its  enoouraqbmbnt.  "  For  he  is  gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger  and  of 
great  kindness,  and  repenteth  him  of  the  eviL"  The  word  deprecateth  would  be  better 
than  "  repenteth."  The  inflicting  of  sufferings  on  his  creatures  is  repugnant  to  his 
nature.  "  He  desireth  not  the  death  of  the  sinner."  What  an  encouragement  it  is  to 
the  sinner  to  turn  to  the  Lord,  to  be  assured  that  he  will  be  welcomed  with  all  the 
love  and  tender  sympathy  of  an  affectionate  father  1 — ^D,  T. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — An  urgently  demanded  meeting'.  "Blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion,"  etc. 
Men  are  constantly  assembling  themselves  together  for  one  purpose  or  another — poli- 
tical, commercial,  scientific,  entertaining.  But  of  all  the  meetings,  none  are  so  urgent 
as  the  one  indicated  in  the  text. 

I.  It  IS  A  MEETING  CALLED  ON  ACCOUNT  OF  COMMON  SIN.  All  the  people  of  .Tudah 
had  sinned  grievously,  and  they  were  now  summoned  together  on  that  account.  No 
subject  is  of  such  urgent  importance  as  this.  Sin,  this  was  the  root  of  all  the  miseries 
of  their  country.  It  behoved  them  to  meet  together  in  order  to  deliberate  how  best  to 
tear  up  this  upas,  how  best  to  dry  up  this  pestiferous  fountain  of  all  their  calamities. 

II.  It  IS  A  MEETING  COMPOSED  OP  ALL  CLASSES.  The  young  and  the  old  were 
there ;  the  sad  and  the  jubilant ;  even  the  bridal  pair ;  the  priests  and  the  people. 
The  subject  concerned  them  all ;  all  were  vitally  interested  in  it.  Sin  is  no  class  sub- 
ject.    It  concerns  the  man  iu  imperial  purple  as  well  as  the  man  in  pauper's  rags. 

III.  It  is  a  MEETING  FOR  HUMILIATION  AND  PBATER.  "Let  the  prfests  and  the 
ministers  weep  between  the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  let  them  say.  Spare  thy  people, 
0  Lord ! "  It  was  not  a  meeting  for  debate  or  discussion,  for  mere  social  intercourse 
and  entertainment ;  but  for  profound  humiliation  before  God. 

Conclusion.  No  meeting  in  England  is  more  urgently  demanded  to-day  than  such 
a  one  as  this. — D.  T. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Interaction  of  the  Divine  and  human.  "Then  will  the  Lord  bo 
jealous,"  etc.  These  verses  refer  to  the  removal  both  of  the  actual  calamity  under 
which  the  nation  were  suffering,  namely,  the  plague  of  locusts,  and  also  to  the  removal 
of  that  calamity  which  was  to  come  upon  them  by  the  invasion  of  a  foreign  foe,  namely, 
the  Assyrians.  The  latter  is  evidently  referred  to  in  ver.  20 :  "I  will  remove  far  off 
from  you  the  northern  army,  and  will  drive  him  into  a  land  barren  and  desolate,  with 
his  face  toward  the  east  sea,  and  his  hinder  part  toward  the  utmost  sea,  and  his  stink 
shall  come  up,  and  his  ill  savour  shaU  come  up,  because  he  hath  done  great  things." 
Henderson  implies  that  the  passage  in  Zeph.  ii.  13,  "  He  will  stretch  out  his  hand 
against  the  north,  and  destroy  Assyria ;  and  will  make  Nineveh  a  desolation,  and  dry 
like  a  wilderness,"  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  the  term  "  northern  "  here  refers  to  the 
Assyrian'  power.  However,  for  homiletical  purposes,  it  scarcely  matters  whether  the 
locusts,  Assyrians,  or  any  other  destructive  enemy  are  referred  to.  The  grand  question 
is — What  are  the  truths  contained  in  the  paragraph  that  are  of  universal  importance 
and  application?     The  f  illowing  are  clearly  deducible. 

L  That  the  material  condition  op  a  people  depends  upon  the  Divine 
OPERATIONS.  Two  things  are  referred  to  in  the  passage  as  the  works  of  the  Almighty 
towards  the  Jewish  people  at  this  time.  1.  The  withdrawal  of  calamities.  "  I  will 
lemove  far  off  from  you  the  northern  army,  and  will  drive  him  into  a  land  barren  and 
desolate."    When  terrible  calamiiies  come  upon  a  people,  such  as  hosts  of  destructive 


OH.  n.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  46 

insects,  or  pestilence,  famine,  or  war,  who  but  the  Almighty  can  remove  them  ?  Men 
may  and  ought  to  employ  means;  but  futile  for  ever  will  be  all  human  efforts  without 
the  co-operation  of  Almighty  power.  This  fact  should  teach  us  ever  to  look  to  him 
and  him  only  for  deliverance  from  evil  at  all  times,  both  material  and  moral.  2.  The 
hestowment  of  blessings.  "The  Lord  will  answer  and  say  unto  his  people,  Behold,  I 
will  send  you  corn,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  ye  shall  be  satisfied  therewith :  and  I  will 
no  more  make  you  a  reproach  among  the  heathen."  The  productions  of  the  earth  are 
dependent  every  moment  upon  Almighty  power.  At  his  bidding  the  most  fertile 
regions  of  nature  are  struck  into  barrenness,  and  deserts  and  wildernesses  become  fertile 
and  beautiful  as  Eden.  The  pseudo-scientist  of  this  age  traces  the  operations  of  nature 
to  what  he  calls  "  laws,"  a  term  to  cover  his  ignorance.  But  true  philosophy  as  well  as 
the  Bible  teaches  that  nature  is  absolutely  in  God's  hands.  "  He  causes  the  sun  to  rise 
and  to  set."  He  poureth  down  the  genial  showers  and  sealeth  the  heavens.  A  prac- 
tical recognition  of  him  in  all  the  phenomena  of  nature  is  what  reason  and  religion 
demand.    "  E.very  good  and  perfect  gift,"  etc. 

IL  That  the  Divine  operations  abb  influenced  by  the  moral  condition 
OF  THE  FEOFLE.  We  are  taught  here,  that  the  removal  of  the  calamity  and  the 
bestowment  of  the  blessing  came  upon  the  people  in  consequence  of  the  moral  humilia-  , 
tion  for  their  sins,  described  in  the  preceding  verses.  The  priests  and  the  ministers  of 
the  Lord  wept  between  the  altar,  and  said,  "  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord ! "  etc.  "  The 
porch  before  the  temple  was  a  hundred  and  twenty  cubits  high,  twenty  broad  from  north 
to  south,  and  ten  from  east  to  west.  The  altar  was  that  of  burnt  offering  in  the  court 
of  the  priests.  Here,  with  their  backs  toward  the  altar,  on  which  they  had  nothing 
to  offer,  and  their  faces  directed  towards  the  residence  of  the  Shechinah,  they  were  to 
weep,  and  make  supplication  on  behalf  of  the  people."  That  the  Divine  conduct 
towards  us  depends  upon  our  conduct  towards  Heaven,  is  inexplicable  to  us  although 
clearly  taught  in  the  Word  of  God.  Indeed,  consciousness  assures  us  that  he  is  to  us 
what  we  are  to  him.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  God  will  alter  the  laws  of  nature 
because  of  human  prayers  or  human  conduct,  says  the  sceptic  scientist.  But  what 
laws  of  nature  are  more  manifest,  more  universal,  settled  and  unalterable  than  the 
tendency  of  human  souls  to  personal  and  intercessory  prayer?  Prom  every  human 
heart  the  world  over,  there  goes  up  to  the  great  Spirit  in  some  form  or  other  a  prayer, 
either  for  self  or  others.  Every  aspiration  is  a  prayer — "  God  help  me  I "  "God  help  thee ! " 
"  Gk)d  help  him ! "  "  God  help  them  1 "  Point  out  to  me  a  human  soul  where  the  spirit 
of  these  is  not  being  breathed  out  every  day.  Scripture  abounds  with  examples  too 
numerous  here  to  write  of  God  apparently  altering  his  conduct  on  account  of  man's 
supplications. 

in.  That  the  BianT  moral  conduct  of  a  feoplb  will  ensure  them  Divine 
BENEDICTIONS.  "  Pear  not,  0  land ;  be  glad  and  rejoice :  for  the  Lord  will  do  great 
things.  Be  not  afraid,  ye  beasts  of  the  field :  for  the  pastures  of  the  wilderness  do 
spring,  for  the  tree  beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig  tree  and  the  vine  do  yield  their  strength. 
Be  glad  then,  ye  children  of  Zion,  and  rejoice  in  the  Lord  your  God :  for  he  hath  given 
you  the  former  rain  moderately,  and  he  will  cause  to  come  down  for  you  the  rain,  the 
former  rain,  and  the  latter  rain  in  the  first  month."  In  these  verses  there  is  a  beautiful 
gradation.  Pirst,  the  land  which  has  been  destroyed  by  the  enemy  is  addressed  in  a 
prosopopoeia ;  then  the  irrational  animals  which  had  suffered  from  the  famine ;  and  lastly, 
the  inhabitants  themselves.  All  are  called  upon  to  cast  off  their  fears,  and  rejoice  in 
the  happy  change  which  God  would  effect.  Desolation,  barrenness,  and  famine  would 
disappear,  and  times  of  prosperity  and  happiness  return.  It  is  too  clear  for  either  argu- 
ment or  illustration,  that  if  you  change  the  moral  character  of  any  country  from 
ignorance  to  intelligence,  from  indolence  to  industry,  from  intemperance  to  self-discipline, 
from  sensualness  to  spirituality,  from  enmity  to  love,  that  the  whole  materiid  region  in 
which  they  live  may  abound  with  plentifulness  and  beauty.  Such  a  change  throughout 
the  whole  human  population  to-day  will  give  to  all  a  new  heaven  and  new  earth. — D.  T. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Two/old  restoration.  "  And  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the 
locust  hath  eaten,"  etc.     These  words  refer  to  a  twofold  restoration. 

I.  The  restoration  op  lost  material  mercies.  "I  will  restore  you  the  years 
that  the  locust  hath  eaten,"  etc.     That  the  prophet  has  here  in  view  the  plague  of 


4»  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  n.  1—32, 

locusts  described  in  oh.  i.,  cannot  well  Ije  doubted.  The  names,  though  placed  in 
a  different  order,  are  identical  with  those  there  specified.  "  Mi/  great  army."  They 
are  called  God's  great  army,  a  name  still  given  to  them  by  the  Arabs.  Though  a 
scourge  lasted  only  one  year,  yet,  as  they  not  only  destroyed  the  whole  produce  of  that 
year,  but  ."(Iso  what  was  laid  up  in  store  for  future  years,  the  calamity  was  great.  The 
loss  of  these  God  promises  to  recompense  or  make  good  by  not  only  furnishing  them 
with  an  abundance  of  temporal  enjoyments,  but  affording  them  a  delightful  experience 
of  his  presence  and  favour  as  their  covenant  God.  This  promise  is  amplified  in  vers. 
20,  27.  Eestoration  in  God's  peculiar  work.  Who  can  restore  the  earth  but  him  V 
An  insect  may  destroy  a  giant ;  but  God  alone  can  restore  the  life  of  a  dying  flower. 
Restoration  is  God's  constant  work.  Fiom  death  he  brings  life  to  all  nature.  Spiing 
is  the  grand  annual  illustration  of  it.  God  restores  lost  temporal  blessings  to  his  people 
in  two  ways.  1.  By  giving  back  the  same  in  kind,  as  in  the  case  of  Job.  2.  By 
bestowing  that  which  answers  the  same  purpose. 

II.  The  bebtoration  op  lost  bbligioub  peivilegbs.  What  are  these  ?  1.  Wor- 
ship. "  And  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied,  and  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
your  God,  that  hath  dwelt  wondrously  with  you:  and  my  people  shall  never  be 
•  ashamed."  True  worship  is  one  of  man's  greatest  and  most  original  privileges  of  his 
being.  True  worship  is  supreme  love  for  the  supremely  good.  The  loss  of  this  has 
been  man's  crime  and  ruin  ;  the  restoration  of  this  is  his  salvation.  When  men  come 
to  praise  the  Lord  as  they  ought  to,  they  reach  the  heaven  of  their  being.  2.  Com- 
munion. "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  and  that  I  am  the 
fjord  your  God,  and  none  else."  Loving  fellowship  with  the  infinite  Father  is  also 
another  privilege  which  we  have  lost.  The  restoration  of  this  is  the  consummation  of 
blessedness.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of  joy."  This  last  restoration  is  the  most 
urgent  and  the  most  glorious  one.  The  restoration  of  lost  material  mercies  to  a  man, 
community,  or  country,  is  a  Divine  work  for  which  gratitude  should  be  cherished  and 
practically  exemplified ;  but  the  restoration  of  lost  religious  privileges,  the  true  worship 
of  God  and  true  fellowship  with  .him,  is  the  transcendent  restoration.  When  this  \a 
realized,  the  world's  redemption  is  completed. — D.  T. 

Vers.  28 — 32. — The  gospel  age.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that  I  will 
pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh,"  etc.  Peter  quotes  this  passage,  but  not  with  literal 
accuracy.  Divine  inspiration  secures  not  uniformity  of  phraseology,  but  uniformity  in 
facts  and  principles.  We  are  authorized  in  regarding  the  passage  as  pointing  to  the 
gospel  age ;  or,  as  Peter  says,  to  the  last  days.  The  days  of  the  Messiah  are  indeed  the 
last  days  of  the  world.  The  passage  teaches  four  things  in  relation  to  these  last  days : 
this  gospel  age  as  connected — 

I.  With  an  extraordinaby  effusion  of  the  Spirit.  "  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit 
upon  all  flesh."  Flesh  here  stands  for  humanity.  Under  the  gospel  dispensation,  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit  would  be:  1.  Universal,  not  limited  to  sex.  "Your  sons  and 
your  daughters  shall  prophesy."  Not  limited  to  age.  "  Your  young  men  shall  see 
visions;  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams."  The  redemptive  influences  of  the  gospel 
are  like  the  rolling  atmosphere  and  the  shining  sun — universal  in  their  aspect.  2. 
Illuminating.  It  would  bring  the  light  of  God's  thoughts  upon  the  soul.  They  "  sav^ 
visions  and  dreamed  dreams  and  prophesied."  That  is,  men  under  its  influence  would 
receive  and  reflect  God's  eternal  truths. 

II.  With  prodigious  revolutions.  "  I  will  show  wonders  in  the  heavens  and  in 
the  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  pillars  of  smoke."  These  words  may  perhaps  be  properly 
regarded  as  a  highly  poetic  re[)iesGntation  of  that  revolution  in  governments,  Churches, 
and  all  other  human  institutions  which  would  inevitably  follow  the  working  out  of  the 
Divine  ideas  and  spiritual  influences  of  these  last  days  (fsa.  xiii.  10 ;  xxxiv.  4).  When 
Christianity  enters  with  all  its  renovating  power  the  individual  sonl,  what  a  revolution  1 
What  wonders  in  heaven,  what  signs  on  earth,  what  blood,  fire,  and  vapour  of  smoke  I 
It  is  so  also  when  it  enters  a  community;  then  it  shakos  the  heavens  and  the  earth  of 
social  and  political  life. 

III.  With  a  TEitRiiiLE  pay.  Peter  calls  it  a  notable  day.  The  primary  reference 
in  all  probability  is  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  It  was  inderd  a  terrible 
day  (see  Josephus;  see  also  first  edition  of  '  Genius  of  the  Gospel,'  p.  60G).     But  there 


OH.  in.  1— 21.J 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


47 


is  another  terrible  day  still  before  us,  a  day  of  which  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  is  but 
a  faint  shadow  and  typo — the  day  of  general  judgment — ^the  day  when  the  heavens 
shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise.  What  a  day  will  that  day  be — "  day  of  judgment, 
day  of  wonders,"  etc.  1 

IV.  With  the  possibility  or  salvation  to  all.  "  Whosoever  shall  call  on  the 
Name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  delivered ; "  or,  as  Peter  has  it,  "  shall  be  saved  " — saved 
from  the  thraldom,  the  guilt,  the  damnation,  of  sin.  "  Whosoever  " — thank  God  for  this 
"whosoever"!— D.T. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEB  ra. 


Vers.  1 — 3. — These  verses  describe  the 
deliverance  of  God's  people  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  his  enemies  because  of  their  injurious, 
itisultiug,  and  ignominious  treatment  of  his 
people. 

Ver.  1. — The  time  referred  to:  In  those 
days,  and  in  that  time,  is  the  first  point  to 
bo  determined.  The  leferenee  is  obviously 
to  the  period  spukeu  of  in  the  twenty -eiglith 
verse  of  the  second  chapter,  where  we  read, 
"  And  it  sliall  come  to  pass  afterward,  that 
I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh." 
This  seems  to  fix  the  date  at  least  of  the 
commencement  of  the  events  recorded  in 
these  verses.  These  events  must  have  been 
subsequent  to  that  Pentecostal  outpouring 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  a  still  closer  speci- 
fication of  the  time  is  ndded  by  way  of  appo- 
sition, namely  (oKher  siipplemented  by  bahem 
or  hall,),  when  I  shall  bring  again  the  cap- 
tivity of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  This  form 
of  expression  includes,  beside  the  restora- 
tion of  God's  people  from  their  dispersion 
and  redemption  out  of  captivity  or  distress 
of  any  kind,  tlieir  elevation  also  to  a  higher 
position  of  dignity  and  to  greater  prosperity 
than  they  had  ever  before  enjoyed.  Thus 
of  Job  wu  read  (xlii.  10),  "  And  the  Lord 
turned  thy  captivity  of  Job  .  .  .  also  the 
Lord  giive  Job  twice  as  much  as  he  had 
before."  The  ftj  which  introduces  the  verse 
gives  assurance  that  the  blessing  promised 
in  the  concluding  verse  of  the  preceding 
chapter  shall  be  realized ;  while  the  hinneh 
directs  attention  to  the  novelty  and  impor- 
tance of  the  subject  introduced  in  the  first 
verse  of  this  pn  sent  chapter. 

Ver.  2  represents  pictori;dly  God's  pass- 
ing sentence  on  the  nations  that  had 
been  hostile  to  his  people,  with  a  general 
summary  of  the  injuries  inflicted  on  them. 
I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  will 
bring  them  down  into  the  valley  of  Jehosha- 
phat.  More  than  eight  centuries  before  the 
Christian  era  King  Jehoshaphat  had  gained 
a  splendid  victory  over  the  allied  army  of 
the  neighbouring  peoples — Moabites.  Am- 
monites, and  Edomites — who  had  united  their 
forces  against  Jerusalom.     The  king   had 


been  assured  of  this  victory  by  the  prophecy 
of  Jahaziel.  Songs  of  praise  had  preceded 
the  battle,  and  songs  of  thanksgiving  had 
supceeded  the  victory ;  hence  the  place  was 
called  the  valley  of  Berachah,  or  blessing. 
The  remembrance  of  such  a  remarkable  de- 
liverance, not  more  than  half  a  century  before 
the  prophet's  time,  would  make  a  vivid  im- 
pression on  the  mind  of  the  x>rophet  and  his 
people.  Accordingly,  this  splendid  piece 
of  past  history  is  interwoven  with  the  pro- 
phet's prediction  of  the  future,  and  forms  its 
groundwork.  It  is  as  though  he  said,  "  On 
a  memoralile  occasion  and  in  a  well-known 
valley  God  was  pleased  to  vouchsafe  to  his 
people  and  prince  a  glorious  victory  over  the 
combined  forces  of  their  enemies ;  so  at  a 
future  period,  under  the  reign  of  Prince 
Messiah,  God  will  subdue  and  destroy  the 
Gentile  nations  that  had  oppressed  his 
people."  It  matters  little  whether  we  under- 
stand the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  in  the  lite- 
ral sense,  as  perhaps  the  valley  of  the  Kedron 
between  Jerusalem  and  Olivet,  or  in  a  figura- 
tive sense;  the  representation  is  equally 
appropriate,  and  the  imagery  equally  im- 
pressive. "  This,"  says  Aben  Ezra,  "  was 
the  war  in  which  the  children  of  Moab  and 
Ammon  and  Seir  combined  their  force  to- 
gether to  a  very  great  multitude,  while  Je- 
hoshaphat had  out  of  Judah  and  Benjamin 
mighty  men  of  valour;  and  the  valley  of 
Jehoshaphat  is  the  valley  of  Berachah,  for 
Jehoshaphat  called  its  name  so."  Kimchi 
gives  the  following  alternative  sense: 
"  There  shall  be  the  war,  and  this  valley 
belonged  to  King  Jehoshaphat;  perhaps 
he  built  there,  or  made  there  a  work, 
and  it  was  called  after  his  name,  and  tlie 
valley  was  near  to  the  city  of  Jerusalem ; 
or  it  is  called  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat 
after  the  name  of  the  judgment,  as  he  said, 
'  I  will  plead  with  them  there.'  "  And  will 
plead  with  them  there  for  my  people  and  for 
my  heritage  Israel,  whom  they  have  scat- 
tered among  the  nations.  God  would  plead, 
or  contend,  with  the  nations,  and  pass  sen- 
tence upon  them  on  account  of  their  disper- 
sion of  his  heritage — nachalathi,  his  peculiar 
people,  and  their  partition  of  his  land,  'artai, 
or  kingdom.  This  must  be  referred  to  the 
long  subsequent  time  when  Palestine  becam" 


48 


THE  BOOK   OP   JOEL. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 21. 


a  Roman  province,  and  its  capital  levelled 
with  the  ground ;  then  the  great  dispersion 
of  the  covenant  people  among  tlie  nations 
commenced,  and  continues  till  the  present 
day. 

Ver.  3. — They  have  cast  lots  for  my  people ; 
and  have  given  a  boy  for  an  harlot,  and  sold 
a  girl  for  wine,  that  they  might  driBi.  Such 
was  the  contumely  with  which  they  were 
treated  at  tlie  time  of  the  great  catastrophe 
referred  to.  'J'he  captives  were  distributed 
by  lot  among  the  conquerors ;  these  in  turn 
sold  them  to  the  slave-dealers  for  the  merest 
trifle — a  slave-boy  for  the  hire  of  a  harlot,  or 
a  slave-girl  for  a  glass  or  draught  of  wine. 
Such  treatment  had  been  predicted  ages 
before,  and  was  verified  by  contemporaneous 
history  (comp.  T,ev.  xxvi.  33,  sqq.,  and  Deut. 
xxviii.  36  for  the  prediction ;  and  Josephus, 
'  De  Bell.  Jud.,'  vi.  9.  2,  3,  for  tlie  fulfllnieiit). 
Ninety-seven  thousand  prisoners  were  dis- 
posed of  as  follows:  those  unler  seventeen 
years  of  age  were  publicly  sold ;  some  exiled 
to  work  in  Egyptian  mines;  others  reserved 
to  fight  with  wild  beasts  in  the  ainj)hl- 
theatre.  Also  in  the  time  of  Hadrian  four 
Jewish  Oiiptives  were  sold  for  a  measure  of 
barley.  Nay,  more,  the  Syrian  commander, 
Nicanor,  bargained  by  antiripation  for  the 
sale  of  such  Jews  as  should  be  taken  cap- 
tive in  the  Miiccabean  war.  The  prophet, 
moreover,  looks  forward  in  prophetic  vision 
to  tlie  day  of  final  judgment,  when  God  will, 
in  just  retribution,  pour  out  the  vials  of  his 
wrath  on  all  the  oppressors  of  his  Church 
and  people. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — In  these  verses  the  prophet 
pauses  before  proceeding  to  describe  the 
final  judgment  of  the  world-powers  for  their 
hostility  to  and  oppression  of  his  Cliurch, 
and  points  out  the  bitter  enmity  of  neigh- 
Liouring  nations  to  the  covenant  people  in 
tlie  prophet's  own  day,  with  a  prediction  of 
the  righteous  retribution  that  awaited  them. 

Ver.  4.— The  northern  sea-board  of  the 
Phconioiiins,  including  the  famous  cities  of 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  also  the  southern  sea-coast 
and  plain  of  the  Philistines,  with  their  five 
principalities,  are  joined  by  Vgam  with  the 
nations  notorious  for  injuring  and  oppressing 
the  people  of  God.  The  words  rendered  in 
the  Authorized  Version,  What  have  ye  to  do 
with  me  ?  rather  mean.  What  would  ye  with 
met  or  still  better,  Wliat  are  ye  tomet  that  is, 
how  worthless  and  despicable  in  my  sight ! 
The  disjunctive  question  which  follows  be- 
comes clearer  by  adopting  the  rendering  of 
Keil  and  Wttnsche,  Will  ye  repay  me  a  deed, 
or  do  anything  against  me  t  that  is,  will  ye 
repay  me  some  wrongdoing  which  ye  fancy 
I  have  inflicted  on  you  ?  or  will  ye,  without 
SQoh  supposed  provocation,  and  of  your  own 


free  will,  do  or  attempt  to  do  anything  against 
me  ?  The  double  question  with  v^m  instead 
of  im  repeats,  in  other  words  or  in  a  modified 
form,  the  preceding  question;  while  the  ques- 
tion itself,  as  often,  implies  a  negative  sense 
to  the  effect  that  they  had  neither  right  nor 
reason  for  avenging  themselves  on  the  people 
of  God — for  God  here  identifies  himself  with 
his  people — nor  for  attempting  wantonly  and 
gratuitously  to  harm  them.  The  conse- 
quence would  only  be  a  swift  and  speedy 
return  of  the  mischief  on  their  own  head,  so 
that,  as  is  usual  with  the  wicked,  they  fall 
themselves  into  the  pit  which  they  dig  for 
others.  The  idea  of  revenge  rather  than 
of  punishment  gets  too  great  prominence  in 
the  old  versions  and  commentators.  The 
comment  of  Kimchi  is  instructive,  though 
more  in  haimony  with  the  rendering  of  the 
Authorized  Version  than  with  that  which 
we  prefer ;  it  is  as  follows :  "  Wl  at  have  I 
to  do  with  you,  that  ye  enter  my  *and  while 
ye  are  neighbours  ?  and  it  behoveil  you  to  do 
good  to  my  people,  but  ye  have  n)t  done  so ; 
but  when  ye  saw  that  the  kings  of  the  na- 
tions (Gentiles)  came  upon  them,  ye  allied 
yourselves  with  them  to  plunder  and  spoil. 
.  .  .  Why  is  it,  then,  that  ye  are  doing  evil 
to  me,  if  ye  think  to  avenge  yourselves  of 
me  because  I  have  done  you  evil?  When 
did  I  do  you  evil  ?  Or  if  yon  will  say  that 
of  yourselves  ye  are  doing  evil  to  me  now, 
for  he  that  does  evil  to  Israel  from  his 
thought  of  doing  evil  to  me,  they  are  my 
children  .  .  .  swiftly  and  suddenly  wUl  I 
return  your  doing  on  your  own  head." 

Vers.  5,  6. — The  prophet  proceeds  to  enn- 
merate  the  injuries  sustained  by  his  people 
at  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and  the  evil 
attempted  against  himself.  (1)  My  silver 
and  my  gold.  The  silver,  gold,  and  precious 
or  desirable  things,  whether  taken  immedi- 
ately from  the  temple  of  God  or  plundered 
mecfiately  from  the  palaces  or  wealthy  man- 
sions of  his  people,  they  transferred  to  their 
temples  and  suspended  as  trophies  therein — 
a  custom  common  among  ancient  nations.  (2) 
The  children  also  of  Judah  and  the  children 
of  Jemsalem  have  ye  sold  unto  the  Grecians. 
The  part  which  the  Phoenicians  had  in  the 
transaction  was  the  purchase  and  sale  of 
the  Jewish  captives  who  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  Philistine  conquerors.  The 
mention  of  Grecians,  or  sons  of  Javan,  brings 
for  the  first  time  the  Hellenic  and  Hebrew 
races  into  contact —  a  contact  sad  and  sorrow- 
ful for  the  latter.  That  ye  might  remove 
them  far  from  their  border.  This  was  at 
once  the  climax  of  their  cruelty  and  the 
aggravation  of  their  crime.  The  object  which 
their  enemies  had  in  view  in  selling  the 
Hebrew  captives  to  the  sons  of  Javan,  or 
Ionian  Greeks  of  Asia  Minor,  was  by  tiiat 
remote  exile  to  prevent  the  possibility  of 


OH.  m.  1 — 21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


49 


their  retura  to  their  own  land.  Thfi  historic 
reference  ia  thought  by  some  to  be  the  event 
narrated  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17,  where  it  is 
written,  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  against  Je- 
horam  the  spirit  of  the  Philistines.  .  .  .  And 
they  came  up  into  Judah,  and  brake  into  it, 
and  carried  away  [margin,  'carried  cap- 
tive ']  all  the  substance  that  was  found  in 
the  king's  house,  and  his  sons  also,  and  his 
wives." 

Vera.  7,  8. — In  these  verses  we  have  the 
recompense  of  reward  so  deservedly  dealt 
out  to  the  enemies  of  Israel. 

Ver.  7. — Behold,  I  will  raise  them  out  of 
the  place  whither  ye  have  sold  them.  Instead 
of  "  raise,"  some  prefer  "  waken,"  "  rouse," 
or  "  stir  up."  The  Judseans  would  be  roused 
out  of  the  countries  into  which  they  had 
been  sold,  and  restored  to  their  own  land, 
and  the  measure  which  had  been  meted 
to  them  meted  in  turn  to  their  enemies. 
The  deliverance  mentioned  here  may  be 
exemplified,  if  not  realized  in  part,  in  the 
time  of  Alexander  the  Great  and  his  suc- 
cessors, when  Jewish  captives  in  many 
lands  were  set  at  liberty.  Thus  Demetrius, 
in  his  letter  to  Jonathan,  writes,  "I  also 
make  free  all  those  Jews  who  have  been 
made  captives  and  slaves  in  my  kingdom." 
And  will  return  your  recompense  upon  your 
own  head;  better  rendered,  and  will  turn 
bcuik  your  doing  upon  your  head.  A  righteous 
retaliation  awaited  Philiotines  and  Phoe- 
nicians. They  in  turn  would  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  Judseans,  and  be  made  prisoners 
of  war,  and,  as  they  had  done,  so  should  it 
be  done  to  them. 

Ver.  8. — And  I  will  sell  your  sons  and 
your  daughters  into  the  hand  of  the  children 
of  Judah,  and  they  shall  sell  them  to  the 
Sabeans,  to  a  people  far  off.  The  Hebrew 
expression  does  not  mean  "  to  sell  by  the 
hand  of,"  as  it  is  erroneously  rendered  by 
some ;  but  "  to  sell  into  the  hand,"  that  is, 
to  deliver  over  into  the  power  of  the  children 
of  Judah.  The  Sabeans  were  the  inhabitants 
of  Sheba,  in  Arabia  Felix,  a  people  actively 
engaged  in  tiade,  and  related  to  the  Pales- 
tinians in  the  south,  as  the  Grecians  in  the 
north.  They  were  a  people  as  far  off  (or 
more  so)  in  an  easterly  direction  as  the 
Greeks  of  Ionia  in  a  westerly ;  and  so  Kim- 
ohi,  "They  were  far  off  from  their  land 
more  than  the  Javanites."  "  As  the  Tyrians 
Si  lid  Jewish  prisoners  to  the  maritime  people 
of  the  far  West,  so  the  Jews  shoull  sell 
Tyrians  to  traders  of  the  far  East."  The 
LXX.,  mistaking  d'MK^  for  the  plural  of 
'3K',  translate  the  clause,  "  They  shall  sell 
them  into  captivity  to  a  far-distant  nation." 
If  we  are  not  to  understand  these  predictions, 
with  Hengstenberg,  as  an  application  of  the 
general  truth  that  God  shall  gather  again 
the  dispersed  of  Judah  and  the  oaptives  of 

JOIL. 


Israel,  we  may  find  their  fulfilment  in  such 
events  as  the  following:  the  defeat  of  the 
Pliilistines  by  Uzziali,  "  when  he  went  fortli 
and  warred  against  the  Philistines,  ami 
brake  down  the  wall  of  Gath,  and  the  wall 
of  Jabueh,  and  the  wall  of  Ashdod,  and 
built  cities  about  Ashdod,  and  among  the 
Philistines  j  "  their  defeat  also  by  Hezckiali, 
when  "  he  smote  tlie  Philistines  even  unto 
Gaza,  and  the  burders  thereof,  from  tlie 
tower  of  the  watchman  to  the  fenced  city ; " 
and  the  temporary  subjection  of  portions  of 
Palestinian  and  Phoenician  territory  to  the 
Jews  in  Maccabean  times,  together  with  the 
siege  and  destruction  of  their  cities,  as 
narrated  by  tlie  Jewish  historian  Josejihus 
and  in  the  First  Book  of  Maccabees.  We 
loam  also  from  Diodorus  that  thirteen  tlion- 
sand  captive  Tyrians  were  sold  into  slavery 
after  the  victory  of  Alexander  the  Great. 

Vers.  9 — 17. — After  a  parenthesis  of  five 
verses,  viz.  4 — 8,  detailing  the  injurious 
treatment  of  the  Jews  by  some  of  the  sur- 
rounding nations,  and  the  righteous  retribu- 
tion visited  on  those  nations,  the  prophet 
resumes  the  subject  broached  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  chapter,  especially  in  ver.  2, 
about  the  judgment  to  be  visited  on  the 
nations  in  general.  The  verses  now  before 
us  describe  very  graphically  the  execution 
of  that  judgment. 

Ver.  9  pictures  the  proclamation  and  other 
preliminaries  of  war.  Heralds  are  sent  out 
to  make  proclamation  among  the  nations. 
Prepare  (margin,  sanctify')  war.  Certain 
formalities  of  a  religious  nature  were  cus- 
tomary among  the  heathen  when  war  was 
proclaimed  and  prepared  for.  Thus  also 
among  the  Jews  supplication  was  made  and 
sacrifices  offered,  as  we  read  in  1  Sam.  vii. 
8,  9,  that  before  the  battle  with  the  Philis- 
tines at  Mizpeli,  the  people  urged  Samuel 
to  make  earnest  supplication  and  sacrifice 
for  them,  when  in  compliance  he  "took  a 
sucking  lamb,  and  offered  it  for  a  burnt 
offering  wholly  unto  the  Lord :  and  Samuel 
cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel ; "  and  thus 
a  preparation  for  war  was  a  consecration  of 
war  by  religious  rites.  Wake  up  the  mighty 
men ;  or  rather,  (1)  according  to  Keil,  waken 
up  or  arouse  the  migkty  men.  (2)  A  pre- 
ferable rendering,  according  to  WUnsclie, 
is,  "  Wake  up,  ye  miglity  men ;  "  wliile  he 
understands  the  whole  address  as  directed 
to  the  covenant  people.  It  is  observable  that 
one  manuscript  has.irpn,  equivalent  to  "make 
strong,"  i.e.  the  heroes.  In  either  ease,  the 
her  e  may  be  conceived  as  enjoying  peaceful 
repooe  when  they  are  rudely  roused  by  the 
declaration  of  war;  and  as  the  word  "war" 
is  indefinite  through  the  absence  of   the 


60 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


[oh.  m.  1 — 21. 


article,  it  implies,  "  What  a  -war  I  how  great 
and  terrible  I "  Let  all  the  men  of  war  draw 
near ;  let  them  come  up.  The  terms  here 
used  are  techDical  military  tenna,  Bummoning 
tlie  wairioia  to  advance  and  march  onward 
in  haste  to  the  place  of  conflict. 

Ver.  10. — Beat  your  ploughshares  into 
swords,  and  your  pruuing-hooks  into  spears. 
The  weapons  of  war  are  to  be  provided; 
and  the  speediest  way  in  which  the  manu- 
facture of  those  weapons  could  be  effected 
was  by  turning  their  implements  of  hus- 
bandry into  them.  The  figure  may,  perhaps, 
have  been  suggested  by  the  interest  King 
Uzziah  took  in,  and  the  encouragement  he 
consequently  gave  to,  husbandry  and  vine- 
culture,  if  we  may  presume  Joel  to  have 
been  in  part  contemporary  with  that  king, 
of  whom  we  are  informed  that  "  he  had  much 
cattle,  both  in  the  low  country,  and  in  the 
plains:  husbandmen  also,  and  vinedressers 
in  the  mountains,  and  in  Carmel :  for  he 
loved  husbandry."  It  is  also  a  familiar 
fact  that  Isaiah  and  Micah  reverse  the  ex- 
pression in  their  description  of  Messianic 
times;  while  well-known  parallels  are  quoted 
from  the  Latin  classics.  Let  the  weak  say, 
I  am  strong ;  or,  a  hero.  The  approaching 
war  was  to  be  one  in  which  no  release,  no 
excuse,  and  no  exemption  from  any  cause 
would  be  allowed,  nay,  the  excitement  of 
the  occasion  should  warm  the  cold  blood 
of  the  weakling  into  some  degree  of  warlike 
enthusiasm.  The  address,  it  will  be  ob- 
served, of  the  previous  verse  is  to  the  heroic 
chiefs ;  that  of  this  verse,  to  the  rank-and- 
file  of  the  army. 

Ver.  11. — Tliis  verse  expresses  the  pre- 
cipitancy with  which  the  procession  of  the 
hostile  nations  is  hurried  on  in  order  to 
meet  their  doom,  as  also  the  prophet's 
prayer  for  the  descent  of  Jehovah's  mighty 
ones  to  the  slaughter.  Assemble  yourselves, 
and  come.  It  is  rather,  liasten,  and  come; 
the  word  i»>j),  only  occurring  here,  being 
equivalent  to  y^Ti,  equivalent  to  "  hasten 
ye."  The  LXX.  and  Ohaldee,  indeed ,  favour 
the  sense  of  "  assemble ;  "  the  former  has 
a-wa6poi(€(r6e.  But  that  idea  is  expressed 
afterwards  by  the  verb  iX3p_  ,  which  is  an 
anomalous  form  of  the  imper  tive  Niph.  for 
iV3pj7,  though  some  take  it  for  the  perfect 
with  vav  consec.  The  wonl  hanchath  is 
usually  and  properly  taken  as  the  impera- 
tive Hiph.,  from  naeliath,  to  come  down, 
the  pafhach  taking  the  place  of  tzere  on 
account  of  the  guttural  and  the  nun  re- 
tained without  assimilation,  as  the  nun 
rarely  falls  away  in  verbs  that  have  a 
guttural  for  their  second  stem-letter.  The 
meaning  (1)  then,  is,  "Assemble  your- 
selves." The  margin,  (2)  however,  has, 
"  The  Lord  shall  bring  down,"  i.e.  cause  to 
euoonmb,  destroy,  "  thy  mighty  ones,"  which 


must  then  signify  "  the  mighty  ones  of  the 
enemy."  This,  though  supported  by  the 
Chaldee,  Syriac,  Vulgate,  and  Jerome,  is 
less  simple  and  obvious,  necessitating  also 
a  corresponding  change  of  the  verbal  form 
into  nran  or  rrnjn.  Tiie  LXX.  rendering 
is  peculiar,  and  as  follows  :  "  Let  the  meek 
become  a  warrior." 

Ver.  12. — This  verse  points  out  the  place 
where  the  great  aatembluge  of  tlie  heatlieTj 
is  to  hold,  and  the  final  decision  in  answer 
to  the  propliet's  prayer  is  to  take  place. 
Let  the  heathen  be  wakened,  and  come  up 
to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  All  the 
nations  that  have  opposed  the  kingdom  of 
God,  as  well  as  those  hostile  nations  from 
round  about  Israel  and  Judah,in  their  more 
immediate  neighbourhood;  though  these, 
no  doubt,  are  primarily  meant.  The  ex- 
pression, "  be  wakened,"  of  this  verse  cor- 
responds to  "  waken  up "  of  ver.  9.  The 
force  of  coming  up  is  explained  by  some  (1) 
as  implying  the  ascent  to  Palestine  in  order 
to  reach  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat.  It  is 
rather  (2)  to  be  understood  in  the  general 
sense  of  advancing  or  marching  on ;  other- 
wise "  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the 
Most  High  God "  may  well  be  called  "  «■ 
coming  up."  The  decision  takes  the  form 
of  a  judicial  process  conducted  by  Jehovah, 
who  as  Jud^e  takes  bis  seat  on  a  throne  of 
judgment. 

Ver.  13. — The  just  decision  being  cume 
to,  and  the  righteous  sentence  passed,  the 
execution  follows.  Jehovali's  mighty  ones 
are  summoned  to  execute  it.  By  the  mighty 
ones  or  heroes  of  Jehovah  are  meant  his 
heavenly  hosts  or  angels;  thus  Kimchi 
says,  "Thy  mighty  ones  are  the  angels;" 
so  also  Aben  Ezra.  (1)  The  execution  of 
Jehovah's  command  is  represented  under  a 
double  figure,  that  of  reaping  grain  in  har- 
vest or  treading  grapes  in  the  vintage. 
Similarly  in  Eev.  xiv.  15,  18,  we  find  the  two 
figures — that  of  reaping  the  ripe  grain,  and 
of  gathering  the  grapes  and  triraciing  them. 
The  ripeness  of  the  grain  and  of  the  grapes 
is  here,  perhaps,  the  prominent  idea.  "  He 
compares,"  says  Kimchi,  "those  nations  to 
the  produce  which  is  ripe,  and  its  time  for 
harvesting  has  approaulied,  that  man  should 
thrust  in  the  sickle  to  reap  it.  So  with 
respect  to  these  nations,  their  season  to  die 
by  the  sword  in  this  valley  has  arrived." 
(2)  Hitzig  conceives  that  the  twofold  com- 
mand of  Jehovah  is  to  cut  otl  the  grapes 
and  then  tread  them  in  the  wine-press.  He 
proceeds  on  the  wrong  assumption  that 
qalsir,  harvest,  is  employed  in  the  sense  of 
batfir,  vintage ;  that  maggal  (from  nagal, 
unused  to  cut,  pierce,  wound)  is  for  mazme- 
rah,  the  liook  of  the  vinedresser;  whUe 
haahal,  ripe,  which  he  restricts  to  grapes, 
applies   to  grapes   and  com   alike.     The 


oa.  in.  1—21.] 


THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL. 


61 


passage  in  Bevelation  alieady  cited  de- 
cides us  in  favour  of  (1),  tlie  judgment 
being  represented  first  by  the  reaping  of 
ripened  grain,  and  then  by  treacling  grapes 
in  the  wine-press.  The  verb  ni,  from 
radah,  to  trample  underfoot,  and  not  from 
yarad,  to  descend,  is  more  poetic  and  em- 
phatic than  the  usual  -|m ;  though  Kimchi 
maintains  the  contrary,  saying,  "  Descend 
ye  into  this  valley,  for  it  is  as  it  were  the 
press  which  is  full  of  grapes,  when  it  is  fit 
to  tread  them ;  so  ye  house  of  Israel,  tread 
these  nations  in  this  valley,  and  thrust  in 
among  them  the  sword."  The  fulness  of 
the  vats,  again,  represents  the  masses  of  the 
sinful  nations  ripe  and  ready  for  destruction  ; 
what  the  wine-press  is  to  the  grapes,  the 
wine-press  of  God's  wrath  is  to  the  wicked. 

Ver.  14. — This  and  the  following  verses, 
instead  of  expressly  narrating  the  execution 
of  the  Divine  command,  present  a  picture  of 
it.  In  one  part  the  prophet  sees  in  vision 
and  shows  us  pictorially  the  multitudes  of 
the  nations  pouring  on  in  one  continuous 
stream  into  the  fatal  valley.  In  another 
compartment  of  the  picture,  Jehovah  is 
seen  in  the  E^wfulness  of  his  majesty  and 
in  the  tearfulness  of  his  judgments  on  the 
wicked,  while  he  is  a  Eefuge  and  Strength 
for  his  people.  Multitudes,  multitudes  in 
the  valley  of  decision.  These  multitudes 
are  the  tumultuous  masses.  Hamon  is  from 
the  root  npn,  to  be  noisy,  or  tumultuous. 
"  It  is  ideufical,"  says  Pusey,  "  with  our 
'  hum ; '  then  noise,  and,  among  others,  the 
hum  of  a  multitude,  then  a  multitude  even 
apart  from  that  noise.  It  is  used  of  the 
throng  of  a  large  army."  The  repetition 
emphasizes  the  masses  as  pits,  pits,  equiva- 
lent to  "nothing  but  pits;"  or  ditches, 
ditches,  equivalent  to  "full  of  ditches  ;  "  or 
it  expresses  diversity,  equivalent  to  "  multi- 
tudes of  the  living  and  multitudes  of  the 
dead."  Decision  is  c':arufi,  out,  something 
decided;  (1)  so  sharp,  se\eiejudgmi-tit,  frnni 
charate,  to  cut  into,  sharpen,  dig.  (2)  Others 
understand  it  in  the  sense  of  a  threshing-wain, 
equivalent  to  eharuts  morag,  a  sharpened 
threshing-instrument.  A 11  things  being  now 
ready,  the  immediate  proximity  of  the  judg- 
ment is  announced  to  be  at  hand. 

Vers.  15 — 17. — These  verses  picture  the 
accompaniments  of  the  judgment,  yet  not 
the  judgment  itself. 

Ver.  15. — The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be 
darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their 
shining.  The  densely  packed  masses  are 
already  in  the  valley  of  decision,  awaiting 
the  judgment  about  to  be  executed  upon 
them.  But  before  the  judgment  actually 
bursts  upon  them,  and  in  preparation  for  it, 
the  sky  is  overcast ;  darkness,  as  a  portent  of 
the  approaching  Bti>nn,  envelops  them-  t'  e 


lights  of  heaven  are  put  out.  The  pitchy 
darkness  of  a  night  in  which  neither  moon 
nor  stars  appear  is  sufBciently  dismal  and 
awful;  still  more  terrible,  if  possible,  is 
darkness  in  the  daytime,  when  the  light  of 
the  sun  is  turned  into  blackness.  The  first 
accompaniment  of  the  storm  is  addressed  to 
the  eye,  and  consists  in  the  extinguishing 
of  the  greater  light  which  rules  the  day,  and 
the  lesser  lights  which  rule  the  night.  The 
next  accompaniment  of  the  coming  tempest 
is  addresperl  to  the  ear,  and  consists  in  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  rolling  in  terrific  peals 
alons  thf  heavens — ^the  voice  of  the  Lord 
like  the  roaring  of  a  lion  ready  to  pounce 
upon  its  prey ;  the  utterance  of  the  Divine 
voice  when  the  God  of  glory  thundereth. 
The  third  accompaniment  is  yet  more  awe- 
inspiring,  consisting  in  a  convulsion  that 
pervades  both  earth  and  sky;  the  whole 
frame  of  nature  shakes;  the  earthquake's 
shock,  so  frightful  to  bird  and  beast  and 
man,  has  a  corresponding  agitation  in  the 
heavens. 

Ver.  16. — Out  of  Ziou.  The  presence  of 
.Tehovah  is  the  immediate  occasinn  of  these 
terrors ;  and  hence  his  voice  proceeds  from 
Jerusalem,  or  more  particularly  from  Zion, 
where  the  visible  symbol  of  his  presence 
long  dwelt.  "For  there,"  says  Kimchi, 
"  was  his  dwelling  in  Jerusalem ;  and  as  if 
from  tlienee  hn  r^nrprl  and  uttered  his  voice 
against  them."  Thus  far  the  prophet  pictures 
in  very  vivid,  indeed  terribly  vivid,  colours 
the  fri,'  htful  sosiie  in  the  valley  of  decision ; 
then  stops  short  without  describing  the  sad 
catastrophe  resulting  from  thp  nctnal  execu- 
tion of  the  judgment.  This  he  omits,  either 
from  revulsion  of  feelinsr  frnm  such  mi.sriv, 
or  the  reader  is  left  to  imagine  it  himself 
But  the  Lord  will  be  the  Hope  of  his  peoule, 
and  the  Strength  of  the  children  of  Israel. 
He  shiinks,  as  we  have  sern,  from  describ- 
ing the  actual  execution  of  judgment,  and, 
breaking  off  with  somewhat  of  abruptness, 
exhibits  the  bright  side  of  the  picture.  With 
tlic  ilcFtruction  of  his  foes  is  joined,  as  usual, 
the  deliverance  of  his  friends.  To  his  people 
he 'stands  in  the  double  relation  of  a  Place 
of  refuge  {machseh)  and  a  Place  of  strength 
(ma'oz),  that  is,  not  only  a  place  to  which 
they  may  flee  for  safety,  but  a  place  in  which, 
as  a  stronghold,  they  shall  be  kept  safe. 

Ver.  17. — Jerusalem  will  be  a  sanctuary, 
and  strangers  will  not  pass  through  it  any 
more.  Intnebeginningofthis  verse  Jehovah 
promises  to  be  the  God  of  bis  people;  he 
points  to  the  place  of  his  abode,  and  purifies 
Jerusalem  by  judgment  that  it  will  be  a 
true  holy  place,  untrodden  by  the  foot  of 
Gentile  stranger  or  Jewish  unbeliever  any 
more.  His  people  would  recognize  his  pre- 
sence and  his  power  by  the  wonderful 
dcliveranre  vouchsafed   to  them.    "Jem- 


sa 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


[oh.  III.  1—21. 


ealem,"  says  Kimchi,  "  shall  be  a  Banetiiarj-; 
like  the  sanctuary  which  was  forbidden  to 
strangers;  and  strangers  shall  not  pass 
through  it  any  more  to  do  injury  to  them  as 
tlioy  have  done  up  to  this  day.  It  may  also 
be  <  xplained  that  strangers  shall  not  enter 
into  Jerusalem,  for  its  holiness  shall  be  great 
for  the  future.  And  as  the  temple  was  for- 
bidden even  for  Israel  to  enter  there,  so  all 
the  city  shall  be  a  sanctuary  into  which 
strangers  out  of  the  nations  of  the  world 
eh:  ill  not  enter." 

Vers.  18—21. — These  verses  picture  Judah 
and  Jerusalem  as  scenes  of  most  abundant 
blessings,  while  Egypt  and  Edom  art:  doomed 
to  irretrievable  barrenness  and  desolation. 
But,  as  the  language  must  be  understood 
figuratively,  the  prosperity  of  the  Lord's 
land  is  set  in  contrast  with  the  countries  of 
the  world-powers ;  but  the  contrast  includes, 
as  we  think,  the  allotments  of  eternity  as 
well  as  the  destinies  of  time. 

Ver.  18. — In  that  day.  These  words  ex- 
press the  state  of  things  consequent  on  the 
judgment  just  executed.  The  mountains 
shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  hills 
shall  flow  with  milk,  and  aU  the  rivers  of 
Judah  shall  flow  (margin,  go)  with  waters. 
Thus  the  mountains  are  represented  as 
covered  over  with  vines  of  richest  growth 
and  terraced  to  the  top ;  the  hills  as  aiford- 
ing  most  luxuriant  pastures  and  clothed 
with  flocks ;  the  rivers,  dried  up  in  summer 
and  reduced  to  dried-up  river-beds,  flowing 
unintermittingly  and  coursing  along  with 
full  stream.  To  exuberance  of  wine  and 
milk  is  added,  what  is  no  less  valuable  in  a 
thirsty  Eastern  Lmd,  abundance  of  water. 
The  source  of  this  abundant  supply  is  a 
fountain ;  the  fountain-head  is  the  house  of 
the  Lord;  thence  proceeds  a  broad  deep 
stream,  which  makes  its  way  to  the  Jordan 
valley  and  across  the  river  to  the  diy  trana- 
Jerdanic  valley  of  acacias,  as  it  is  added: 
A  fountain  BhaM  oome  forth  of  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  and  shall  water  the  valley  of 
Shittim ;  fiom  which  statement  we  must 
conclude  the  figurative  signification  of  the 
whole  of  this  and  the  following  verses. 
Parallels  for  some  of  the  above  expressions 
are  not  far  to  seek.  Ovid's  description  of 
the  golden  age,  in  which  he  speaks  of  rivers 
of  milk  and  rivers  of  nectar  and  honey 
dropping  from  the  green  palm  tree,  is  cited 
by  Ensenmiiller ;  while  the  '  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary '  quotes  from  the '  Bacchse '  of  Euri- 
pides the  lines  about  the  plain  flowing  with 
milk,  flowing  with  wine,  and  flowing  with 
the  nectar  of  the  bees.  Instead  of  the  "  hills 
flowing  with  milk,"  we  should  rather  expect 
the  milk  to  be  spoken  of  as  flowing;  the 
hypallage,  however,  a£  we  may  consider  it. 


makes  the  clause  more  symmetrical  with 
those  between  which  it  Btnnds.  Thus 
Kinichi :  "  The  meaning  of '  They  shall  flow 
(go)  with  milk,'  is  from  the  abundance  of 
the  flowing  and  running:  he  applies  the 
name  of  flowing  (going)  to  the  hills,  even 
although  that  the  milk  is  that  which  goes 
and  flows."  And  in  reference  to  the  follow- 
ing clause  he  says,  "Ue  uses  the  name  of 
going  to  the  channels."  That  is  one  side  of 
the  picture.  We  are  now  invited  to  look  on 
this— 

Yer.  19. — Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation,  and 
Edom  a  desolate  wilderness,  for  the  violenoe 
against  the  children  of  Judah.  The  curse  of 
barrenness  and  utter  desolation  falls  on  the 
enemies  of  Judah — the  nearer  and  the  more 
remote— because  of  that  very  enmity  and 
the  violence  which  was  its  outcome.  The 
Edoiiiite  enemies  in  the  south  revolted  from 
Judah  in  the  days  of  Jehoram ;  the  Edomitea 
compassed  him  in,  and,  by  thus  surrounding 
him.  placed  him  in  extreme  peril;  and 
though  it  is  said  he  smote  them,  yet  his  ex- 
pedition proved  unsuccessful,  for  it  is  added 
by  the  chronicler  that  "  the  Edomites  re- 
volted from  under  the  hand  of  Judah  unto 
this  day."  The  Egy|itian  enemies  in  the 
more  distant  south  made  a  stiU  more  formid- 
able attack  on  the  capital  city,  Jerusalem, 
under  the  famous  Shishak,  in  the  fifth  year 
of  the  reign  of  Rehoboam,  plundering  the 
palace  and  temple.  What  acts  of  violence 
were  perpetrated  in  these  or  other  wars 
unrecorded  we  know  not.  A  more  specific 
charge  follows:  Because  they  have  shed 
innocent  blood  in  their  land.  This  is  under- 
stood by  some  to  refer  to  the  blond  of  captive 
or  fugitive  Jews  iu  the  lands  of  their  Edom- 
ite  and  Egyptian  enemies.  It  seems  pre- 
ferable to  understand  the  suffix  answering 
to  "their"  of  ihe  land  of  Judah,  on  the 
occasion  of  some  hostile  inroad  into  Jewish 
territory. 

Vers.  20,  21.— The  contrast  which  these 
verses  present  to  what  precedes  is  very 
striking.  While  Egypt  and  Edom  are 
devoted  to  desolation-and  destruction,  Judah, 
personified,  shall  dwell  (margin,  ahide),  and 
Jerusalem,  or  rather,  as  we  think,  Judah 
shall  be  dwelt  in,  as  also  its  capital,  from 
generation  to  generation.  In  the  concluding 
verse  a  reason  is  assigned.  Tor  I  will  oleanse 
their  blood  that  I  have  not  cleansed.  The 
blood  shed  by  the  Egyptians  and  Edomites 
is  proved  by  Jehovah  to  be  innocent  blood, 
because  he  promises  to  avenge  it  in  the  end, 
though  for  wibO  and  good  reasons  he  had 
delayed  to  do  so.  This  closing  thought  is 
well  explained  by  Keil  in  the  words,  "  The 
eternal  desolation  of  the  world-kingdoms 
mentioned  here  will  wipe  out  all  the  wrong 
which  they  have  done  to  the  people  of 
God,  and  which  has  hitherto  remained  un- 


OB.  m.  1 — 21.] 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


63 


punished."  When  Jehovah  thus  wipes  out 
the  bloodguiltiness  of  the  enemies  of  Judah 
by  punishing  them  with  destruction  for  their 
cruelties,  while  he  exalts  gloriously,  finally, 
and  for  ever  his  people,  he  proves  his 
sovereignty  over  them  and  his  dwelling- 
place  in  Zion.  The  Hebrew  interpreters, 
with  the  exception  of  Abarbanel,  understand 
this  passage  (1)  literally;  thus  Kimchi: 
"  At  that  time  (the  day  of  the  Lord),  after 
making  an  end  of  the  nations  there,  great 
goodness  shall  accrue  to  Israel ; "  the  same 
is  seen  in  the  exposition  of  the  last  verse  of 
tlie  chapter.  Bashi  says,  "Even  if  I  sliall 
cleanse  them  of  the  remaining  transgression 
which  is  in  their  liands,  and  the  evil-doing 
which  they  have  done  to  me,  the  blood  of 
the  children  of  Judah  I  will  not  cleanse 
from  tliera;"  also  in  commenting  on  the 
same,  Kimchi  says,  "For  their  silver  and 
their  gold  which  they  took  I  will  cleanse 
the  nations,  fur  Israel  also  shall  take  from 
them  in  tlie  future,  and  they  shall  bucome 
their  spoil ;  but  for  their  blood  which  they 
have  shed  I  will  not  cleanse  them,  but 
life  shall  be  for  life — the  life  of  those  that 
shed  it,  or  of  their  children  after  them; 


for  for  all  the  silver  and  the  gold  that  is 
in  the  world  which  they  shall  give  as  a 
ransom  of  their  souls  they  shall  not  be 
cleansed  of  the  blood  which  they  have  shed; " 
also,  "For  the  ages  of  eternity  shall  his 
dwelling-place  be  in  Zion,  after  that  it  shall 
return  there  in  tlie  days  of  the  Messiah." 
(2)  Some  refer  the  passage  to  millennial 
times.  (3)  Others  to  the  time  of  the  con- 
summation of  all  things.  Thus  Keil,  com- 
paring Kzek.  xlvii.,  Zech.  xiv.,  Bev.  xxi. 
and  xxii.,  says,  "  This  passage  does  not  teach 
the  earthly  glorification  of  Palestine,  and 
desolatiim  of  Egypt  and  Idumsea,  but  that 
Judah  and  Jeru!>alem  are  types  of  the  king- 
dom of  Gdd,  whilst  Egypt  and  Edom  are 
types  of  the  world-powers  that  are  at  enmity 
against  God;  in  other  words,  that  this 
description  is  not  to  be  understood  literally, 
but  spiritually;"  he  had  previously  in- 
timated that  spiritual  sense,  "  For  Zion  or 
Jerusalem  is,  of  course,  not  the  Jerusalem 
of  the  earthly  Palestine,  but  the  sanctified 
and  glorified  oity  of  the  living  God,  in 
wliich  the  Lord  will  be  eternally  united 
with  his  redeemed,  sanctified,  and  glorified 
Church." 


HOMILETIOS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Deliverance  and  destruction.  The  causal  particle,  with  which  the  first 
verse  of  this  chapter  commences,  connects  it  closely  with  the  preceding.  It  not  only 
introduces  a  further  explanation,  but  confirms  the  statements  there  made.  The  course 
of  the  pii  dictions  contained  in  the  foregoing  chapter  embraced  the  outpouring  of  the 
Spirit  at  Pentecost  j  the  establishment  of  the  Christian  Church  ;  the  great  catastrophes 
and  troubles  that  should  succeed ;  the  destruction  of  the  holy  city  and  the  dispersion 
of  its  inhabitants,  here  called  "  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  ; "  the  deliver- 
ance of  a  remnant  from  those  troubles — at  all  events,  the  eternal  salvation  of  the  godly 
who  cleaved  to  the  Lord  and  his  service.  Of  the  general  promise,  a  particular  instance 
is  given  in  the  case  of  the  Jews.  But  the  promise  to  Judah  and  Jerusalem  is  a  pledge 
of  the  spiritual  deliverance  of  his  Church  and  people,  as  also  of  temporal  deliverance 
when  and  wheresoever  such  may  be  required. 

I.  Deliverance  op  the  people  or  God.  1.  The  relation  in  which  Israel  stood  to 
God  is  symbolical  of  the  relaiion  in  which  God's  people  stand  to  him  still.  They  are 
his  people ;  "  my  people,"  he  is  pleased  to  call  them ;  "  my  heritage,"  he  names  them. 
I'hey  are  his  "  peculiar  treasure,"  and  "  the  lot  of  his  inheritance,"  as  he  elsewhere 
designates  them.  Their  land  is  his  land.  We  thus  see  how  dear  God's  people  are  to 
him,  and  what  a  deep  interest  he  takes  in  their  persons  and  in  their  property — in  fact, 
in  all  that  concerns  them.  They  are  his  for  correction  when  that  is  needed ;  they  are 
his  for  protection  from  their  enemies ;  they  are  his  to  right  their  wrongs,  and  to  take 
vengeance  on  their  adversaries;  they  are  his  to  preserve  to  them  their  possessions,  and 
to  punish  all  who  trespass  thereon,  or  expel  them  therefrom.  He  keeps  them  and  all 
they  have  as  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand ;  and  they  are  dear  to  him  as  the  apple  of  his 
eye.  2.  This  promise  comprehends  in  itself  a  series ;  it  is,  indeed,  instanced  in  a  single 
case,  yet  it  is  not  confined  to  it,  but  multiplies  itself.  Just  as  the  Israelites  were 
delivered  out  of  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  and  Jerusalem  out  of  the  hands  of  Sennacherib 
in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah,  and  the  Jews  out  of  the  captivity  in  Babylon,  and  other 
deliverances  of  the  Jewish  Church  and  people  took  place  before  the  advent  of  Messiah, 
so  has  the  promise  repeated  itself  in  the  many  deliverances  of  God's  people  since  then. 
Especially  is  it  exemplitied  in  the  great  deliverance  from  sin  and  Satan  wrought  out 


84  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL,  [ch.  iii.  1-21. 

for  us  by  Messiah;  and  shall  have  its  complete  consummation  in  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day. 

II.  Dbstbucption  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people.  1.  Simultaneous  with  the  year 
of  the  redeemed  shall  be  the  year  of  recompense  for  the  controversy  of  Zlon.  The 
salvation  of  God's  people  and  the  destruction  of  their  enemies  go  hand  in  hand 
together.  They  are  frequently  connected  in  time,  almost  always  in  prediction.  2.  The 
place  as  well  as  the  time  is  imiioated,  namely,  the  valley  where  Jehoshaphat  gained 
his  notable  victory,  and  where  the  allies  slew  one  another,  as  if  a  similar  fate  awaited 
all  the  enemies  of  Israel;  or  the  valley  so  called  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  within 
view  of  Jerusalem,  that  their  destruction  might  be  within  view  of  the  very  people  they 
sought  to  injure ;  or,  as  the  name  denotes,  the  "  valley  of  judgment,"  for  whatever  be  the 
particular  place  intended,  it  will  be  a  place  of  justice.  3.  The  destruction  shall  proceed 
according  to  strict  justice.  God  will  plead  the  cause  of  his  people  in  proof  that  he 
deals  judicially,  not  capriciously,  nor  causelessly,  with  their  enemies.  In  this  way 
their  destruction  shall  he  seen  to  be  the  result  of  a  judicial  process,  and  fully  deserved, 
4.  There  is  an  enumeration  pf  the  pleas  advanced,  and  an  example  of  the  pleading 
adopted.  (1)  Among  the  former  are  the  dispersion  of  Israel  among  foreign  and  far-off 
nationalities,  the  division  of  their  land,  the  distribution  of  the  inhabitants,  the  con- 
tempt poured  on  them,  the  cruelty  practised  upon  them,  and  the  despoiling  of  their 
treasures,  secular  and  tacred.  (2)  The  method  of  pleading  is  expressive  of  deep  and 
deserved  indignation.  Identifying  himself  with  his  people,  he  indignantly  inquires — 
What  have  ye  to  do  with  me,  that  is,  with  my  people  ?  What  injury  have  they  dona 
you?  What  provocation  have  they  given  you  ?  Or,  if  we  adopt  the  alternative  read- 
ing of  "  What  are  ye  to  me  ?  "  the  gist  of  this  indignant  interrogatory  is — What  interest 
have  ye  in  me?  What  claim  have  ye  upon  me?  Of  what  value  are  ye  to  me,  that  I 
should  overlook  such  unjust  and  unjustifiable  conduct  on  your  part?  Further,  he 
asks — Will  ye  requite  some  supposed  injury  I  have  done  you,  or  some  imaginary 
provocation  I  have  given  you  ?  Will  ye  requite  me  by  taking  revenge  on  my  people, 
with  whom  I  am  so  closely  identified?  Or  do  you  mean  to  wreak  your  gratuitous 
malice  on  my  people,  and,  out  of  sheer  malignity,  inflict  on  them  injuries  altogether 
unprovoked  ?  Have  you  shut  your  eyes  on  the  result  of  such  conduct,  which  must  be 
a  swift  and  sudden  recompense  upon  your  own  head  ?  (3)  The  common  maxim  of 
"  ni-got,  ill-gone"  is  exemplified  in  the  conduct  of  these  enemies  of  God  and  his  people. 
What  they  got  by  one  sin,  they  lavished  on  another.  The  Hebrew  captives,  whom 
they  had  taken  by  violence,  they  kept  in  home  servitude  for  domestic  drudges  to  them- 
selves or  others,  or  transported  to  a  distant  and  foreign  land,  and  sold  into  slavery, 
while  the  proceeds  of  the  barter  in  the  one  case,  or  of  sale  in  the  other,  they  expended 
on  their  lusts.  The  silver  and  the  gold  and  goodly  pleasant  things  which  they  plun- 
dered from  the  people,  or  temple  of  the  Lord,  they  squandered  upon  idolatry.  It  was  a 
common  custom  among  the  ancients  to  hang  up  in  temples  spoils  taken  from  the  enemy, 
and  trophies  of  victory ;  thus  the  ark  of  God,  when  captured  by  the  Philistines,  was 
transferred  to  the  temple  of  Dagon,  the  fish-god.  With  what  a  black  catalogue  of  crimes 
these  enemies  of  the  people  of  God  were  chargeable  1  Tbere  were  violence  and  rapine, 
slave-dealing,  drunkenness  atid  lust,  and  idulatry.  (4)  The  law  of  retaliation  also 
applies  here.  They  had  sold  the  children  of  Juilah  and  Jeiusalem  to  the  Grecians  for 
expatriation  to  lands  remote,  where  they  would  have  no  opportunity  of  combining  for 
common  safety,  or  whence  they  could  never  have  the  hope  of  returning  to  their  country. 
Now,  in  turn,  and  as  a  just  retribution,  their  children  would  be  sold  to  the  children  of 
Judah,  and  by  them  to  the  Sabeans,  a  people  far  off.  Whether  this  was  accomplished, 
as  some  suppose,  in  the  wars  of  the  Maccabees,  and  their  victories  over  the  enemies  of 
the  Jews,  or  not,  certain  it  is  that  the  principle  of  retribution  finds  here  a  fitting  place 
for  its  operation.  The  justice  of  this  principle  was  acknowledged  by  Adoni-bezek,  when 
he  said,  "  Threescore  and  ten  kings,  having  their  thumbs  and  their  great  toes  cut  off, 
gathered  their  meat  under  my  table  :  as  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me." 
This  principle  is  very  widely  prevalent  in  the  affairs  of  men,  not  only  by  way  of  retri- 
bution, but  also  in  the  matter  of  recompense.  The  evil  that  men  do  is  returned  on  their 
own  head;  the  good  likewise  has  its  reward. 

Vers.  9 — 14. — Providence,  preparation,  and  prevention.     Circumstances  of  great 


OH.  m.  1—210  MB  BOOK  OP  JOEL,  65 

solemnity  and  grandeur  shall  usher  in  the  day  of  vengeance  on  the  wicked  sinners 
of  every  class,  especially  such  as  persecute  and  oppress  the  people  of  God. 

I.  The  peovidenok  op  ,  God  at  woek.  Men  propose,  God  disposes ;  they  pursue 
their  own  individual  plans,  and  yet  all  the  while  they  are  only  carrying  out  the  Divine 
purposes.  A  remarkable  example  of  the  wonderful  scheme  of  God's  providence  is 
recorded  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  Acts,  when  earthly  kings  and  rulers  were  gathered 
against  the  Lord  and  his  Anointed.  "  Of  a  truth,"  it  is  addi-d,  "  against  thy  holy  Child 
Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  anointed,  both  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles,  and 
the  people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  together ; "  but  in  all  they  planned  and  purposed  and 
performed,  though  following  their  own  impulses,  they  only  did  "  whatsoever  thy  hand 
and  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done."  So  in  the  case  before  us,  the  Gentiles 
are  assembling  in  great  force  and  strenuously  pushing  forward  their  hostile  movements 
against  the  people  of  God ;  and  yet  they,  without  thinking  it  and  without  intending  it, 
are  accomplishing  the  Divine  purposes  against  themselves.  They  are  hastening  on 
their  own  destruction,  and  rnshing  on  their  own  ruin. 

IL  The  preparation  made.  The  preparation  is  heralded  among  the  Gentiles  by  a 
formal  and  fearful  proclamation.  The  warlike  preparations  are  on  the  grandest  sctje ; 
they  mean  the  work  of  war  in  earnest.  Not  only  mighty  men  and  men  of  war  are  sum- 
moned to  the  strife ;  but,  besides  the  men  whose  trade  is  war,  husbandmen  are  called 
away  from  their  peaceful  occupations,  their  implements  of  husbandry  are  changed  into 
weapons  of  war.  ■  Even  the  weak  are  for  the  time  to  gird  themselves  with  strength. 
What  is  the  object,  one  naturally  asks,  of  all  this  immense  assemblage,  of  their  activity 
and  energy  and  vast  preparations?  Every  one  in  that  huge  multitude  thinks  his 
mission  is  to  destroy  the  people  and  Church  of  the  Most  High,  and  imagines  himself 
commissioned  for  that  purpose;  nor  do  those  mighty  masses  dream  that  their  own 
doom  is  sealed,  and  that  they  are  convened,  not  for  the  annihilation  of  the  people  of 
God,  but  for  their  own.  They  are  convoked  to  appear  before  the  august  tribunal  of  the 
lighteous  Ruler  of  the  universe  to  receive  their  sentence — a  sentence  in  agreement  with 
unerring  justice,  and  to  be  executed  in  accordance  therewith.  The  executioners  are 
already  on  the  spot ;  they  are  agents  appointed  and  armed  for  the  express  purpose.  It 
matters  not  whether  they  are  angels  or  men ;  perhaps  the  enemies  themselves,  engagiisg 
in  internecine  strife,  as  was  the  case  with  the  confederates  that  once  came  to  fight 
against  Jehoshaphat,  then  turned  their  arms  against  each  other. 

III.  Prevention  of  his  people's  fears.  God  repeats  the  summons  to  his  enemies 
to  assemble  themselves  for  judgment.  1.  This  he  does  to  persuade  his  own  people 
that  their  fears  are  groundless,  and  to  prevent  them  apprehending  peiil  from  the  power 
and  preparations  of  their  enemies.  To  prevent  them  being  troubled  by  the  might  and 
multitude  of  their  enemies,  he  repeats  his  challenge,  if  1  may  so  term  it,  for  them  to 
come  on,  one  and  all,  with  all  their  powers.  Thus  he  means  to  show  how  puny  and 
insignificant  all  those  enemies  were  in  his  sight,  and  let  his  people  know  that  his  hand 
is  in  the  whole  business,  overruling  aU  and  controlling  all.  2.  But  he  makes  it 
evident  that  all  his  proceedings  are  in  righteousness,  that  justice  and  judgment  are  the 
habitation  of  his  throne.  He  pleads  before  he  punishes;  he  sifts  the  case  judicially 
before  he  passes  sentence.  He  sits  to  judge,  taking  sufficient  time  and  pains,  so  that  he 
is  justified  when  he  speaks,  and  clear  when  he  judges. 

IV.  Period  of  execution.  Once  judgment  is  pronounced  and  sentence  passed,  the 
execution  is  not  long  delayed.  The  ripeness  of  the  harvest  now  ready  for  reaping, 
the  fulness  of  the  presses  now  fit  for  treading,  and  the  overflow  of  the  vats  now  waiting 
for  the  foot  of  the  trampler,  are  figures  easily  understood,  and  of  which  the  corre- 
sponding fact  is  the  greatness  of  the  wickedness.  Harvest  is  used  in  a  good  sense, 
oftener  in  a  bad  sense ;  while  the  treading  of  the  wine-press  is  always  expressive  of 
Divine  wrath.  The  ripeness  of  the  one  and  the  fulness  of  the  other  imply  not  only 
the  height  of  abounding  ungodliness,  but  that  the  fulness  of  the  time  for  punishment 
has  arrived,  as  in  the  case  of  the  old  world,  when  all  flesh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon 
the  earth,  so  that  God  said,  "  The  end  of  all  flesh  is  before  me ; "  or  as  Sodom,  when 
fire  and  brimstone  were  rained  from  heaven  on  its  wicked  inhabitants ;  or  as  when  our 
Lord  said,  "  Fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your  fathers.  "They,"  says  Pococke,  "  were 
ripe  in  their  sins,  fit  for  a  harvest,  and  as  full  of  wickedness  as  ripe  grapes,  which  fill 
and  overflow  the  vats,  through  the  abundance  of  the  juice  with  which  they  swelL" 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  m.  1-21. 

v.  Pbooession  op  the  condemned  obimwals  to  the  place  of  punishment.  The 
prophet  himself  is  tilled  with  amazement  at  the  assembling  multitudes.  He  looks  on 
for  a  time  in  wonder,  as  one  mass  of  living  beings  follows  in  quick  succession  another, 
till  at  last,  as  if  the  procession  would  never  come  to  an  end,  he  is  lost  in  wonder,  and 
exclaims,  in  view  of  the  assembling  throngs  and  multitudes,  "Whichever  way  he 
looked  there  were  yet  more  of  these  tumultuous  masses,  so  that  there  was  nothing 
beside  them.  It  was  one  living,  surging,  boiling  sea ;  throngs  upon  throngs — mere 
throngs."  The  place  of  rendezvous  is  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,or  the  valley  of  judg- 
ment, where  Jehovah  judgeth;  but  it  is  also  the  valley  of  decision.  This  is  something 
more  than  mere  judgment ;  it  is  the  place  of  sharp,  strict,  severe  judgment. 

Vers.  15 — 17. —  That  day — the  fear  of  the  wicked,  the  hnpe  of  the  Just.  These  verses 
picture  the  dread  accompaniments  of  the  time  and  place  of  the  destruction  of  the 
wicked.     They  give  us  a  glimpse,  and  a  most  alarming  one,  of  the  final  catastrophe. 

I.  Thk  DAT  OF  DECISION  s^ALL  BE  A  DAT  OF  DARKNESS.  Apart  from  the  decision 
itself  and  consequent  execution  of  Divine  wrath  upon  the  ungodly — an  execution  which, 
as  if  baffling  the  power  of  words  to  describe,  is  left  to  imagination  to  conceive — ^the 
attendant  terrors  of  that  day  invest  it  with  the  blackness  of  darkness.  Not  only  shall 
sun  and  moon  withdraw  their  shining  and  undergo  a  total  eclipse,  but  the  stars  shall 
frown  upon  them.  The  lights  of  heaven  shall  be  darkened,  or  those  lights  shall  dwindle 
before  the  unspeakable  brightness  of  the  glory  in  which  the  Judge  shall  appear,  just  as 
the  stars  pale  and  disappear  in  presence  of  the  sun  when  he  rises  in  splendour  above  the 
eastern  horizon. 

II.  That  dat  bhall  be  a  dat  of  dreadfttlness.  Dreadful  sounds  as  well  as 
dreadful  sights  shall  augment  the  terrors  of  that  day,  "  As  the  failure  of  the  light  of 
the  sun  at  our  Lord's  passion  betokened  the  shame  of  nature  at  the  great  sin  of  man, 
so,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  it  sets  before  us  the  awfulnessof  G-od's  judgments,  as  though 
it  dared  not  behold  the  severity  of  him  who  judgeth  and  returneth  every  man's  work 
upon  his  own  head ; "  so  the  voice  of  God,  when  he  shall  roar  out  of  Zion,  shall  be 
a  voice  of  terror.  Even  when  the  voice  of  God  speaks  words  of  warning,  it  is  compared 
to  the  roaring  of  a  lion,  as  we  read,  "  The  Lord  hath  roared,  who  will  not  fear?  the 
Lord  hath  spoken,  who  can  but  prophesy  ?  "  How  much  more  when  that  terrible  voice 
is  no  longer  a  voice  of  warning,  but  a  voice  of  wrath  ? 

III.  That  dat  shall  be  a  dat  of  desolatbness.  The  frame  of  nature  shall  feel 
the  shock  of  strong  convulsions.  The  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  shake,  but  this 
shaking  is  only  a  prelude  to  something  still  more  awe-inspiring,  even  such  convulsions 
as  seem  to  betoken  their  dissolution.  "  Nor  shall  it  be  a  slight  shaking  of  the  earth  at 
his  coming,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  but  such  that  all  the  dead  shall  be  roused,  as  it  were, 
from  their  sleep."  And  when  the  day  of  final  decision  comes,  "  the  heavens,"  we  are 
told,  "shall  pass  away  with  a  great  voice,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent 
heat,  the  earth  also  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up."  Minor 
judgments  are  premonitions  of,  and  should  be  improved  as,  preparations  for  the 
judgment  of  the  great  day. 

"  The  day  of  wrath !  that  dreadful  day, 
Wlien  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away. 
What  power  shall  be  the  sinner's  stay  ? 
Whom  shall  he  trust  that  dreadful  dayf 

"  When,  shrivelling  like  a  pnrolifed  scroll, 
The  flaming  heavens  together  roll. 
And  louder  yet,  and  yet  more  dread, 
Swells  the  high  trump  that  wakes  the  dead; 

•  Oh  I  on  that  day,  that  wrathful  day, 
When  man  to  judgment  wakes  from  olay. 
Be  thou,  O  Christ,  the  sinner's  Stay, 
Though  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away." 

When  God,  in  punishing  his  enemies,  shakes  as  it  were  earth  and  heaven,  causing  such 
changes  and  commotions  as  seem  to  threaten  a  general  upheaval  and  convulsion  of  the 
course  of  nature,  it  is  not  strange  if  the  people  of  God  should  be  agitated  with  fears  and 


OH.  III.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  67 

exercised  with  apprehensions  lest  the  'storm  should  burst  over  them.  Accordingly, 
he  vouchsafes  to  them  promises  to  secure  them  against  such  fears  and  fortify  them  for 
the  ordeal. 

I.  He  is  the  Hope  of  his  people.  He  comforts  his  people  so  that  the  terrors  of 
a  time  of  great  convulsions  do  not  overwhelm  them.  As  Gud  is  the  Ground  and 
Pounder  of  his  people's  hopes,  so  will  he  be  their  Crown  and  Consummation.  He  is 
their  Harbour  of  re'  uge  and  their  Fortress  of  safety.  Fleeing  to  him,  they  shall  net  only 
be  admitted  to,  but  preserved,  in  safety.  He  is  their  Eefuge  on  earth  while  the  storm 
of  wrath  is  sweeping  over  the  wicked ;  he  will  be  their  Home  in  heaven  at  last.  "  The 
saints  in  the  great  day  shall  arrive  at  the  desired  haven,  shall  put  to  shore  alter 
a  stormy  voyage ;  they  shall  go  to  be  ever  at  home  with  God — to  their  Father's  house, 
the  house  not  made  with  hands." 

II.  He  is  the  Happiness  of  his  people.  He  is  the  Hope  of  his  people  and  the 
Strength  of  the  children  of  Israel.  We  are  thus  taught  that  while  all  are  not  Israel 
that  are  called  Israel,  so  all  who  are  really  God's  people  are  the  true  spiritual  Israel ; 
and  that  all  his  spiritual  promises  to  Israel  in  the  past  apply  in  the  present,  and  may 
be  claimed  by  all  those  whb  are  Israelites  indeed.  When  other  meu's  hearts  fail  them, 
God  is  the  Strength  of  his  people's  hearts  and  their  Portion  for  ever.  When  the  judg- 
ments of  God  are  abroad  in  the  earth,  and  sinners  overtaken  by  them,  God  is  a  present 
Help  to  his  people ;  and  in  that  time  of  terror  when  the  vials  of  wrath  shall  be  poured 
out  upon  the  wicked,  joy  and  gladness  shall  be  reserved  for  the  righteous,  while  the 
joy  of  the  Lord  shall  be  their  strength.  Thus,  amid  all  the  trials  of  this  mortal  life, 
"  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation ;  in  all  time  of  our  wealth  ;  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in 
the  day  of  judgment/'  God  is  the  Hope  and  Happiness  of  his  people,  the  Support  and 
Strength  of  all  his  true  Israel. 

III.  He  is  the  Holiness  of  his  people.  While  God  is  a  holy  God,  heaven  a  holy 
place,  the  angels  of  God  holy  angele,  even  the  Church  militant  is  holy,  and  the 
redeemed  of  the  Lord  a  holy  people.  But  in  this  world  the  Church  is  a  mixed  society ; 
there  are  tares  among  the  wheat,  chaff  as  well  as  good  grain.  It  will  not  always  be  so. 
In  millennial  times,  to  which  the  passage  points,  there  shall  be  higher  degrees  of  holiness, 
of  purity,  of  prosperity,  and  peace,  than  the  Church  has  yet  attained ;  but  in  heaven 
alone  holiness  shall  be  perfect  and  happiness  complete.  Meantime  we  are  encouraged 
by  the  promise  that  God's  presence  is  enjoyed  by  his  people.  He  himself  is  the  Source 
of  holiness  ;  the  Church  on  earth,  like  Zion  of  old,  is  made  holy  by  his  presence  ;  the 
place  of  his  people's  habitation,  like  Jerusalem  of  old,  is  a  holy  place ;  his  people  are 
a  holy  people.  Strangers  may  force  or  find  an  entrance  to  the  Church  militant,  or 
earthly  Jerusalem,  and  pollute  it ;  but  the  Jerusalem  that  is  above,  that  is,  the  Church 
triumphant,  shall  never  be  trodden  by  stranger's  foot,  nor  entered  by  anything  that 
defiles  or  works  iniquity.  None  but  the  true  citizens  of  Zion  shall  be  there,  and  so 
only  those  that  have  a  right  to  be  there.  Even  here  and  now  we  have  the  happy  con- 
sciousness that  God,  our  own  God — our  own"  as  much  as  if  possessed  by  none  besides, 
filling  all  with  gladness,  yet  fully  possessed  by  each,  as  though  there  were  none 
besides  "—dwells  with  us,  and  in  us,  while  hereafter  we  shall  have  "  unvarying,  blissful, 
hallowing  presence,  never  withdrawn,  never  hidden,  never  shaded,  but  ever  shining 
upon  us." 

Vers.  18 — 21. — The  promise  of  plenty.  These  verses  contain  the  concluding  pro- 
mises of  the  closing  chapter  of  this  book  of  Scripture. 

I.  There  is  the  promise  of  plenty.  Some  understand  the  whole  of  this  verse  as 
referring  to  spiritual  blessings,  especially  in  millennial  times.  "  But  though  the  prophecy 
belongs  eminently  to  one  time,  the  imagery  describes  the  fulness  of  spiritual  blessings 
which  God  at  all  times  diffuses  in  and  through  the  Church;  and  these  blessings,  he 
saySj'shall  continue  on  in  her  for  ever ;  her  enemies  shall  be  cut  off  for  ever."  Others, 
understanding  these  blessings  as  promised  to  the  Jews  when  restored  and  converted, 
understand  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  as  relating  to  spiritual,  and  the  preceding  to 
temporal,  blessings.  In  either  case  the  language  is  beautifully  poetic,  and  conveys  the 
idea  of  exuberant  blessings.  The  mountains,  covered  with  vineyards,  shall  yield  abun- 
dance of  wine,  or,  without  human  toil,  shall  spontaneously  pour  it  forth  ;  the  hills  shall 
be  clothed  with  flocks,  or,  of  their  own  accord,  shall  yield  abundance  of  milk ;  the  rivers, 


68  THE  BOOK  OP  JOEL.  [oh.  in.  1—21. 

even  the  tiny  channels,  never  again  reduced  to  dry  river-heds,  shall  gush  perennially,  or 
overflow  their  banks.  Thus  there  shall  be  abundance  of  wine  for  refreshment,  of  milk 
for  nourishment,  and  of  water  for  allaying  thirst  or  fertilizing  what  would  otherwise  be 
a  dry,  parched  land.  The  last  clause  can  only  be  referred  to  spiritual  blessings,  both 
because  of  its  source — the  house  of  the  Lord — and  its  course,  extending  to  the  valley 
of  acacias,  seven  and  a  half  miles  to  the  east  of  the  Dead  Sea.  This  is  the  stream, 
"  the  Siloah,"  whose  streamlets,  i.e.  the  artificial  fertilizing  divisions,  which  made  glad 
the  city  of  God,  shall  make  the  wildest,  driest  spots  of  our  mortality  like  the  garden  of 
the  Lord. 

IL  There  is  the  promise  of  peepbtuitt.  While  the  enemies  of  God,  like  Egypt, 
the  ancient  oppressor  of  his  people,  and  Edom,  their  constant  enemy,  are  devoted  to 
destruction,  Judah  the  country  and  Jerusalem  the  city — all  the  members  of  the 
Church  of  Christ  shall  enjoy  a  perpetuity  of  blessing  in  time,  and  an  eternity  of  bliss 
when  time  shall  be  no  more.  "  Egypt  and  Edom  and  all  the  enemies  of  God  shall 
come  to  an  end ;  but  his  people  shall  never  come  to  an  end."  The  Judah  that  truly 
praise  God,  the  Israel  that  without  ceasing  pray  to  God,  shall  outlive  all  the  machina- 
tions of  the  wicked ;  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  the  Church.  "  The 
enemy  shall  not  destroy  her;  time  shall  not  consume  her;  she  shall  never  decay.  The 
people  of  God  shall  abide  before  him  and  through  him  here,  and  shall  dwell  with  him 
for  ever." 

III.  These  is  the  promise  of  purity.  This  blessing  contains  the  reason  of  all  the 
rest.  It  is  the  cause  of  the  plenty  and  perpetuity  and  all  other  privileges.  If  we 
accept  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  last  verse,  we  conclude  from  it  that  all  the  guilt 
of  sin,  especially  their  blood  guiltiness,  shall  be  purged  away.  The.  people  of  God,  both 
Jew  and  Gentile,  shall  in  the  day  of  God's  gracious  visitation  be  cleansed  from  sin 
and  throughly  washed  from  all  iniquity  ;  otherwise  they  could  not  be  fit  for  full  com- 
munion with  God.  As  long  as  we  are  defiled  by-sin,  we  are  odious  to  the  holiness  and 
obnoxious  to  the  justice  of  God.  It  is  only  when  washed  in  the  opened  fountain,  and 
purified  by  that  blood  which  clcanseth  from  all  sin,  that  we  are  made  meet  for  the  holy 
companionship  of  heaven.  Here  in  the  Church  below  the  lessons  of  the  Divine  Word, 
the  ordinances  of  religion,  the  providences  of  God,  sometimes  pleasant,  oftener  painful, 
but  above  all  and  giving  efficacy  to  all,  the  blood  of  atonement,  purge  away  our  sins. 
But  whatever  is  amiss  in  the  Church  or  the  Christian  on  earth  shall  be  amended, 
whatever  is  wrong  shall  be  rectified ;  and  the  Church,  as  the  individual  soul,  shall  be 
without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOKa 

Ver.  1. — Sestorationfrom  captivity.  It  is  believed  that  Joel  was  the  earliest  of  the 
prophets  who  prophesied  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  If  so,  it  is  remarkable  how  boldly 
he  led  the  way  in  the  general  tone  of  his  declarations  and  predictions,  and  especifelly 
with  what  poetic  insight,  with  what  religious  fervour,  he  connected  political  events 
with  lessons  of  eternal  morality.  In  this  chapter  it  would  perhaps  be  possible  to  find 
nothing  but  history  ;  yet  tlie  grandeur  and  solemnity  of  the  language  point  rather  to 
truths  of  Divine  import  and  power  as  the  real  significance  of  the  prophecy.  The  very 
captivity  here  foretold  has  its  spiritual  analogy,  and  the  restoration  of  Judah  is  a  type 
of  the  ransom  of  mankind. 

I.  The  worst  captivity  is  that  op  humanity  to  sin.  1.  This  implies  that  sin  is 
not  the  true  and  proper  lord  of  our  race,  but  that  God  has  a  claim  to  the  loyalty  and 
obedience  of  men.  2.  And  that  sin  is  a  tyrant,  arbitrary,  unjust,  and  basely  oppressive. 
3.  And  further,  that  in  such  bondage,  no  peace,  no  liberty,  no  satisfaction,  are  to  be  found. 

II.  The  only  Deliverer  of  humanity  is  God  himself.  1.  His  interposition  is 
prompted  by  Divine  compassion.  2.  And  is  effected  by  supernatural  means.  In  rescu- 
ing Judah  from  tlie  captivity  in  the  East,  Jehovah  was  painting,  as  it  were,  beforeViac  1 
a  picture  of  what  was  yet  to  be.  In  Christ  God  laid  help  upon  One  who  was  mighty  ; 
his  designation  is  emphatically  the  Eedeemer.  3.  The  interposition  is  completed  by 
the  restoration  of  the  ransomed  to  greater  happiness  than  by  their  disloyalty  they 
forfeited  and  lost 


OH.  m.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  B9 

III.  The  bbbtobed  fbom  spiritual  captivity  akb  summoned  to  obbdibnck  and 
PBAISE.  1.  To  obedience,  because  they  have  tasted  tlie  bitter  fruits  of  rebellion,  and 
have  learned  the  lesson  that  true  happiness  lies  in  cheerful  subjection.  2.  To  praise, 
because  such  mercy  as  they  have  experienced  deserves  grateful  and  unceasing  acknow- 
ledgments.— T. 

Vers.  2 — 8. — Retribution.  Joel's  prophetic  foresight  beholds  the  calamities  that  are 
to  come  ujion  the  Jew.s,  his  countrymen.  Looking  back  upon  the  past,  we  are  able  by 
the  records  of  history  to  verify  the  justice  of  these  predictions.  The  transportations 
into  the  East,  the  oppression  under  Antiochus,  the  dispersion  by  the  Romans, — these 
awful  events  in  Hebrew  history  rise  before  our  view.  But  where  shall  we  look  for  a 
fulfilment  of  the  predictions  of  vengeance  and  of  retribution?  Surely  God  in  his 
providence  has  spoiled  the  spoilers,  and  led  captivity  captive !  There  is  but  a  name 
and  a  memory  left  of  the  proud  conquerors  and  the  mighty  nations  that  oppressed  and 
scattered  Israel.  An  omen  this  of  final  judgment^-a  picture  of  the  purposes  of  the 
Eternal.     'J'he  Lord  reigneth,  and  none  can  stay  bis  hand. 

I.  The  opfbession  of  God's  peopi.b  by  thbib  toes.  1.  The  land  is  parted.  The 
sacred  soil  is  divided  among  strangers,  for  the  tribes  to  whom  it  was  allotted  are  dis- 
possessed. The  heirs  become  slaves,  and  toil  upon  their  own  inheritance.  2.  The 
treasures  are  carried  away.  The  silver,  the  gold,  the  pleasant  things,  which  have  been 
a  delight  io  the  eyes  and  an  enrichment  to  the  population, — these  are  carried  off  to 
adorn  the  palaces  and  temples  of  the  conquerors  and  captors.  3.  The  inhabitants  of 
the  land  are  led  into  captivity,  are  scattered  among  the  nations,  far  from  the  homes  of 
their  ancestors  and  the  scenes  of  their  childhood.  4.  Nay,  even  worse,  the  children  are 
sold  as  slaves,  as  worthless  trifles,  or  as  ministers  to  the  luxury  or  the  lust  of  heathen 
masters. 

II.  The  eescue  of  God's  people  feom  thbie  fobs.  1.  The  enemies  and  oppressors 
shall  be  themselves  defeated  and  vanquished.  The  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  or  "  the  judg- 
ment of  Jehovah,"  is  to  be  the  scene  of  a  righteous  retribution,  in  which  the  cause  of 
God's  people  shall  be  maintained,  and  their  enemies  judged.  2.  The  people  of  God 
shall  be  restored  to  their  dwelling-places,  and  their  former  happiness  and  privileges ; 
the  mischief  shall  be  undone.  3.  And  the  oppressors  shall  in  turn  endure  the  fate 
they  inflicted  upon  the  Lord's  people ;  they  who  sold  Israelites  into  captivity  in  the 
West  shall  themselves  be  deported  as  slaves  into  the  East.  From  this  prediction  the 
great  lesson  may  be  learned  that  the  Lord  reigneth — that  he  suffers  nothing  to  happen 
to  his  people  that  he  will  not  overrule  for  their  good  and  for  his  gloiy.— rT. 

Vers.  9 — 13. —  War  and  judgment.  This  is  truly  prophetic  language;  for  the  writer 
Is  not  merely  relating  historical  facts,  or  foretelling  future  events ;  he  is  uttering  great 
moral  and  religious  principles.  The  form  these  utterances  assume  is  determined  by 
the  circumstances  of  Judah  in  the  time  of  the  prophet;  but  the  truth  enunciated  is 
one  which  is  universal  and  all-important. 

I.  A  PICTURE  OF  WAR.  1.  The  vastness  of  the  scale  upon  which  it  is  condacted 
HI  pears  from  the  language  employed  to  designate  those  who  take  part  in  it.  They  are 
"  ttie  Gentiles;  "  "  all  the  nations."  2.  The  valour  and  renown  of  the  comHatants  are 
«ct  forth  in  the  expressions, "  the  mighty  men,"  "  the  men  of  war,"  eic.  3.  The  military 
preparation  and  warlike  accoutrements  are  brought  before  us  veiy  vividly  and  pic- 
turesquely in  the  representation  of  ploughshares  fashioned  into  swords,  and  pruning- 
hooks  into  spears.  4.  The  warlike  array  is  denoted  by  the  directions  to  "assemble,"  to 
"come  up,"  etc. 

II.  A  PICTURE  or  JUDGMENT  AND  RETRIBUTION.  1.  The  vast  multitudes  who  intend 
to  gather  ibr  battle  prove  in  reality  to  have  gathered  for  judgment.  They  came  in  battle 
array  to  contend  with  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  and  lo !  they  find  themselves  standing;  at 
the  bar  of  the  great  Judge  of  all.  2.  The  Lord  sits  upon  his  judgment-seat,  his  throne, 
whilst  before  him  are  gathered  all  nations.  3.  Under  two  striking  figures  is  set  forth 
the  judicial  process  and  the  punitive  consequences  which  ensue.  The  harvest  is 
reaped,  the  wine-press  is  trodden.  The  enemies  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  people  arn,  as  it 
were,  mown  down  by  the  hand  of  the  reaper ;  their  blood  flows  from  the  wine-press  of 
the  wrath  of  God. 


60  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [ch.  in.  1—21. 

Application.  The  passage  shows  us  the  omniscient  regard  of  Q-od  surveying  all  the 
sons  of  men,  and  the  power  of  God  defeating  the  counsels  of  lebels  and  foes,  delivering 
the  righteous  from  oppression,  vindicating  the  cause  of  truth  and  obedience.  The  sway 
of  the  Supreme  extends  throughout  the  universe ;  and  however  we  may  be  perplexed 
and  baffled  by  seeming  disorder,  we  may  be  assured  that  the  sceptre  of  righteuusnesa  ia 
the  sceptre  of  God's  fingdom,  and  that  every  enemy  shall  be  put  beneath  his  feet. — T. 

Ver.  14. — "  The  valley  of  decision."  A  learned  and  interesting  book  has  been 
written  upon  'The  Decisive  Battles  of  the  World.'  Often  in  the  long  history  of  man- 
kind, the  fate  of  races,  of  empires,  as  well  as  that  of  kings  and  heroes,  has  beeu  settled 
upon  the  battle-field.  Decisive  conflicts  often  occur  in  the  region  of  thought  and 
belief,  in  the  region  of  personal  influence,  where  there  is  nothing  to  attract  general 
attention.  But  even  more  overlooked  and  unnoticed  is  the  perpetual  Divin ,'  judgment 
which  t»kes  place  in  human  life  and  human  society ;  and  even  more  forgotten  is  the 
day  of  judgment,  which  revelation  assures  us  shall  surely  come.  Not  denying  that 
there  may  be  in  this  verse  a  reference  to  some  special  histoiical  incident,  we  may  yet 
take  it  as  conveying  a  great  and  solemn  truth  applicable  to  the  mora)  life  of  humanity. 

I.  Law  anb  eetbibution  are  present  as  perpetual  factors  in  human  histobt. 
1.  Nations  are  judged  by  their  works.  What  is  stated  in  this  chapter  reganliiig 
Judah,  Tyre,  Sidon,  and  the  Gentile  nations  that  surrounded  Palestine,  is  not  true  of 
them  alone.  God  is  the  Euler  of  the  nations.  National  error  and  crime  are  visited 
by  Divine  penalties,  and  the  nations  that  endure  probation  are  exalted  to  honour  and 
to  sway.  History  is  now  better  understood  than  formerly,  and  it  has  become  growiugly 
evident  that  deep-seated  moral  causes  underlie  and  explain  the  changes,  the  rise,  the 
decline,  the  fall,  of  peoples.  2.  Individual  life  is  equally  the  province  of  God's  retribu- 
tive government.  "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap ; "  "  The  wiekcd 
shall  not  go  unpunished."  His  prosperity  shall  not  last  for  ever ;  it  shall  be  seen  that 
there  is  a  Judge  in  the  earth.  We,  indeed, have  no  right  to  set  ourselves  up  as  infallible 
interpreters  of  the  ways  of  God;  we  have  no  right'  to  infer  from  particular  suffeiings 
particular  sins;  but  the  fact  of  God's  moral  rule  we  cannot  question,  and  we  should 
never  for  a  moment  forget. 

II.  Though  retribution  be  deferred,  its  action  will  not  be  evaded;  for  the 
DAY  OF  THE  LoBD  18  NEAB.  1.  Men's  Conscience  assures  them  that,  although  for  a 
season  they  may  escape  the  deserved  penalties  due  to  their  misdeeds,  a  time  of  reckon- 
ing shall  come,  and  that  soon.  2.  The  reflections  to  which  events  constrain  us,  and 
which  lead  us  to  consider  the  course  and  order  of  Divine  Providence,  cannot  but  induce 
a  belief  that  the  inequalities  of  this  world  will  be  redressed  hereafter ;  that  although 
vice  and  virtue  may  not  here  meet  with  their  recompeuse,  that  recompense  will  be 
accoided  hereafter,  3.  Bevelation  comes  in  to  make  the  probability  a  certainty.  The 
Hebrew  prophets  seem  to  point  on  to  a  day  of  the  Lord,  in  which  the  inequalities  of 
this  life  shall  be  corrected,  in  which  the  truth  shall  be  made  manifest,  in  which  every 
man  shall  receive  according  to  his  works.  Indeed,  the  future  judgment  occupied  a  more 
prominent  position  in  the  preaching  and  teaching  of  the  apostles  than  it  usually  holds 
in  Christian  teaching  at  the  present  time.  In  that  day,  for  which  all  days  were  made, 
multitudes  shall  be  gathered  in  the  valley  of  decision ;  the  righteous  Judge  shall  admi- 
nister his  awful  functions  in  the  sublimest  publicity,  and  upon  principles  of  unques- 
tionable rectitude.  Happy  is  the  Christian  who  can  look  forward  with  equanimity  and 
hope  to  the  day  when  "  every  man  shall  receive  his  praise  from  God." — T. 

Ver.  16. — The  Lord  his  peoph's  Hope  and  Strength,  The  prosjieot  of  the  day  of 
the  Lord  is  to  the  sinful  fraught  with  dread  and  with  dismay.  To  them  the  judgment 
brings  the  delayed  condemnation,  and  therefore  the  very  thought  of  it  is  associated 
with  alarm.  But  the  language  of  this  verse  reminds  us  how  differently  the  Divine 
appearance  and  interposition,  are  regarded  by  the  true  people  of  God. 

I.  The  RIGHTEOUS  Lord  is  the  Harbour  and  the  Hope  op  his  people.  1.  They 
have  need  of  a  Divine  and  secure  refuge  and  confidence.  2.  They  have  received  God's 
revelation  of  himself,  and  are  accordingly  able  to  trust  and  rest  in  him.  3.  And 
thus  the  expectation  which  brings  to  others  consternation,  brings  to  them  a  tranquil 
confidence. 


OH.  m.  1—21.,.  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  8* 

n.  The  BiaBTXous  Lobd  is  the  Stbenoth  of  hib  feofle.  1.  This  assuruico 
Bupporta  them  when  conscious  of  their  own  feebleness.  2.  And  when  convinced  hj 
experience  of  the  comparative  strength  of  their  enemies.  8.  To  them  the  power  ol 
Qoil  is  a  welcome  thought;  for  the  irresistible  might,  which  others  fear  becanse  it 
ensures  their  defeat  and  destruction,  will  be  ezerclKd  by  a  faithful  Qoi  for  the  pro- 
tection and  preservation  of  all  who  trust  in  him.— T. 

Ter.  17. — Z%«  LoreTB  holy  dw^ing-plaoe.  When  Jerusalem  was  entered  by  hostile 
armies,  it  must  have  been  to  the.  Jews  a  sore  amasement  and  trouble  to  behold  the 
sanctuary  of  God  profaned.  The  city  was  a  holy  city,  and  the  temple  was  a  holy 
building.  National  disaster  involved  the  fffofanation  of  what  was  justly  regarded  as 
"  holiness  unto  the  Lord." 

L  The  tboe  JEBnsALEU  is  the  ooNSEOBATEn  Obuboh  of  Chbibt.  Iu  the  elder 
dispensation  certain  places  were  holy.  But  the  Ohristian  religion  has  taught  us  that 
holiness  is  not  local,  ceremonial,  or  officiaL  True  holiness  is  of  the  heart.  Hence  the 
spiritual  temple  is  that  constructed  of  living  stones.  The  true  Jerusalem  is  the  city 
composed  of  renewed  and  sanctified  citizens  and  subjects  of  the  new  and  spiritual 
kingdom. 

II.  The  fbesenoe  of  the  Lobd  conseobateb  and  blesses  Zion.  His  omnipresence 
is  not  to  be  questioned.  But  the  presence  of  his  approval,  his  favour,  hia  love,  is 
peculiar  to  his  own  chosen  abode.  In  his  holy  mountain,  the  Church  of  his  Son, 
Ood  ever  dwells  as  in  a  congenial  residence.  His  presence  diffuses  purity,  confidence, 
and  joy. 

III.  The  indwelling  of  the  Lobd  banishes  fbom  the  bpibitital  Jebubalem  all 
THAT  could  injttbe  ob  deobade.  The  presence  of  the  foreigner  contaminated  and 
defiled  the  holy  dwelling-place  of  the  Eternal.  As  such  invasion  was  loathed  by 
patriotic  and  pious  Jews,  we  can  understand  how  welcome  was  the  assurance  that 
strangers  should  no  more  pass  through  the  city.  The  perfection  of  the  saved  and 
glorified  Church  of  God  involves  its  freedom  from  all  that  is  uncongenial  and  inhar- 
monious.   There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  heaven  "  anything  that  defileth." — T. 

Ver.  18. — Spiritual  prosperity.  The  language  of  the  prophet  in  this  passage  is 
obviously  figurative.  In  poetical  terms,  the  Iwldness  and  beauty  of  which  are  not 
exceeded  by  the  graceful  and  imaginative  writers  of  classical  antiquity,  Joel  depicts 
the  reign  of  peace,  plenty,  and  prosperity.  Literally  these  words  have  not  been,  and 
will  not  be,  fulfilled.  To  some  they  speak  of  a  restoration  of  Israel,  yet  in  the  future, 
of  a  period  when  all  the  delights  that  a  nation  can  enjoy  shall  be  secured  in  abundance 
to  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  It  seems  a  more  sober  and  more  profitable  interpre- 
tation to  read  in  these  words  a  prediction  of  the  spiritual  prosperity  of  God's  people, 
whether  to  be  enjoyed  upon  this  earth  or  in  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth. 

I.  The  mountains  dbopping  wine  syubolize  the  sfibitual  jots  of  Christ's 
Church.  The  Scriptures  speak  of  wine  as  "  making  glad  the  heart  of  man."  The 
"  new  wine  "  of  the  gospel  is  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  elect.  The  wine  of  the  kingdom 
is  of  celestial  vintage ;  they  who  partake  of  it  are  "  filled  with  the  Spirit."  The  joy 
of  the  new  covenant,  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  is  the  portion  of  the  rescued,  emancipated, 
and  consecrated  IsraeL 

II.  The  hills  flowino  with  mile  symbolize  the  sfibitual  nutbiment  of 
Chbist's  Chubch.  We  are  taught  by  the  apostle  to  "  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word,  that  we  may  grow  thereby."  Even  the  babes  in  Christ  can  partake  of  this 
nourishing  spiritual  diet ;  but  the  strong  men  do  not  disdain  the  food.  As  Canaan 
WuH  "  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,"  so  the  Church  of  the  blessed  Saviour 
abiunds  with  all  that  can  enrich  and  nourish  and  bless  the  people  of  God.  "They 
shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more." 

III.  The  bivebb  flowino  with  waters  symbolize  the  revival  and  rbfbbshmbnt 
OF  Chbist's  Chubch.  Several  of  the  prophets,  expatiating  (as  they  loved  to  do)  upon 
the  glorious  prospect  afforded  them  by  inspiration  of  the  future  of  the  Church,  describe 
one  element  of  that  happy  future  by  the  figure  of  a  river  flowing  from  its  source  in  the 
Lord's  house  at  Jerusalem,  and  fertilizing  the  soil  until  it  should  enter  the  Dead  Sea 
or  the  Mediterranean.     And  the  Anostle  John  beheld  the  river  of  the  water  of  life, 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOEIi.  [ckiilI— tL 


flowing  oat  of  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb.  How  exact  U  the  correspondence 
between  the  prediction  and  the  reality  I  It  wai  in  Jerusalem  that  Jesus  wai  eon* 
demned,  and  hard  by  that  he  Buffered ;  and  his  cross  was  the  source  of  a  liver  of 
spiritual  blessing  to  mankind.  Wherever  his  Spirit  penetrates,  there  Ufa  is  revived, 
souls  are  saved,  society  is  purified,  weariness  is  refreshed.  Xot  earth  only,  but  heaven, 
is  fertilized  and  cheered  by  the  water  which  Ohrist  gives  in  a  sweet,  unceasing 
stream. — ^T. 

Ver.  13. — A  harvest  lermon.  "  Put  ye  In  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe."  Joel 
is  alluding  here  to  a  coming  judgment,  in  which  the  results  of  men's  sins  would  appear, 
and  each  would  reap  as  be  had  sown.  Our  Lord's  parable  of  the  tares,  which  points 
us  onward  to  a  future  harvest,  very  £tly  illustrates  these  words.  The  harvest  of  each 
year  is  fraught  with  instruction  to  us,  reminding  us  as  it  does  of  the  bounty  which 
supplies  our  needs,  the  fidelity  which  remembers  our  toil,  and  the  certainty  of  retribu- 
tion and  reward  being  apportioned  to  the  careless  and  to  the  faithfiil.  To  the  disciple 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  no  phase  of  nature  should  be  a  blank.  Each  contains  lessons  which 
are  as  truly  written  with  tiie  finger  of  Ood  as  were  the  laws  on  tables  of  stone.  Ask- 
ing the  aid  of  him  who  can  lead  us  into  all  truth,  let  us  see  what  truths  appear  in 
every  harvest-field. 

L  Thk  habvest  beybalb  thk  results  or  Han's  laboub.  "Whatsoever  a  man 
soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  "  He  which  soweth  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly, 
and  he  which  soweth  bountifully  shall  reap  also  bountifully."  Both  in  kind  and  in 
quantity,  every  harvest  is  proportioned  to  our  sowing.  1.  We  see  this  in  tocial  life. 
The  nation  which  allows  its  children  to  grow  up  in  hovels  where  decency  is  impossible, 
and  under  conditions  in  which  knowledge  and  virtue  are  out  of  reach,  will  have  to  reap 
as  it  has  sown — ^in  jails  and  penitentiaries,  in  abject  misery  and  festering  vice.  2.  In 
ow  intellectiud  life,  as  every  man  in  due  time  discovers  for  himself ;  e.g.  the  indolence 
and  the  studiousness  of  school-days  have  their  certain  results.  3.  In  the  occupation*  we 
follow  we  sow  as  we  reap.-  Wealth  or  fame  depends  upon  our  choice  and  persistence. 
4.  In  the  moral  and  religious  sphere  the  same  law  holds  good,  so  that  the  worldly  need 
not  complain  if  they  are  hopeless  of  heaven,  and  the  religioiis  need  not  be  indignant 
if  the  wealth  of  this  world  is  not  theirs.  Yet  we  must  remember  the  injimction, 
"  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,"  God's  Word  points  us  on  to  a  future  in  which  alone 
we  shall  be  able  accurately  to  estimate  the  full  issues  of  our  present  life.  We  look  for 
a  distant  day  when  he  shall  say  to  his  angels,  "  Put  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is 
ripe." 

n.  The  habtest  fboolaius  the  bufbeuaot  of  Dirors  law.  1.  Science  has  demon- 
strated the  constancy  and  regularity  of  the  laws  of  nature.  Amongst  them  is  this : 
"  Seed-time  and  harvest  .  .  .  shall  not  cease."  If  it  had  not  been  for  the  fidelity  of 
our  God  in  fulfilling  this  promise,  husbandry  would  have  been  discouraged,  many  of 
the  race  would  have  perished,  and  the  world  would  only  be  peopled  by  a  wandering  race 
of  starving  fishermen  and  hunters.  It  is  the  stability  of  law  which  preserves  humanity. 
If,  then,  we  trust  God  in  nature,  ought  we  not  to  trust  him  in  the  higher  sphere  where 
he  reigns  as  certainly  ?  We  are  confident  that  he  will  be  true  to  himself  in  all  the 
physical  laws  he  has  ordained,  so  that  we  dare  not  trifle  with  them,  knowing  that 
retribution  is  certain.  Then  let  us  not  forget  his  words,  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh 
shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  2.  The  thought  that  our  Ood  rules  in  every  sphere 
should  give  sanctity  to  all  our  employments,  and  to  all  the  relationships  which  they 
necessitate.  The  Christian  who  does  a  menial  service,  and  is  treated  with  indifference 
or  with  unkindness,  may  be  encouraged  by  the  reflection  that  he  can  "  therein  abide 
with  God."  On  the  other  hand,  employers  will  feel  their  responsibilities,  and,  even 
at  the  risk  of  their  interference  being  resented,  will  give  counsel  and  warning  and 
encouragement  (as  well  as  wage)  to  the  weak  and  unwary.  3.  Most  of  all,  in  the  broad 
fields  of  Christian  service,  we  should  work  as  those  who  are  under  the  eye  of  "  the  Lord 
of  the  harvest."  He  will  give  us  the  seed  of  truth  to  sow ;  he  will  prepare  the  soil  of 
human  hearts ;  he  will  water  what  we  have  sown,  and  let  it  appear  "  first  as  the  blade, 
then  as  the  ear,  and  afterward  as  the  full  corn  in  the  ear." 

ITT.  The  harvest  witnessks  to  the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose.  1.  Ee 
has  a  purpose  about  everything,  but  with  him  there  is  no  haste.     In  proportion  as  we 


cH.  ui.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSIL.  M 

are  co-workera  with  him,  we  must  experience  the  Divine  slowness.  A  farmer  cannot 
hasten  his  harvest,  but  must  wait  for  the  due  season.  He  can  do  little  more  than 
watoh  it;  for  as  he  sleeps  and  rises  night  and  day,  the  seed  springs  up,  he  knows  not 
how.  He  must  wait  and  trust.  2.  Let  us  not  he  discouraged  a^mt  ourselves,  though 
the  new  life  roithin  us  does  seem  immature.  Let  us  not  fear  the  storms  of  temptation, 
weak  though  we  are  in  ourselves ;  for  God  can  care  for  the  feeble  blade  as  well  as  for 
the  mighty  oak.  Nor  should  we,  in  our  impatience,  try  to  force  spiritual  growth  by 
unwholesome  excitement.    "  In  due  season  we  shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not." 

CoNOLUSiOK.  1.  Even  in  this  life  the  law  of  retribution  and  reward  makes  itself  fdt. 
The  old  proverb  truly  says,  "He  that  seeketh  mischief,  it  shall  come  unto  him." 
Hamau  plotted  Ms  own  destruction.  His  vaulting  ambition  overleaped  itself.  The 
men  of  Babel  meant  to  form  a  social  combination  which  should  bid  defiance  to  God, 
but  only  brought  about  their  scattering.  The  Pharisees  crucified  the  Son  of  Gt)d,  but 
they  made  his  cross  the  pivot  of  the  world's  history.  Our  own  observation  and 
experience  can  give  many  examples  of  folly  and  sin  bringing  dire  results  even  in  this 
world.  Popiilar  proverbs  embody  this  universal  expectation :  e.g.  "  Ashes  fly  in  the  face 
of  him  that  throws  them ; "  "  Harm  watch,  harm  catch ;  "  "  He  that  sows  thorns,  let 
him  not  walk  barefoot ; "  "  Even  as  I  have  seen,  they  that  plough  iniquity  and  sow 
wickedness  reap  the  same."  2.  The  law  of  retribution,  of  which  we  see  glimpses  here, 
wUl  be  revealed  in  the  experience  of  all  men  hereafter.  On  earth  we  see,  a»  it  were,  an 
ear  or  two  ripening  to  show  what  the  crop  will  be  like ;  but  the  harvest  is  yet  to  come, 
and  none  can  hinder  it  or  alter  it.  Let  us  not  delay  the  sowing  of  good  seed  until  the 
mandate  is  heard,  "  Put  ye  in  the  sickle,  for  the  harvest  is  ripe. — A.  B. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  persecution  of  good  men.  "  For,  behold,  in  those  days,"  etc.  "  In 
this  chapter  the  prophet  returns  from  the  parenthetic  view  which  he  had  exhibited  of 
the  commencement  of  the  Christian  dispensation  and  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish 
polity,  to  deliver  predictions  respecting  events  that  were  to  transpire  subsequent  to  the 
Babylonish  captivity,  and  fill  up  the  space  which  should  intervene  between  the  restora- 
tion of  the  Jews  and  the  first  advent  of  Christ,  He  announces  the  judgment  to  be 
holden  on  their  enemies  after  their  return  to  Judaea  "  (Henderson).  And  in  these  two 
verses  he  specifies  the  reason  why  they  were  to  be  pimished.  Our  subject  ia  the 
persecution  of  good  men  on  earth, 

L  These  have  eveb  been  oood  men  on  eabth.  Corrupt  as  the  world  has  been  for 
sixty  centuries,  there  have  always  been  in  every  generation  some  men  whose  characters 
in  the  main  have  been  good,  and  in  whom  the  great  Governor  of  the  world  has  mani- 
fested a  special  interest  These  are  in  the  holy  book  called  by  a  large  variety  of  names. 
They  are  called  here :  1.  "  My  people."  They  are  his.  (1)  They  have  surrendered 
themselves  to  his  will.  All  others  are  controlled  by  a  variety  of  laws,  they  evermore 
by  his  wilL  Whatever  they  do,  in  word  or  deed,  they  are  inspired  by  a  loving  loyalty 
to  his  wiU.  They  are  his  faithful  servants,  his  loyal  subjects,  his  loving  children 
begotten  i^in  by  his  will.  (2)  He  has  pledged  them  his  loving  guardianship.  He 
is  their  Shepherd.  "  He  leads  them  by  still  waters."  He  is  their  Father.  "  As  a 
father  pitieth  his  children."  He  makes  for  them  all  necessary  provision,  both  for  this 
life  ana  for  the  life  that  is  to  come.  2.  "  My  heritage."  In  Exod.  xix.  5  you  have  these 
words,  "  Now  therefore  if  ye  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and  keep  my  covenant,  then 
ye  shall  be  a  peculiar  treasure  imto  me  above  all  people :  for  all  the  earth  is  mine." 
He  who  owns  the  universe,  esteems  holy  souls  as  the  most  valuable  of  his  possessions. 
The  vast  universe  of  matter  is  in  his  estimation  worth  nothing  in  comparison  with  one 
truly  virtuous  spirit. 

IL  These  oood  men  on  eabtb  bavb  genebaUiT  been  ansjEcr  to  pebbeoution. 
"  AVhom  they  have  scattered  among  the  nations,  and  parted  my  land."  The  faithful 
and  the  true  amongst  the  Jews  had,  subsequent  to  their  restoration  from  Babylonish 
captivity,  been  driven  by  violence  amongst  the  nations.  The  indignities  and  cruelties 
to  which  they  were  subject  are  specified  in  the  subsequent  verses.  "Persecution," 
says  an  old  writer,  "  is  the  reigning  sin  of  the  world."  The  enmity  between  the  seoi 
of  the  woman  and  the  serpent  has  shown  itself  from  the  beginning.  "  Marvel  not," 
said  Christ,  "  that  the  world  hate  you."  There  is  a  persecution  that,  whilst  it  does  not 
involve  bonds,  imprisonments,  and  physical  violences,  involves  the  malice  of  hell,  and 


G4  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  [oh.  m.  1—21 

inflicts  grievous  injury.    There  is  social  calumny,  scorn,  degradation,  and  various 
disabilities.    The  good  must  ever  suffer  in  a  world  like  this  for  conscience*  sake. 

in.  Theib  persboution  will  be  avenqed  by  Heaven.  "  I  will  also  gather  all 
nations,  and  will  bring  them  down  into  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  will  plead  with 
them  there  for  my  people  and  for  my  heritage  Israel."  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that 
the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  here  means  the  vale  through  which  the  Kedron  flows,  lying 
between  the  city  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Mount  of  Olive* ;  or  the  valley  of  blessings 
mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xx.,  or  any  other  particular  place.  Its  literal  meaning  is,  "the 
valley  where  God  judgeth."  It  means  here  the  scene  where  God  would  deal  out  retribu- 
tion upon  the  nations  that  persecuted  his  people.  It  was  in  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat 
that  in  all  probability  the  army  of  Sennacherib  was  slain  by  Heaven's  avenging  angel. 
Ah  I  the  time  hastens  when  persecutors  of  all  types  and  ages  will  have  full  retribution 
dealt  out  to  them  in  some  great  valley  of  Jehoshaphat. — D.  T. 

Vers.  9 — 17. — Selribution.  "  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentiles,"  etc.  Here  is 
the  first  startling  boom  of  the  righteous  retribution.  Some  think  the  reference  is  to 
the  approach  of  Sennacherib,  or  Nebuchadnezzar,  or  Antiochus ;  but  the  language 
seems  strong  and  grand  enough  to  represent  the  approach  of  the  last  day.  In  this 
retributive  scene  there  are  several  things  observable. 

L  The  obeatest  ebsistanob  absolutely  fittile.  "  Proclaim  ye  this  among  the 
Gentiles ;  Prepare  war,  wake  up  the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw  near  ; 
let  them  come  up :  beat  your  ploughshares  into  swords,  and  your  pi-uning-hooks  into 
spears:  let  the  weak  say,  I  am  strong.  Assemble  yourselves,  and  come, all  ye  heathen, 
and  gather  yourselves  together  round  about :  thither  cause  thy  mighty  ones  to  come 
down,  0  Lord."  The  idea  is — ^Let  all  the  enemies  of  GKid  do  their  utmost  to  ward  off 
this  judgment.  It  means — Do  your  utmost,  muster  all  your  strength,  "  wake  up  the 
mighty  men,"  let  them  turn  their  agricultural  implements  into  weapons  of  war,  swords 
and  spears ;  all  will  be  futile.  Heaven  bids  defiance  to  all  such  opposition.  "  The 
heathen  may  rage,  and  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing ;  but  he  that  sitteth  in  the 
heavens  laughs  them  to  scorn."  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ."    Wicked  spirits  will  fight  to  the  utmost,  but  will  faiU 

n.  The  obeatest  uultitudeb  absehbled  tooetheb.  "  Assemble  yonrselvea,  and 
come,  all  ye  heathen,  and  gather  yourselves  together  round  about.  .  .  .  Multitudes, 
multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision."  Oh,  this  valley  of  decision,  this  valley  of 
Jehoshaphat,  this  scene  of  judgment!  what  imtold  multitudes  are  siuunoned  to  appear 
therein !  AU  the  men  of  alt  generations  will  be  there,  and  the  Judge  will  appear  also, 
and  all  the  holy  angels  too,  ete. 

IIL  The  obeatest  fbopbiett  dibplated  ik  the  whole.  "  Put  ye  in  the  sickle, 
for  the  harvest  is  ripe :  come,  get  you  down ;  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow  ; 
for  their  wickedness  is  great."  The  judgment  is  only  the  harvest ;  hell  is  only  sin 
ripened  into  fruit.  "  In  that  valley  those  that  have  sowed  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the 
flesh  reap  corruption ;  those  that  have  sowed  to  the  Spirit  shall  of  the  Spirit  reap  ever- 
lasting life."  No  one,  then,  will  have  any  just  reason  to  complain.  It  is  mere  reaping 
of  what  they  have  sown ;  it  is  the  mere  result  of  thdr  own  labours. 

IV.  The  obeatest  awfulness  dibplatbd.  "  The  Lord  also  shall  roar  out  of  Zlon, 
and  utter  his  voice  from  Jerusalem ;  and  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  shake."  He 
shall  "  roar."  Now  he  speaks  in  the  still  small  voice  of  mercy,  then  he  shall  roar  like 
a  lion,  striking  terror  into  all  ungodly  hearts.  "  At  his  voice  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  shall  shake."  The  idea  is  (1)  he  will  appear  on  that  day  in  such  a  way  as  to 
strike  terror  into  the  hearts  of  his  enemies ;  ana  (2)  to  inspire  hope  in  the  heaits  of 
his  people.  "  The  Lord  will  be  the  Hope  of  his  people."  Should  the  material  unirerse 
be  frightened  into  nothingness  at  his  approach,  even  Uien  his  people  will  still  have  a 
strong  Hope  in  him.  "  God  is  our  Refuge  and  Strength,  a  very  present  Help  io  time 
of  trouble."    Let  as  learn  calmly  to  await  the  judgment. 

"  Ck>d's  ways  seem  dark,  but  soon  or  lata 
They  touoh  the  shining  hills  of  day  | 
The  evil  cannot  brook  delay. 
The  good  can  well  aCTord  to  wijt" 

D.  T 


«ni.  DLl— SI.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL.  « 

Yen.  18—21. — 3%e  mUlennium  era.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,"  etc. 
This  passage  begins  witb  a  splendid  representation  of  the  glorious  prosperity  which 
shall  attend  the  people  of  God  after  the  destruction  of  all  their  enemies.  Whatever 
their  application  to  the  Jews  at  any  period  of  their  history,  they  certainly  bear  an 
application  to  that  period  foretold  by  prophets  and  sung  1^  poets, — the  millennial 
period.    Giving  it  this  application,  observe — 

I.  It  will  be  an  eba  of  plentiful  fbovision.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that 
day  that  the  mountains  shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  hills  shall  flow  with  waters, 
and  a  fountain  shall  come  forth  o(  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  water  the  valley  of 
Shittim."  Fertilizing  streams  will  irrigate  the  land.  The  vineyards  on  the  mountains 
shall  drop  down  new  wine,  and  the  well-fed  cattle  shall  yield  abundance  of  milk.  The 
idea  is,  in  that  age  there  will  be  a  profusion  of  all  that  is  necessary  to  supply  the  needs  and 
gratify  the  desires  of  men.  The  time,  I  veiily  believe,  will  come  when  pauperism  will 
be  lanished  from  the  earth,  when  indigence,  squalor,  and  want  will  be  evUs  existing 
only  in  the  history  of  the  past.  Even  now  it  does  not  require  the  earth  to  be  more 
fruitful  than  it  is,  to  yield  mankind  ample  supplies.  What  is  wanted  is  men  less 
avaricious,  indolent,  extravagant,  Intemperate,  and  wasteful. 

II.  It  will  be  an  eba  or  oohflete  conquest.  "  Egypt  shall  be  a  desolation,  and 
Edom  shall  be  a  desolate  wilderness,  for  the  violence  against  the  children  of  Judah, 
because  they  have  shed  innocent  blood  in  their  land."  Egypt  and  Edom,  the  old  and 
inveterate  enemies  of  the  Jews,  are  here  represented  as  crushed  into  utter  desolation. 
Error  and  sin  are  the  Egypt  and  Edom  of  the  world.  These  will  be  crushed  one  day. 
The  great  moral  Deliverer  will  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet,  will  ^ut  down  all  rule  and 
authority,  will  make  mankind  more  than  conquerors.  There  is  a  period  of  moral 
conquest  and  moral  kingship  that  will  dawn  upon  souls  before  the  history  of  the  world 
is  over. 

III.  It  IB  AN  EBA  OF  ABIDING  PBOSPEBTTT.  "  Judah  shall  dwell  for  evcF,  and  Jerusalem 
from  generation  to  generation."  So  long  as  the  earth  endures  the  righteous  shall 
continue.  They  will  endure  throughout  all  generations,  and  happiness  will  attend 
them.  The  kingdom  of  truth,  purity,  love,  and  peace,  which  Christ  is  now_  building 
up,  and  which  one  day  he  will  make  commensurate  with  the  world,  will  continue  from 
generation  to  generation  ;  it  will  have  no  end. 

rV.  It  is  AN  EBA  OF  HOBAL  PUBITY.  "  For  I  will  cleanse  their  blood  that  I  have 
not  cleansed."  That  is,  I  will  radically  cleanse  them.  Their  very  blood,  which  has 
been  a  current  of  moral  pollution,  I  will  make  pure  in  every  particle.  I  will  cleanse, 
not  merely  their  skin,  or  their  external  parts,  but  the  whole'  current  of  their  life. 

Such  is  the  era  which  the  passage  anyhow  suggests ;  such  is  the  era  that  awaits  the 
earth.  Would  that  it  had  dawned  1  Haste,  ye  circling  seasons,  and  bring  it  on— or 
rather  haste,  ye  servants  of  Christ,  to  disseminate  those  principles  of  the  gospel  over 
tht  earth  in  whose  mature  development  consists  the  blessed  era  I 

«  The  time  shall  come  when  every  evil  thing 
From  being  and  remembranoe  both  shall  me ; 
The  world  one  solid  temple  of  pure  gold." 

('Festus.") 

D.T. 


JOEL. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 

TO 

THE  BOOK  OF  JOEL. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THEME.  PAGE. 

T  lie  Value  of  the  Divine  Word    ..  8 
A  Retrospect  and  a  Prospect       . .  8 
Tlie  Lessons  taught  by  this  Calam- 
ity           8 

The  Calamity  has  fallen  on  all,  and 
ther.  fore  th.e  Wail  of  Woe  pro- 
ceeds from  all                . .           . .  9 
Calamity  removed             . .           . .  9 
Tradition              ..           ..           ..10 

"Awake!"           10 

Religions  Privations         . .           . .  11 

The  Withering  of  Joy      . .           . .  11 

A  Fast 11 

■'TheDay  of  the  Lord"               ..  12 

T..e  Desolation  of  the  Land          . .  13 

Trouhle  leads  to  Prayer                . .  12 
Tlie    Lifc-Work    oE    an    obscure 

Proph  t             13 

R.  ligious  Reformation     . .           . .  14 
National  Calamity             ..           ..  15 
A  Call  to  Drunkards         . .           . .  17 
The  lofluence  of  ISfational  Calam- 
ities on  the  Minds  of  the  Good  17 

CHAPTER  IL 
The  Purposes  f  )r  which  a  Trum- 
pet was  blown  and  an    Alarm 

sounded             . .           . .           . .  39 

The  Way  in  which  God  executes 

his  Judgments               . .           . .  39 

Huniiliation.for  Sin,  and  Thanks- 
giving for  Mercy           . .           . .  30 

The  Efficacy  (.f  Prayer     ..  ..31 

Loss  repaired       .  .           . .           . .  33 

The  Dispensation  of  the  Gospel  3i 
"  Sound  an  Alarm  !  "        ..           ..36 

"  Who  can  abide  it  ?  "      , .           . .  36 


Conversion           . .           . .  . .      36 

Spiritual  Repentance        . .  . .      37 

The  Hope  of  Reconciliation  . .      37 

Elders  and  Children         . .  . .      38 

Priestly  Entreaty              ..  ..38 

Pity  and  Repenting          . .  . .      39 

Joy  after  Sorrow               . .  . .      39 

Showers  of  Blessing         . .  . .      39 

The  God  of  Israel             . .  . .      4iJ 

The  Outpouring  of  the  Spirit  40,  41 

The  Promise  of  t'alvation  . .      41 

The  Call  of  the  Convicted  . .      43 

The  Ministry  of  Alarm     . .  . .      43 

Soul-Reformation             ..  ..      43 

An  urgently  Demanded  Meeting  44 

Interaction    of    the    Divine  and 

Human              ..           ..  ..44 

Twofold  Restoration        . .  . .      45 

The  Gospel  Age  . .           . .  . .      46 

CHAPTER  III. 
Deliverance  and  Destruction  . .      53 
Providence,  Preparation  and  Pre- 
vention             . .           . .  . .      54 

That  Day— the  Fear  of  the  Wicked, 

the  Hope  of  the  Just     . .  . .      56 

The  Promise  of  Plenty  . .      57 

Restoration  from  Captivity  . .      58 

Retribution         ..            ..  59,64 

War  and  Judgment          ..  ..59 

"  The  Valley  of  Decision  "  . .      60 

The  Lord  his  People's  Hrpe  and 

Strength              . .          ...  . .      60 

The  Lord's  Holy  Dwelling-place  61 

Spiritual  Prosperity          . .  . .      61 

A  Harvest  Sermon            . .  . .      62 

The  Persecution  of  Good  Men  . .      63 

The  Millennium  Era        ..  ..65 


