e Naur N Naw 
Bir in Chriſt — in order co 
Salvation. 5 


Preached in the Chuan of 
St. N A R T Ravel ir x, 


IN 


B R 45 S . 0 'L 


88 — 


DC GEORGE WHITEFIELD, 4 B. 
of PzxMBROKE n Oxford. | 


— —— 


ot. 
— 


=—_ at t the « Repu of Wem f the 8 


* 8 th 


„ 


*** 


The. Foz rn boris. 


L Oo ND o N: 


Printed for C. R1 VINOTON, in st. Pate Church-yard 
and fold by Meff. Harris, ſen. and jun. in Gloutefter z, 
Mr. an in Briftol ; and Mr. Lx AE, in Bath, | 

| Tpcczzxix. 


PREFACE 


„E Importunity of Friends, 
be Aſperſions of Enemies, the 
E892 great Scarcity of 9e77m0NsS on 
157 Sabjecr among the Divines of our 
own Church, and not any overweening 


Conceit, I truſt, of the Worth of the 


Performance, were, amongſt divers 


others, the Reaſons that induced me 
| to permit the Publication of this very 
| plain Diſcourſe. 

What Reception it may meet with 
Y from the Publick, it behoves me, for 
| any own Sake, to be very little con- 


cerned about. But I 1 hope, 


that as God was pleas'd to give it 
ſurprixing Hucceſo, when delivered 
from the Pulpit, ſo the ſame Graci- 
| ous Being will continue to co-operate 
| with is from the Preſs: And then, 
it be thereby made Inſ}rumental to- 
wards the ra any one Sinner, 


* 


„ 0 


(n) 


or Confirming any one Saint, I ſhall 


not be ſolicitous about the Cenſures, 


that may be paſſed, either on the Sim 


plicity f the Style, or on the r outh of 
the Author. 


J hope it will be carmiited me to 
add my hearty Wiſhes, that my Re- 
ame B 5 the Mini ſpers of the 
Church of England, (if ſuch an one 
as I may be worthy to call them Bre- 
- thren) Sends more frequently enter tain 


their People with Diſcourſes of this 


Mature, than they commonly do: And 
that they would not, out f 4 ſervile 
Fear f diſoleafng ſome particular 
Perſons, fail to declare the whole Will 


of G OD 20 their reſpective Congrega- 


tions, nor ſuffer their People to reſt 


ſatisfied with the Shell and Shadow of | 


Religion, without acquainting them 


with the Mature and Neceſſity of that 
| Inward Holineſs, and Vital Purity of 
Heart, which their Profeſſion obliges 
them to aſpire after, and without which 


no Man living can n ſee the 
LoRD. 


EE I A M Td oe ee te Er br IE ao Ae 


a 


| 


. 


e 


iS ASS e be £ lin. * 


2 Co R. v. 17. 


If any Man be in Chrift, be is 
a new Creature. 


P H E Doctrine of our Rr G E- 
I Jy NERATION, or NE W 

Bir in CHRIST JESUS, 
8 [ though one of the moſt fun- 
| Ree damcntal Doctrines of our 
——— holy Religion; though fo 


f plainly and oſten preſſed on us in ſacred 


Writ, © that he that runs may read;“ nay, 
though it is the very Hinge on which the 
Salvation of each of us turns, and a Point too 
in which all /ncere Chriſtians, of whatever 


| Denomination, agree; yet is ſo ſeldom con- 


ſidered, and ſo little experimentally under- 
ſtood by the Generality of Profeſſors, that 
were we to judge of the Truth of it by the 
Experience of moſt who call themſelves Chriſ- 

| Hans, 


6 wel —__ 
m — ee 
_ — a > ” 


OS 2 * — oy 


6 
tians, we ſhould be apt to imagine they had 
« not ſo much as heard” whether there be 
any ſuch thing as Regeneration or no. It is 


true, Men, for the moſt part, are Orthodox 


in the common Articles of their Creed ; they 


believe there is but one God, and one Medi- 
ator between God and Man, even the Man 
CHRIST JESUS; and that there is no 


other Name given under Heaven, whereby 
they can be ſaved, beſides His: But then 


tell them, They muſt be ReGENERATE, 
they muſt be BORN AGAIN, they muſt. 
be renewed in the very Spirit, i. e. in the 


inmoſt Faculties of their Mind, e're they can 


truly call Chriſt Lord, Lord, or have any 
Share in the Merits of his precious Blood; 


and they are ready to cry out with Nicode- 
mus, © How can theſe things be?” Or with 


the Athenians, on another Occaſion, © What 
will this Babler ſay ? He ſeemeth to be a 
* Setter-forth of ſtrange Doctrines, becauſe 


ve preach unto them Chriſt, and the New 
« Birth,” - 


TAT I may therefore contribute my 


Mite towards curing the fatal Miſtake of ſuch 
_ Perſons, who would thus put aſunder what 


God has inſeperably joined together, and 


vainly expect to be juſtified by Chriſt, 7. e. 


have their Sins forgiven, unleſs they are alſo 


ſanctified, . e. have their Natures changed, 
and made holy; I ſhall beg leave to enlarge 


on 


e 


„ 


4 
2 7 
* 


e ccc 


1 


on the Words of the Text in the following 


manner. 


Firſt, I ſhall endeavour to explain what is 


meant by Being in Chriſt IF any Man 
be in Chriſt. : 4 


Secondly, What we are to underſtand by 
being a New Creature : © If any Man 


be in Chriſt, fays the Apoſtle, he is a 
« NEW Creature. | 


Third! „ I ſhall produce ſome Arguments 
to prove y we muſt be new Creatures 
e're we can be in Chriſt. 


Fourthly and Laſtly, T ſhall draw ſome 
Inferences from what will have been 
delivered, and then conclude with a 


Word or two of Exhortation from the 
Whole. 


AND firſt then, J am to endeavour to ex- 
plain what is meant by this Expreſſion in the 


MW ext, If any Man be in Core 


Now a Perſon may be ſaid to be in Chriſt 
two Ways. Firſt, only by an outward Pro- 


feſſion. And in this Senſe, every one that is 
called a Chriſtian, or baptized into Chriſt's 
| Church, may be ſaid to be in Chriſt, But 


that 


13 


that this is not the ſole Meaning of the Apo- 


ſtle's Phraſe now before us, is evident, be- 
cauſe then © every one that names the Name 
« of Chriſt,” or is baptized into his viſible 


Church, would be a new Creature. Which? 
is notoriouſly falſe, it being too plain, be- 

yond all Contradiction, that comparatively 
but few of thoſe that are ©* born of Water,” 
are © born of the Spirit” likewiſe; or, to uſe 
another Scriptural way of ſpeaking, Many 


are baptized with Water, which were never, 


effectually at leaſt, baptized with the Holy 
Ghoſt. | EE Tho 
To be in CHRIS x therefore, in the full 
Import of the Word, muſt certainly mean 
ſomething more than a bare out ward Profeſ- 


ſion, or being called after his Name. For, 


as this ſame Apoſtle tells us, “ All are not 
Iſraelites that are of Iſrael, i. e. when ap- 
plied to Chriſtianity, all are not real Chriſ- 


tians that are nominally ſuch. Nay, that is 


ſo far from being the Caſe, that our Bleſſed 
Lo ðD himſelf informs us, That many that 
have propheſied or preached in his Name, 
and in his Name caſt out Devils, and done 


many wonderful Works, ſhall not withſtand- 


ng be diſmiſſed at the laſt Day, with a 


« Depart from me, I know you not, ye 


« Workers of Iniquity.” 


. 


Ir remains therefore, that this Expreſſion, 
| if any Man be inChriſt, muſt be underſtood 


In 


eee eee 


b 28 


S rn 


ar 


in a ſecond and cloſer Signification, v/s. to 
be in him ſo as to mar, of the Benefits of 
his Sufferings. To be in hem not only by an 
outward Proſeſſion, but by an inward Change 
and Purity of Heart, and Cohabitation of his 
Holy Spirit. To be in him fo as to be myſti- 
cally united to him by a true and lively 
Faith, and thereby to receive ſpiritual Vir- 


tue from him, as the Members of the natural 


Body do from the Head, or the Branches 
from the Vine. To be in him in ſuch a man- 
ner as the Apoſtle, ſpeaking of himſelf, ac- 
quaints us he knew a Perſon was; 1 tnew a 


Mam in CxrisT, ſays he, 7. e. a true Chriſ- 
tian; or, as he himſelf deſires to be in 
CARIS T, when he wiſhes, in his Epiſtle 
to the Philippians, that he miglit be found 


in hum. 
THis is undoubtedly the full Purport of 
the Apoſtle's Expreſſion in the Words of the 


Text; ſo that what he ſays in his Epiſtle to 


the Romans about Circumciſion, may very 


well be applied to the preſent Subject, VIS. 


That he is not a real Chriſtian, who is only 
one outwardly; nor is that true Baptiſm, 


which is only ourward in the / leſh. But he 
is a true Chriſtian, who is one mwardly, 


whole Baptiſm is that of the Heart, in the 


. and not merely in the Hater, whole 
raiſe is not of Man, but of Gop. Or, as 


he ſpeaketh in another Place, neither Circum- 
B ciſion 


( 10 ) 


ciſion or uncircumciſſion availeth any thing 
of itſelf, but a mew Creature, Which 
amounts to what he here declares in the 


Verſe now under Conſideration, that if any 
Man be truly and properly in ChRIS 7, he is 
a new Creature. hai : 


WI Ar we are to underſtand by being a 
New Creature, was the next and ſecond 
general Thing to be conſidered. 


Ab here it is evident at the firſt View, 
that this Expreſſion is not to be ſo explained 


as though there was a Phyſical Change re- 


quired to be made in us, i. e. as though we 
were to be reduced to our primitive Nothings, 
and then created and formed again. For, 


_ ſuppoſing we were, as Nicodemus ignorantly 


imagined, to enter a © ſecond time into our 


« Mother's Womb, and be born,” alaſs! 
what would it contribute towards rendring us 
ſpiritually new Creatures? ſince that which 


was born of Fleſh would be Fleſh till, i. . 


we ſhould be the ſame carnal Perſons as ever, 


being derived from carnal Parents, and con- 


ſequently receiving the Seeds of all manner of 
Sin and Corruption from them. No, it only 
means, that we mult be ſo altered as to the 


Qualities and Tempers of our Minds, that we 


muſt entirely forget what manner of Perſons 
we once were. As it may be ſaid of a Piece 


— —— ———ſ̃ — — — . 


of Gold that was in the Ore, after it has 
been 


( 11) 
been cleanſed, purified and poliſhed, that it 
is a new Piece of Gold: As it may be ſaid of 
a bright Glaſs that has been covered over 
with Filth, when it is wiped, and ſo become 
tranſparent and clear, that it is a new Glaſs: 
Or, as it might be ſaid of Naaman, when he 
recovered of his Leproſy, and his Fleſh re- 
turned unto him like the Fleſh of a young 
Child, that he was a new Man; fo our Souls, 
though ſtill the ſame as to Eſſence, yet are 
ſo purged, purified and cleanſed from their 
natural Droſs, Filth and Leproſy, by the 
bleſſed Influences of the Holy Spirit, that 
they may properly be ſaid to be made anew. 
Ho this glorious Change is wrought in 
the Soul, cannot eaſily be explained: For no 
One knows the Ways of the Spirit, ſave the 


Spirit of Gop Himſelf, Not that this ought 


to be any Argument againſt this Doctrine; 
for, as our Bleſſed Lo RD obſerved to Nico- 
demus, when he was diſcourſing on this very 
Subject, The Wind, ſays he, bloweth where 
1 liſteth, and thou heareſt the Sound 2 . 
but knoweſt not whence it cometh, and b,. 
ther it goeth; and if we are told of natural 
Things, and we underſtand them not, how 
much leſs ought we to wonder, if we cannot 
immediately account for the inviſible Work- 
ings of the Holy Spirit? The Truth of the 
Matter is this: The Doctrine of our Regene- 
ration, or New Birth in CHRIST JESUS, is 
J) dark 


„„ 
* dark and hard to be underſtood“ by the 


natural Man. But that there is really fuch a 
Thing, and that each of us muſt be ſpiritu- 


ally born again, before we can enter into the 


Kingdom of Gop ; or, to keep to the Terms 


made uſe of in the Text, muſt be new Crea- 


{ures before we can be in CH RIS T, 1 ſhall 
endeayour to ſhew under my 


Third general Head, in which I was to 
produce ſome Arguments to prove, 
Why we muſt be new Creatures, in or- 


der to quality us for ve lavingly in 
CHRIST. 


ANp here one would think it ſufficient to | 


affirm, that Gop himſelf, in his holy Word, 
hath told us fo. For, not to mention many 
Texts, that might be produced out of the 


Old Te eſtament to prove this Point, (and in- 
deed, by the way one would wonder how 
N icodemins, who was a Teacher in frael, and 
who was thorebae to inſtruc the People in 
the ſpiritual Meaning of the Law, ſhould be 


Jo ignorant of this grand Article, as we find 


he Teally was, by his asking our bleſſed 
LORD, when he was preſſing on him this 
Topic, « How can theſe things be?“ Surely. 
he could not forget how often the Pfalmiſt 


| had begg'd of Gop to make him a new 
Heart, and renc do a right irt within him; 


as 


( 13 ) 


as likewiſe, how frequently the Prophets had 


warned the People to make them vew 


Hearts, and new Minds, and ſo turn unto 
the Loxrp their Gop. But not to mention 
theſe and ſuch-like Texts out of the Old 
' Teſtament) this Poctrine is to plainly and oſt- 
en repeated in the New, that, as I obferved 
before, He that runs may read.” For 


what ſays the great Prophet and Inſtructor of 


the World himſelf? Except 4 Mau (i. e. 
every one that is naturally ingendered of the 
Offspring of Adam) be born again of Water, 
and the Spirit, he canuot enter 3 ihe Xing 
dom of God. And leſt we ſhould be apt to 
ſlight this Aſſertion, and, Nicodomus-like, 


| reject the Doctrine, becants we cannot im- 


mediately explain, How this thing can be; 
our Blefſed Maſter therefore affirms it, as it 
were, by an Oath, Verily, Verily, I fay un- 
to yort, or, as it may be read, I the Amen, I 
who am Truth itſelf, fay unto you, that it 
is the unalterable Appointment of my hea- 


venly Father, that wnlefs a Man be born 


agam, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of 
GO p. 

AGREFABLE to this 1 are thoſe many Paſ- 
ſages we meet with in the Epiſtles, where 
we are commanded to be renewed in the 
Oprrit, i. e. as was before explained, in the 
inmoſt Faculties of our Minds; to put off the 
Ola Man, which is corrupt; and to put on 


the 


614 
the New Man, which is created after Gop, 


in Righteouſneſs and true Holineſs; That 
Old Things muſt paſs away, and that all 


Things muſt become New; That we are to 
be ſaved by the Waſhing of Regeneration, 
and the Renewing of the HoLy Gros r. 
Or, methinks, was there no other Paſſage to 


be produced beſides the Words of the Text, 


it would be full enough, ſince the Apoftle 


therein poſitively affirms, that if any Man 


be in CHRIST, he 1s a new Creature. | 
| Now what can be underſtood by all theſe 
different Terms of being born again, of put- 
ting off the old Man, and putting on the new, 
of being renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, 
and becoming ne Creatures; but that Chriſ- 


tianity requires a 7horough, real iuward 


Change of Heart? Do we think theſe, and 


ſuch-like Forms of ſpeaking, are mere Meta- 


phors, Words of a bare Sound, without any 


real ſolid Signification? Indeed it is to be 
feared, ſome Men would have them inter- 
preted ſo; but, alaſs! unhappy Men! they 
are not to be envied their Metaphorical Inter- 


pretation: It will be well, if they do not in- 
terpret themſelves out of their Salvation. 


MuLTitupes of other Texts might be 


produced to confirm this ſame Truth: But 
thoſe already quoted are ſo plain and con- 
vincing, that one would imagine no one 
ſhould deny it; were we not told, T here 
900 1 - * are 


[ 
— . emi. 


c e, 2% 2 7 


40 
cc 
cc 
4s 


00 


5 
| 


ad 


PE 2 2 Bb 3 


8 
"dis E . vos eee 


( 15) 
« are ſome, who having Eyes, ſee not, and 
Ears, hear not, and that will not under- 


« ftand with their Hearts, or hear with their 


Ears, leſt they ſhould be converted, and 


« ChRIST ſhould heal them.” 


Bur I proceed to a ſecond Argument to 
prove, Why we muſt be new Creatures, in 
order to be rightly in CHRIST: And that 


ſhall be taken from the Purity of Gop, and 


the preſent corrupt and polluted State of 
Man. 


Now Gop is deſcribed in Holy Scripture 


(and I ſpeak to thoſe who profeſs to know 
the Scripture) as a Spirit; as a Being of ſuch 
infinite Sanctity, as to be of purer Eyes than 

to behold Iniquity; as to be ſo tranſcendently 
holy, that it is ſaid the very Heavens are not 
clean in his Sight ; and the Angels themſelves 


he chargeth with Folly. On the other hand, 
Man is deſcribed (and every regenerate Per- 


ſon will find it true by his own' Experience) 


as a Creature altogether concerved and born in 
Sin; as having no good Thing dwelling in him; 


as being carnal, ſold under Sin; nay, as hav- 


ing a Mind which is Eumity with Gob, and 
ſuch-like. And ſince then there is ſuch an 
infinite Diſparity, can any one conceive, how 
ſuch a filthy, corrupted, polluted Wretch 
can dwell with an infinitely pure and holy 


Gop, 


2 * 


0 


—— — : 


> WOW; > nt "4. —— — 2 — — 5 
FU rr 
OE ER NOD IP * u. 


(16) 

God, before he is changed, and rendered, in 

forme meafure, like him? Can He, that is of 
purer Eyes than to behold Tni quity, dwell 

with it? Can He, in whoſe Sight the Hea- 


Dens are not clean, delight to dwell with 


Uncheanneſs itſelf? No; we might as well 
ſuppoſe Light to have Communion with 

Darkneſs, 4 CHRIST to have Wen with 
Belial. But I paſs on to a 


Tnixp Argument to make good the Apo- 
flle's Aſſertion in the Text, which ſhall be 
founded on the Conſideration of the Nature 
of that Happineſs Gop has prepared for thoſe 

that unfeignedly love him. _ 


To enter indeed on a minute and particu- 
lar Deſcription of Heaven, would be vain 
and preſumptuous, ſince we are told, that 
Eye hath not ſeen, nor Ear heard, neither 
hath it entered into the Heart of Man to 
conceruve, the Things that are prepared for 
the ſincere Followers of the Holy Ixsus 
even in this Life, much leſs in that which is 
to come. However, this we may venture to 
affirm in the general, that as Gop is a Syirit, 
ſo the Happineſs he has laid up for his Peo- 
ple, is ſpiritual likewiſe; and conſequently, 
unleſs our carnal Minds are changed, and be- 


come ſpiritualized, we can never be made 
meet 


e 


Wa . wad 
* 

IX - > Ate A 5 uv 

* * , 4 . W eee > 


W 


(27 ) 


Saints in Light. 8 
I is true, we may flatter ourſelves, that, 
ſuppoſing we continue in our natural corrupt 
Eſtate, and carry all our Luſts along with 
us, we ſhould, notwithſtanding, reliſh Hea- 
yen, was Gop to admit us therein. And fo 
we might, was it a Mahometan Paradiſe, 
wherein we were to take our full Swing in 


ſenſual Delights, But fince its Joys are 
only ſpiritual, and no unclean Thing can 


poſſibly enter thoſe bleſſed Manſions, there 
is an abſolute Neceſſity of our being changed, 
and undergoing a total Renovation of our 
depra ved Natures, before we can have any 


Taſte or Reliſh of thoſ heavenly Pier 


{ures. 33 DT 

IT is, doubtleſs, for this Reaſon, that 
the Apoſtle declares it to be the irrevocable 
Decree of the Almighty, that without Holi- 
weſs, i. e. without being made pure by Re- 
generation, and having the Image of Gop 


thereby re-inſtamped upon the Soul, uo Mar 


living ſhall ſee the Lord, And it is very 
obſeryable, that our Divine Maſter, in the 
famous Paſſage beiore referred to, concerning 


the abſolute Neceſſity of Regeneration, does 


not ſay, unlets a Man be born again, he 
SHALL NoT, but unleſs a Man be born 
again, he CANNOT enter into the Kingdom 
55 55 of 


618) 


of Gop. For it is founded in the very Na- 


ture of Things, that unleſs we have Diſpoſi- 
tions wrought in us ſuitable and anſwerable 
to the Objects that are to entertain us, we 


can take no manner of Complacency or Satis- 


faction in them. For Inſtance ; What De- 


light can the moſt harmonious Muſick afford 


a deaf, or what Pleaſure the moſt excellent 
Picture give a blind Man? Can a taſteleſs 
Palate reliſh the richeſt Dainties, or a filthy 


Swine be pleaſed with the fineſt Garden of 


Flowers? No: And what Reaſon can be 


aſſigned for it? An Anſwer is ready; Be- 


cauſe they have neither of them any Tem- 


pers of Mind correſpondent or agreeable to 
what they are to be diverted with. And 


thus it is with the Soul hereafter. For 
Death makes no more Alteration in the Soul, 
then as it inlarges its Faculties, and makes 


it capable of receiving deeper Impreſſions 
either of Pleaſure or Pain. If it delighted 


to converſe with Gop here, it will be tran- 


ſported with the Sight of his glorious Ma- 


jeſty hereafter. If it was pleaſed with the 
Commurion of Saints on Earth, it will be 


infinitely more ſo with the Communion and 
Society of holy Angels, and the Spirits of 
juſt Men made perfect in Heaven. But if 
the Oppoſite of all this be true, we may 


aſſure ourſelves, it could not be happy, was 


ES FAG: eee 


* eiue i . R KN D N 


. 497 
Gop himſelf to admit it (which he never will 


do) into the Regions of the Bleſſed. But it 


is Time for me to haſten to the CE 


| FourTH and laſt Argument I ſhall offer to 


prove, that we muſt be new Creatures e're 


we can be in CHRIST, vg. becauſe CHRIST's 


Redemption will not be compleat without 


it. 


| - IF we reflect indeed on the firſt and chief 


End of our Bleſſed Loxp's Coming, we 


hall find it was to fave us from our Sins, to 


be a Propitiation for our Sins, to give his 


Life a Ranſom for many. But then, if the 
Benefits of our dear Redeemer's Death were 


to extend no further than barely to procure 


Forgiveneſs of our Sins, we ſhould have as 
little Reaſon to rejoice in it, as a poor con- 
demned Criminal that is ready to periſh by 


ſome fatal Diſeaſe, would have in receiving 
a Pardon from his Judge. For Chriſtians 


would do well to conſider, that there is not 
only a legal Hindrance to our Happineſs, as 


we are Breakers of Gop's Law, but alſo a 


moral Impurity in our Natures, which ren- 


ders us incapable of enjoying Heaven, (as 


hath been already proved) till ſome mighty 
Change hath been wrought in us. It is ne- 
ceſſary therefore, in order to make CyR1sT's 


ä Redemp- 


( 20 ) 

Redemption complete, that we ſhould have 
a Grant of Gop's Holy Spirit to change our 
Natures, and ſo prepare us for the Enjoy- 
ment of that Happineſs our Saviour has pur- 
chaſed by his precious Blood, 3 

AccorDiNGLY the holy Scriptures in- 
form us, that whom CHRIST juſtiſſes, i. e. 
(as we ſaid before) whoſe Sins he forgives, 
thoſe he alſo ſanctiſies, i. e. purifies and 


cleanſes, and totally changeth their corrupted 


Natures. Nay, in one Place of Scripture, 
Santtification is put before Fuſtification, on 
purpoſe, as it were, to convince us that there 


is no Salvation to be had without it. But 


ye are waſhed, ſays the Apoſtle, but ye are 
ſanftified ; and then follows, but ye are 
Juſttfied, As the Scripture alſo ſpeaketh in 
another Place, © CHRIST is to us Juſtifica- 
< tion, SanQiification, and then Redem 


“ tion.“ Let this cies be admitted as 


another indiſputable Argument why we 
muſt be new Creatures, ere we can be 


7H Car1sT, becauſe without it CHRIST is 
dead i in vain. 


ngen we now to the next general 
Thing propoſed, vis. To draw ſome 


Inferences from what has been de- 


liyered. 


An 


4 
3 
15 
7s 
* 
my 


4 
L 


C 


(21) 


Ap Firſt then, If he that is in CRIST 
muſt be a new Creature, this may ſerve as 
a Reproof for ſome, who reſt in a bare Per- 


formance of outward Duties, without per- 
ceiving any real inward Change of Heart. 


Wr may obſerve a great many Perſons to 
be very punctual in the regular Returns of 
publick and private Prayer, as likewiſe of 
receiving the Holy Communion, and per- 


haps, now and then too, in 2 a Faſt. 


And fo far we grant they do well. But then 


here is the Misfortune, they reſt barely in 
the Uſe of the Means, and think all is over, 


when they have juſt complied with theſe 
ſacred Inſtitutions: Whereas, where the 


rightly informed, they would conſider, that 
all the inſtituted Means of Grace; as Prayer, 
Faſting, Hearing and Reading the Word of 
 Gop, Receiving the Bleſſed Sacrament, and 


ſuch-like, axe no further {ſerviceable to us, 
than as they are found to make us 1mward/y 
better, and to carry on the ſpiritual Life in 


the Soul. 5 


It is true, they are Means, and Eſſential 


ones too; but then they are only Means; 


7 


they are Part, but not the / hole of 
Religion: For if ſo, Who more religious 


than the Phariſee? who faſted twice in the 


Week, 


ew” — 


2 I 
— 


PPP 
q . 2 


— 


622 
Week, and gave Tythes of all that he 


poſſeſſed, and yet was not juſtified, as 
our Saviour himſelt informs us, in the Sight 


of Gop. 
You perhaps, like the Pbariſte, may faſt 


often, and make long Prayers; you may, 


Herod, hear good Sermons gladly ; or, 

as Judas himſelf, ende to the Opinion 
of our Church, did *, receive the Bleſſed 
Sacrament. But yet, if you continue vain 
and trifling, immoral or worldly-minded in 
your Converſations, and differ from the reſt 


of your Neighbours barely in going to 
Church, or in complying with ſome outward 


Performances, are you better than they ? 
No, in no wiſe : You are by far much worſe, 


becauſe thoſe that wholly neglect the Means, 
are anſwerable only for omitting the Uſe of 


Gop's Ordinances ; whereas if you uſe them, 
and at the fame time abuſe them, by not 


letting them produce their intended Effect, 


you thereby encourage others to think there 


is nothing in them, and therefore muſt ex- 


pect to © receive the greater Damnation.” 


Bur, Secondly, If he that is in CuRIST 
muſt be a new Creature, then this may 
check the groundleſs Preſumption of another 


_ Claſs of Profeſſors, who reſt in the Attain- 


ment of ſome Moral Virtues, and falſely 


Ser the Hr ft ee to be read < Week before the 


Communt i297, 


imagine 


1 


range they are good Chriſtians, if they 


e juft in their Dealings or temperate 
in their Diet, and do Hurt or N to 


no Man. 


' Bur if this was all that is requiſite to 
make us Chriſtians, Why might not the 


 Heathens of old be good Chriſtans, who 


were remarkable for theſe Virtues? Or, 


St. Paul, before his Converſion, who tells 
2 E hat then he lived in all good Conſcience, 


and was, touching the Law, blameleſs ? And 
yet, after his Converſion, we find he re- 
nounces all Dependence on Works of this 


Nature, and only defires to be found in D 


CnRIs , and to know the Power of his 
Reſurrection; 7. e. to have an experimental 


Proof of receiving. the HoLy GHosr, 
purchaſed for him by the Death, and 


enſured and applied to him by the Re- 


ſurrection, of JESUS CHRIST. 
TE Som of the Matter is this: Chriſtia- 


rai includes Morality, as Grace does Rea- 
ſon; but if we are only mere Moraliſts, if 
we are not imwar diy wrought upon, and 


changed by the powerful Operations of the 


Holy Spirit, and our Moral Actions proceed 


1058 a Principle of a new Nature, however 
we may call ourſelves Chriſtians, it is to be 


feared we ſhall be ſound naked at the Great 


Day, 


624) 3 
Day, and in the Number of thoſe, who | 
vainly depend on their own Righteouſneſs, * 
and not on the Righteouſneſs of JeEsUs | 
CHRIS Tr, imputed to and inherent in 
them, as neceſſary to their eternal Sal- 
vation. - 3 5 8 


Nox, Thirdly, will this Doctrine leſs 
condemn thoſe, who reſt in a Partial 
Amendment of themſelves, without going 
on to Perfection, and experiencing a tho- 
rough, real, inward Change of Heart, 


A little Acquaintance with the World 
will furniſh us with Inſtances of no ſmall 

Number of Perſons, who, perhaps, were 
before openly profane; but ſeeing the ill 
Conſequences of their Vice, and the many 
worldly Inconveniences it has reduced them 
to, on a ſudden, as it were, grow civilized; 
and thereupon flatter themſelves that they 
are very religious, becauſe they differ a 
little from their former Selves, and are not 
ſo ſcandalouſly wicked as once they were: 
Whereas at the ſame time they ſhall have 
| ſome ſecret darling Sin or other, ſome be- 
loved Dalilah or Herodias, which they will 
not part with; ſome hidden Luſt, which 
they will not mortify; ſome vicious Habit, 
which they will not take pains to root 
Re out. 


| ( 25 ) 
out. But wouldſt thou know, O vain Man! 
whoever thou art, what the Lo b thy 
Gop requires of thee? thou muſt be informi- 
ed, that nothing ſhort of a thorough, ſound 
Converſion will avail for the Salvation of 
thy Soul. It is not enough to turn from 
Profaneneſs to Civility ; but thou muſt 
turn from Civility to Godlineſs. Not only 
fome, but all Things muft become new in 
thy Soul. It will profit thee but little to 
do many Things, if yet ſome one Thing thou 
lackeſt. In ſhort, thou muſt not be only an 
almoſt, but altogether a new Creature, or in 
. yain thou hopeſt for a faving Intereſt in 
[ Cn . 
Fouxrlx and Laſtly, If he that i is in 
 Cux1sT muſt be a new Creature, then this 
may be preſcribed as an infallible Rule for 
every Perſon of whatever Denomination, 
Age, Degree or Quality, to judge himſelf 
by; this being the only ſolid Foundation, 
! whereon we can build a well-grounded AC 
ſurance of Pardon, Peace and Happineſs. 
We may indeed depend on the broken 
Reed of an external Prot eſſion; we m 
think we have done enough, if we e lead ſuc 
ſober, honeſt, moral Lives, as many Hea- 
thens did.. We may imagine we are in 4 


E W. we 


{afe Condition, if we attend on the publ. ck , 
Offices of Religion, and are conſtant in 8 | 
D = - Duties 


( 26 ) 


Duties of our Cloſets. But unleſs all theſe 
tend to reform our Lives, and change our 
Hearts, and are only uſed as ſo many Chanels 
of Divine Grace; as I told you before, ſo I 


tell you again, Chriſtianity will profit us 


nothing, 


L r each of us therefore ſeriouſly put this 


Queſtion to our Hearts: Have we received 
the HorLy Ghost ſince we believed? Are 


we new Creatures in CHRIST, or no? At 
leaſt, if we are not ſo yet, is it our daily En- 


devvour to become ſuch? Do we make a 


conſtant and conſcientious Uſe of all the 


Means of Grace required thereto? Do we 


faſt, watch and pray? Do we not only lazily 


ſeek, but laboriouſly ſtrive to enter in at the 
ſtrei ght Gate? In ſhort, Do we renounce 


_ ourſelves, take up our Croſſes, and follow 


CurisT? If ſo, we are in that narrow 


Way which leads to Life: We are, at leaſt 


ſhall in Time, become new Creatures in 
ChRkisr. The good Seed is ſown in our 
Hearts, and will, if duly watered and nou- 
riſhed by a regular perſevering Uſe of all 


the Means of Grace, grow up to eternal Life. 
But, on the contrary, if we have only heard, 
and know not oo , Whether there 

HOST ; if we are Strangers 
to Faſting, Watching, and Prayer, and 


be any HoLyY 


all the other {ſpiritual Exerciſes of Devotion; 


if we are content to go in the broad Way, 
merely 


* 


—— — — 


(29 3 
merely becauſe we ſee moſt other People do 
ſo, without once reflecting whether it be the 
right one or not; in ſhort, if we are 
Strangers, nay, Enemies to the Croſs of 
CuxrisrT, by leading Lives of Softneſs, 
| Wordly-mindedneſs, and ſenſual Pleaſure ; 
and thereby make others think, that Chriſti- 
anity is but an empty Name, a bare formal 
Profeſſion; if this be the Caſe, I fay, then f 
CHRIST is as yet dead in vain as to us, WC \ 
are yet under the Guilt of our Sins; we ; 
are unacquainted with that true and thorough 
Converſion, which alone can intitle us to the 
Sal vation of our Souls. 
1 Bor, Beloved, I am perſuaded better 
' Things of you, and Things that accompany 
Sal vation, though we thus ſpeak ; and hum- 
bly hope, that you are fully and heartily 
convinced, that nothing but the Wedding 
Garment of a new Nature, can gain Admiſ- 
ſion for you at the Marriage Feaſt of the 
' Supper of the Lamb; that you are ſincerely 
perſuaded, that he that hath not the Spirit 
of CHRIST, 1s none of his; and that, unleſs 
the SPIRIT, which raiſed Iss from the 
Dead, dwell in you here, neither will your 
mortal Bodies be quickened by the ſame 
SPIRIT to dwell with him hereafter, _ 
Lux r me therefore (as was propoſed in the 
laſt Place) earneſtly exhort you, in the Name 
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to act ſuitable 


= Z S882 7 — 
1 * 4 8 7 tes or ey Za « 5 KOT 8 . = be > A e — 
eee e e 
. e e SR ES es 


(28 
to thoſe Convictions, and to live as Chriſ- 
tians, that are commanded in Holy Writ, to 


put of their former Converſation concern- 


ing the Cid Man, and to put on the New 


Man, which is created after GoDp, in. Righ- 


teoufneſs and true Holineſs. 

Ir muſt be owned indeed, that this is a 
great and difficult Work; but, bleſſed be 
Gop, it is not impoſſible. Many Thou- 


fands of happy Souls have been aſſiſted by 


a Divine Power to bring it about, and why 
ſhould Ve deſpair of Succeſs? Is Go »'s 


Hund ſhortened, that it cannot ſave? Was 


He the Gop of. our Fathers, is He not the 
Gor of their Children allo? Yes, doubtleſs, 


of their Children alſo. It is a Task likewiſe 
that will put us to ſome Pain; it will oblige _ 
us to part with tome Luft, to break with 
ſome Fr end, to mortiſy ſome beloved Paſ- 


ſion, W.. ich may be exceeding dear to us, 
and perhaps as hard to leave, as to cut off a 
r ght Hand, or pluck out a Tight Eye. But 
whar of all this? Will not the being mide a 


real living Member of CHRIST, a Child of 
Gop, and an Inheritor of the. Kingdom of _ 
| Flamen, aburdantly make Amends for all this 
Trouble? Undoubtedly it will. Laſtly, fet- 


ting about and carrying on this great and 
neceſſary Work, perhaps may, nay, aſſur- 


edly will, expole us to the Ridicule of the 


unthinking Part of Mankind, who will won- 


der, 


« 3" F r ot 0 ER 
„r LA * e 5 


8 — En »„— — 


(29) 
der, that we run not into the ſame Exceſs of 
Riot with themſelves : ; and becauſe we may 
deny our ſinful Appetites, and are not con- 


formed to this World, being commanded in 
Scripture to do the one, and to have our Con- 
verſation in Heaven in Oppoſition to the o- 
ther, they may count our Lives Folly, and 
our End to be without Honour. But will 
not the being numbered among the Saints, 
and ſhining as the Stars ſor ever and ever, be 


a more than a ſufficient Recompence for all 


the Ridicule, Calumny, or Reproach, we 


can poſſibly. meet with here! 
INDEED, was there .no other eu at 


tended a thorough Converſion, but that Peace 
of Gop, which is the unavoldele' Conſe- 


quence of it, and which, even in this Life, 


paſſeth all Underſtanding, we ſhould have 


great Reaſon to rejoice. But when we conſi- 


der this is the leaſt of thoſe Mercies Gop has 


prepared for thoſe that are in CHRIST new 
Creatures ; that this is but the Beginning of 


an eternal ENS Tron of Pleaſures ; that the 
Day of our Dcaths, which the unconverted, 


unrenewed Sinner mud ſo much dread, will 
be, as it were, but the firſt Day of our new 


Lirihs, and open to us an everlaſting Scene 


of Happineſs and Comfort; in ſhort, if we 

remember, that they who are regenerate and 
born again, have a real Title to all the glori- 
ous Promiſes of the Goſpel, and are infallibly 


"oy 


| ( 39 ) 0 
certain of being as happy, both here and here- 
after, as an all-wiſe, all-gracious, all-power- - 
ful Gop can make them; methinks, every 
one that has but the leaſt Concern for the 
Salvation of his precious, his immortal Soul, 
having ſuch Promiſes, ſuch an Hope, ſuch an 
Eternity of Happineſs ſet before him, ſhould 
never ceaſe watching, praying, and ſtriving, 
till he find a real, inward, ſaving Change 
wrought in his Heart; and thereby knoweth 
of a Truth, that he dwells in ChRIST, and 
CHRIST in him; that he is a mew Creature 
in CHRIST ; that he is therefore a Child of 
Gop; that he is already an Inheritor, and 
will ere long, if he endure to the End, be an 
actual Poſſeſſor of the Kingdom of Heaven. 


Which God of his infaite Mercy grant 
Through Jeſus Chriſt our Lord. NY 


To whom, &c. 


1 1 14 


