I 


BX   6495    .S7   A24  Vg^.^igsz      , 
?rruroiio.raphy  of  Charle,^ 
H.    Spurgeon  i 


V.     1 


C.   H.   SPURGEOiN'S   AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


OF 


CHARLES  H.  SPURGEON 


COMPILED   FROM 

HIS   DIARY,  LETTERS,  AND   RECORDS 


BY 

HIS  WIFE 

AND 

HIS  PRIVATE  SECRETARY 


'The  law  of  truth  was  in  his  ?i!07ith,  and  inigi/ity  was  not  found  in  his  lips;  he  walked  with 
Me  in  peace  and  equity,  and  did  turn  many  away  from  iniquity'' — walachi  ii.  6 


VOL.  I.     1834-1854 


CHICAGO     XKW  YORK     TORONTO 

FLEMING    H.    REVELL    COMPANY 
i8q8 


CONTENTS    OF   VOL.    1 


Knill's  Prophecy 


Chapter 

I.  Introduction 

II.  Ancestry  and  Genealogy 

111.  Ha.ppy  Childhood  at  Stambourne 

IV.  Stambourne  Meeting-House 

V.  A  Memorable  Visit  to  Stambourne. — Mr, 

VI.  Incidents  of  Home  and  School  Life 

V^II.  Memories  of  Maidstone  and  Newmarket 

\'III.  A  Holiday   Pastime. — Essay  on  Popery 

IX.  Early  Religious  Impressions 

X.  "Through  much  Tribulation" 

XI.  The  Great  Change. — Conversion    ... 

XII.  Letters  to  Father  and  Mother,  January  to  June,   1850 

XIII.  Diary,  April  to  June,    1850... 

XIV.  A  Good  Confession. — Baptism 

XV.  E.XPERIENCES    after    CONVERSION 

XVI.  A  Defence  of  Calvinism 

X\'II.  Beginning  to  Serve  the  Lord 

XVIII.  Cambridge   Life  and   Letters,    1850-1851    ... 

XIX.  "The  Boy-Preacher  of  the   Fens" 

XX.  F"iRST  Outlines  of  Sermons,    1851-1S52 

XXI.  The  Young  Soul-Winner  at  Waterbe.\ch 


Page 
I 


'o 

25 

39 
47 
57 
67 

75 

97 
117 

127 

147 
157 
167 

179 
185 
199 

213 
227 


VI 


CONTENTS    OF    VOL.    I. 


Chapter 

XXII.  The  Lord's  Hand  behind  the  Maid's  Mistake 

XXIII.  Reminiscences  as  a  Village  Pastor 

XXIV.  Memorable  Services  away  from  Waterbeach  ... 
XXV.  Later  Sermonettes  ... 

XXVI.  Glimpses  of  Essex  and  Cambridgeshire  Life,   1853 

XXVII.  The   Last  Year  at  Waterbeach  and  Cambridge 

XXVIII.  Dr.   Rippon's  Prayer  and  its  Answer     ... 

XXIX.  First  Sermons  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel 

XXX.  Letters  concerning  Settlement  in  London 

XXXI.  Divine  and  Human  Ordination    .  . 

XXXII.  The  Long  P.\stor.ate    Commenced,    1854... 

XXXIII.  The  Cholera  Year  in  London 


Page 
241 

253 
269 

277 

^93 

321 

339 

355 


361 


^/i 


ILLUSTRATIONS    IN    VOL.    I, 


Page 

Our  First   Home  (No.   217,   New  Kent   Road,    London)    ...          ...  ...  5 

Haddon   H.\ll,   Bermondsey  New  Road,   London     ...         ...         ...  ...  ii 

The  Old  Manse  and  Meeting-House,  Stambourne            ...         ...  ...  13 

Apples  in  Bottles            ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  15 

C.   H.  Spurgeon's  Grandfather            ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  17 

The  Yew  Hedge,   Stambourne  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ..  ...  ig 

C.   H.  Spurgeon's  Grandmother           ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  21 

Back  View  of  the  Old  Meeting-House,  Stambourne       ...         ...  ...  25 

Present  Meeting-House  .\nd  Graveyard,   Stambourne      ...         ...  ...  29 

Rev.    Richard  Knill        ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  t,t, 

The   House  at  Kelvedon,   Essex,  where  C.   H.   Spurgeon  was  Born    ...  39 

St.  Augustine's  College,   Maidstone  (where  C.   H.   Spurgeon  Went  to 

School,  1848-9        ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  47 

C.   H.  Spurgeon's  Father  and  Mother          ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  67 

Exterior  of  Primitive  Methodist  Chapel,  Artillery  Street,  Colchester  107 

Interior  of  Chapel,  Showing  Tablet  over  Pew  where  C.  H.  Spurgeon 

Sat,  January  6th,    1850  ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  107 

Isleham   Ferry,  where  C.    H.   Spurgeon  was  Baptized       ...          ...  ...  147 

Exterior    of    Cottage    at    Teversham,    where    C.    H.    Spurgeon  first 

Preached     ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  199 

Interior    of    Cottage    at    Teversham,    where    C.    H.    Spurgeon  first 

Preached     ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  201 

Facsimile  of  Title-page  of  Volume  I.  of  Outlines  of  Sermons  ...  215 

Facsimile  of  Title-page  of  Volume  II.  of  Outlines  of  Sermons  ...  217 

Waterbe.\ch  Chapel,  1851           ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  227 

Rev.  Cornelius  Elven,  of  Bury  St.   Edmund's       ...         ...         ...  ...  249 

Mr.  Thomas  Olney,  Senior       ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  299 

Mr.   Benjamin  Keach       ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  305 

Dr.  Gill     ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  309 

Mr.   Rippon  in  his  Younger  Dats       ...         ...         ...         ...         ...  ...  312 

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Almshouses  and   Schools         ...         ...  ...  314 

New  Park  .Street  Chapel,   Southwark          ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  319 

New   Park   Street  Chapel  Puli'IT  Stairs      ...          ...          ...          ...  ...  367 


C.    H.    SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


CHAPTER     I. 


Bntrotiuction. 


Biographies  are  generally  interesting   if  they  are  biographies;  that  is  to  say,  if  the   events  of 
the  person's  life   are   truly  told ;    but  I  think  that  the  most  interesting  biography  to  any  man  is  his 

own  life It  would  have  been  impossible  for  me  to  quote  the  experiences  of  other  men 

if  they  had  not  been  bold  enough  to  record  them,  and  I  make  an  honest  attempt  to  acknowledge 
my  debt  to  my  greater  predecessors  by  writing  down  my  own.  Whether  this  arises  from  egotism 
or  not,  each  reader  shall  decide  according  to  the  sweetness  or  acidity  of  his  own  disposition.  A 
father  is  excused  when  he  tells  his  sons  his  own  life-story,  and  huds  it  the  readiest  way  to 
enforce  his  maxims;  the  old  soldier  is  forgiven  when  he  "shoulders  his  crutch,  and  shows  how 
fields  were  won;"  I  beg  that  the  license  which  tolerates  these  may,  on  this  occasion,  be  extended 
to  me. — C.  H.  S. 


HE  publication  of  this  work  carries  out  a  plan  long  ago  formed 
by  Mr.  Spurgeon.  In  the  occasional  intervals  of  comparative 
leisure  that  he  was  able  to  snatch  from  his  busy  life's  labours, — 
and  mainly  in  the  bright  sunshine  at  Mentone, — he  recorded  many 
of  the  principal  incidents  in  his  wonderful  career.  As  each  one 
was  completed,  he  used  joyfully  to  exclaim,  "  There's  another 
chapter  for  my  Autobiography  ; "  and  had  he  been  spared  long  enough,  he  would 
doubtless  have  ofiven  to  the  church  and  the  world  a  full  account  of  his  life  as  it 
appeared  from  his  own  standpoint.  This  he  has  virtually  done  from  the  commence- 
ment of  his  public  ministry,  though  not  in  the  connected  form  in  which  it  is  now 
issued.  His  preaching  was  always  so  largely  illustrated  from  his  personal  e.xperience 
that  his  true  biography  is  delightfully  enshrined  in  the  whole  series  of  his  .Sermons, 
while  "his  own  Magazine" — The  Sword  and  the  Trozvel — was  confessedly  auto- 
biographical during  the  entire  period  of  his  unique  editorship.  His  many  other 
published  works  abound  in  allusions  to  the  Lord's  gracious  dealings  with  him,  and 
these  are  now  for  the  first  time  gathered  together  into  a  continuous  narrative.  The 
record  is  given  entirely  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  words,  except  here  and  there  where 
an  explanatory  sentence  or  two  had  to  be  inserted,  or  where  letters  written  to  him, 
and  references  made  by  others  to  the  incidents  he  described,  seem  to  be  necessary 
to  the  completeness  of  the  history. 


2  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Mr.  Spurgeon's  writings  are  enriched  with  many  references  to  other  biographies 
beside  his  own.  In  the  year  1870,  after  reading  Mr.  Arnot's  Life  of  Dr.  James 
Hamilton,  he  wrote  : — "The  value  of  a  biography  depends  far  less  upon  its  subject 
than  upon  its  author.  Milton  mutilated  by  Ivimey,  and  Carey  smothered  by  his 
nephew  Eustace,  are  mournful  instances  of  literary  murder.  James  Hamilton  has 
the  singular  good  fortune  to  be  embalmed  by  William  Arnot,  his  own  familiar  friend 
and  acquaintance,  a  spirit  cast  in  the  same  fair  mould,  a  genial  genius  wealthy  in 
grace  and  wisdom.  It  were  worth  while  to  pray  for  an  earlier  end  to  one's  career,  if 
we  could  be  sure  of  an  Arnot  to  produce  its  record.  Apples  of  gold  in  baskets  of 
silver  are  precious  things  in  an  appropriate  setting,  the  golden  apple  being  neither 
dishonoured  by  contact  with  a  basket  too  homely,  nor  shamed  by  comparison  with 
costlier  metal  than  its  own  ;  the  memorial  of  a  good  man's  life  should  not  be  marred 
by  poor  writing,  neither  should  it  be  overshadowed  by  excessive  authorship.  "  In 
this  Autobiography,  the  subject  is  also  the  author,  so  the  apples  of  gold  are  perfectly 
matched  by  the  golden  basket  in  which  they  are  displayed. 

■•$  ^  ^  ^ 

In  his  early  volume.  The  Saint  and  his  Saviour,  published  in  1857,  Mr. 
Spurgeon  wrote  : — "  Few  men  would  dare  to  read  their  own  autobiography,  if  all 
their  deeds  were  recorded  in  it  ;  few  can  look  back  upon  their  entire  career  without 
a  blush.  '  All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glor)"  of  God.'  None  of  us  can 
lay  claim  to  perfection.  True,  at  times,  a  forgetful  self-complacency  bids  us  exult  in 
the  virtue  of  our  lives  ;  but  when  faithful  memory  awakes,  how  instantly  she  dispels 
the  illusion  !  She  waves  her  magic  wand,  and  in  the  king's  palaces  frogs  arise  in 
multitudes  ;  the  pure  rivers  at  her  glance  become  blood  ;  the  whole  land  is  creeping 
with  loathsomeness.  Where  we  imagined  purity,  lo,  imperfection  ariseth  !  The 
snow-wreath  of  satisfaction  melts  before  the  sun  of  truth,  the  nectared  bowl  of 
gratulation  is  embittered  by  sad  remembrances  ;  while,  under  the  glass'  of  honesty, 
the  deformities  and  irregularities  of  a  life,  apparently  correct,  are  rendered,  alas  !  too 
visible. 

"  Let  the  Christian,  whose  hair  is  whitened  by  the  sunlight  of  Heaven,  tell  his 
life-long  story.  He  may  have  been  one  of  the  most  upright  and  moral  ;  but  there 
will  be  one  dark  spot  in  his  history,  upon  which  he  will  shed  the  tear  of  penitence, 
because  then  he  knew  not  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Let  yon  heroic  warrior  of  Jesus 
recount  his  deeds  ;  but  he,  too,  points  to  deep  scars,  the  oflspring  of  wounds  received 
in  the  service  of  the  evil  one." 

•*  *  *  * 

Speaking  in  the  Tabernacle,  many  years  ago,  Mr.  Spurgeon  said: — "I  used  to 
mar\'el  at  William   Huntington's  Bank  of  Faith, — a  strange  enough  book,  by  the 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGKArHV.  3 

way, — but  I  am  sure  I  could,  from  my  own  history,  write  a  far  more  remarkable 
Bank  of  Faith  than  William  Huntington  has  penned.  I  have  often  told  you,  dear 
friends,  that,  if  I  possessed  the  powers  of  a  novelist,  I  might  write  a  three-volume 
novel  concerning  the  events  of  any  one  day  in  my  life,  so  singularly  striking  has 
my  experience  been.  I  should  never  need  to  describe  things  from  the  outside, 
as  I  should  have  plenty  of  material  from  within.  My  life  seems  to  me  like  a 
fairy  dream.  I  am  often  both  amazed  and  dazed  with  its  mercies  and  its  love. 
How  good  God  has  been  to  me  !  I  used  to  think  that  I  should  sing  among  the 
saints  above  as  loudly  as  any,  for  I  owe  so  much  to  the  grace  of  God  ;  and  I  said  so 
once  in  a  sermon,  long  ago,  quoting  those  lines, — 

"  '  Then  loudest  of  the  croud  I'll  sing, 

While  Heaven's  resounding  mansions  ring 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace.' 

"  I  thought  that  I  was  the  greatest  debtor  to  Divine  grace,  and  would  sing  the 
loudest  to  its  praise  ;  but  when  I  came  down  out  of  the  pulpit,  there  was  a  venerable 
woman  who  said  to  me,  '  You  made  a  blunder  in  your  sermon  this  evening.'  I  said, 
'  I  daresay  I  made  a  dozen,  good  soul,  but  what  was  that  particular  one  ? '  '  Why, 
you  said  that  you  would  sing  the  loudest  because  you  owed  most  to  Divine  grace  ; 
you  are  but  a  lad,  you  do  not  owe  half  as  much  to  grace  as  I  do  at  eighty  years  of 
age !  I  owe  more  to  grace  than  you,  and  I  will  not  let  you  sing  the  loudest.' 
I  found  that  there  was  a  general  conspiracy  among  the  friends  that  night  to  put  me 
in  the  background,  and  that  is  where  I  meant  to  be,  and  wished  to  me  ;  that  is  where 
those  who  sing  the  loudest,  long  to  be,  to  take  the  lowest  place,  and  praise  most  the 
grace  of  God  in  so  doing." 

*  *  *  * 

In  The  Sword  and  the  Troivcl  for  1869,  Mr.  Spurgeon  turned  to  good 
account  a  popular  superstition.  He  was  too  humble  to  apply  to  himself  the  closing 
sentences  in  the  following  paragraph  ;  but  all  who  read  it  must  see  how  exactly  it 
describes  the  abiding  influence  of  his  long  and  gracious  ministry.      He  wrote  : — 

"  Hone,  in  his  Year  Book,  gives  a  letter  from  a  correspondent  in  Raleigh, 
Nottinghamshire,  which  states  that,  many  centuries  since,  the  church  and  a  whole 
village  were  swallowed  up  by  an  earthquake.  Many  villages  and  towns  have 
certainly  shared  a  similar  fate,  and  we  have  never  heard  of  them  more. 

"  '  The  times  have  been 
When  the  brains  were  out,  the  man  would  die  ; ' 

"but  at  Raleigh,  they  say,  the  old  church  bells  still  ring  at  Christmas  time,  deep, 
deep,  in  earth  ;  and  that  it  was  a  Christmas  morning  custom  for  the  people  to  go 
out  into  the  valley,  and  put  their  ears  to  the  ground  to  listen  to  the  mysterious 
chimes  of  the  subterranean  temple.     This  is  sheer  superstition  ;  but  how  it  illustrates 


4  C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOKIOGRArilY. 

the  truth  that  those  preachers,  whose  voices  were  clear  and  mighty  for  truth  during 
life,  continue  to  preach  in  their  graves  !  Being  dead,  they  yet  speak  ;  and  whether 
men  put  their  ears  to  their  tombs  or  not,  they  cannot  but  hear  them." 

^  ^  ^  ^ 

In  the  last  sermon  but  one  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever  revised,  that  remarkable 
discourse  upon  the  te.xt,  "  I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the 
Lord  ; "  he  uttered  these  words,  which  have  already  been  to  a  large  extent  fulfilled 
with  regard  to  himselt  : — "  Often,  the  death  of  a  man  is  a  kind  of  new  birth  to  him  ; 
when  he  himselt  is  gone  physically,  he  spiritually  survi\'es,  and  from  his  grave  there 
shoots  up  a  tree  of  life  whose  leaves  heal  nations.  O  worker  for  God,  death  cannot 
touch  thy  sacred  mission  !  Be  thou  content  to  die  if  the  truth  shall  live  the  better 
because  thou  diest.  Be  thou  content  to  die,  because  death  may  be  to  thee  the 
enlargement  of  thine  influence.  Good  men  die  as  dies  the  seed-corn  which  thereby 
abideth  not  alone.  When  saints  are  apparently  laid  in  the  earth,  they  quit  the  earth, 
and  rise  and  mount  to  Heaven-gate,  and  enter  into  immortality.  No,  when  the 
sepulchre  receives  this  mortal  frame,  we  shall  not  die,  but  live." 

if  *  *  * 

The  portrait,  which  forms  the  frontispiece  to  this  volume,  has  never  before,  so 
far  as  I  know,  been  published.  It  was  a  lover's  gift  to  the  one  who  was  very  soon 
to  become  his  bride,  and  I  recall  how,  in  the  glamour  of  "love's  young  dream," 
I  used  to  gaze  on  the  sweet  boyish  face,  and  think  n(j  angel  could  look  half  so 
lovely  !  Afterwards,  the  picturL-  was  enshrined  in  a  massive  oaken  frame,  and  it 
occupied  the  place  of  honour  on  the  walls  of  the  house  in  the  New  Kent  Road, 
where  we  began  our  life's  journey  together,  and  founded  our  first  home.  Many  a 
time,  during  my  husband's  long  absences,  when  fulfilling  his  almost  ceaseless 
preaching  engagements,  has  this  portrait  comforted  me  ;  its  expression  of  calm 
confident  faith  strengthened  my  heart,  and  I  used  to  think  the  up-raised  finger 
pointed  to  the  source  whence  I  must  draw  consolation  in  my  loneliness. 

Something  of  the  same  soothing  and  sacred  influence  steals  over  me  as  I  look 
at  it  now  with  tear-filled  eyes  ;  it  speaks  to  me,  even  as  it  did  in  those  days  of  long 
ago,  and  it  says^  "  Do  not  fear,  my  beloved,  God  is  taking  care  of  its  both  ;  and 
though  we  are  still  separated  for  a  little  while,  we  shall  meet  again  at  home 
by-and-by  !  " 

There  have  been  many  representations  of  my  dear  husband  during  the  inter- 
vening years  ; — the  young  face  changed  into  that  of  a  strong,  energetic  man,  then  it 
grew  into  the  semblance  of  one  who  knew  sorrow  and  suft'ering,  and  again  it  changed 
into  the  grave  and  noble  features  which  we  remember  best,  because  his  departure 


C.      II.      STURGEON  S     AUTODIOGRAniV. 


has  stamped  them  for  ever  on  the  tablet  of  our  loving  heart.  Throughout  them  all 
can  be  traced  the  sweet  humihty,  the  gentle  kindness,  the  mightv  faith  in  God  which 
characterized  his  glorious  and  blameless  life  ;  but  I   think  it  is  reserved  to  this  early 


OL-R    FIRST   HOME   (NO.    2 1 7,    NEW    KENT   ROAD,    LONDON). 

portrait  to  depict  the  intense  love  and  unfailing  devotion  to  his   Master  which  was 
the  secret  of  his  power  both  with  God  and  man. 

*  *  *  # 

In  the  early  portion  of  the  present  volume,  Mr.  Spurgeon's  reminiscences  of  his 

life  at  Stambourne  are  given  at  considerable  length,  partly  because  they  present  such 


5  C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  / 

a  charmincr  picture  of  his  happy  childhood  at  his  grandfather's,  but  also  because  they 
are  of  special  value  to  his  many  friends  from  the  fact  that  this  was  the  literary  work 
upon  which  he  was  engaged  just  before  his  long  and  terrible  illness  in  1891.  They 
also  contain  his  inimitable  description  of  the  interest  taken  in  him  in  his  boyhood 
by  Mr.  Knill  when  at  Stambourne,  the  remarkable  prophecy  uttered  by  that  godly 
man  over  the  head  of  the  little  ten-years-old  lad,  its  literal  fulfilment,  and  the 
influence  of  the  incident  itself  and  the  circumstances  that  followed  it,  upon  the  whole 
of  his  after  history. 

Most  of  the  letters,  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon,  which  are  here  published  for  the 
first  time,  were  copied  by  his  direction  specially  with  a  view  to  his  Autobiography. 
Some  of  the  others  have  been  placed  at  my  disposal  by  various  friends  ;  a  few  had 
been  printed  before.  There  are,  doubtless,  many  thousands  of  my  dear  husband's 
letters  still  extant ;  but  no  useful  purpose  could  be  served  by  the  publication  of  even 
a  tithe  of  them.  There  must,  however,  be  a  very  large  number  of  the  products  of 
his  pen  that  ought  to  have  an  enlarged  ministry  through  the  press.  I  shall  be  glad, 
therefore,  to  receive  copies  of  special  episdes  of  public  and  permanent  interest ;  or, 
if  the  originals  are  lent  to  me,  I  will  have  them  copied,  and  returned  at  once.  All 
communications  for  me  should  be  addressed, — Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "Westwood." 
Beulah  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  London. 


CHAPTER   II. 


I  sing  of  the  noble  Refugee, 

Who  strove  in  a  holy  faith, 
At  the  altar  of  his  God  to  bow, 

When  the  road  was  marked  with  death. 

Wiien  the  despot's  sword  and  the  bigot's  torch 

Had  driven  him  forth  to  roam, 
From  village,  and  farm,  and  city,  and  town, 

He  sought  our  Island  Home. 

And  store  of  wealth  and  a  rich  reward 

He  brought  in  his  open  hand. 
For  many  a  peaceful  art  he  taught. 
Instead  of  the  fireman's  brand. 

nr.  Byles. 

R.  SMILES,  one  of  the  ablest  authors  of  our  time,  has  produced  a 
work  upon  the  Huguenots*,  which  is  not  only  intensely  interesting 
in  its  style,  but  of  the  utmost  importance  in  its  subject.  It  should 
be  read  carefully  by  every  statesman  in  Europe,  especially  by  those 
who  entertain  a  lingering  love  to  persecution  lor  righteousness'  sake, 
for  beyond  anything  else  in  print  it  illustrates  the  great  fact  that  the 
oppression  of  the  conscience  is  an  injury  to  the  State, — an  injury  not  only  to  its 
mental  and  moral  health,  but  to  its  material  prosperity.  We  were  not  aware  that 
our  little  isle,  the  asylum  of  the  banished,  had  received  so  great  a  reward  for  the 
entertainment  of  the  Lord's  exiles.  We  knew  that  they  had  brought  with  them  many 
of  our  most  lucrative  trades,  but  we  had  no  idea  of  the  great  extent  of  the  boon. 
England  must  have  been  a  poor  land  until,  in  entertaining  strangers,  she  entertained 
angels  unawares.  We  are  certainly  a  very  singular  race  ;  the  Huguenot  blood  has 
had  more  to  do  with  us  than  many  suppose  ;  let  us  hope  that,  by  God's  grace,  enough 
of  the  characteristics  of  these  good  men  may  be  found  among  us  to  keep  us  from 
drifting  utterly  to  Rome  and  perdition.  If  England's  opening  her  gates  to  receive 
the  hunted  Protestants  of  the  Continent  may  be  rewarded,  in  our  day,  by  a  revival 
of  the  brave  spirit  which  they  brought  with  them,  it  would  be  a  blessing  from  the 
Lord's  own  x'vAw.  hand. 


*  The  Huguenots :  their  Settlements,  Churches,  and  Industries  in  En'^land  and  Ireland.     By  SAMUEL  SMILES.     John  Murray. 


8  C.      M.     SPURGEON'p     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

Many  of  the  Flemish,  Dutch,  and  French  Protestants,  driven  by  persecution  out 
of  their  native  country,  found  a  haven  of  refuge  in  England  ;  and.  naturally,  great 
numbers  of  them  settled  down  in  the  Southern  and  Eastern  Counties,  though  others 
journeyed  to  the  Midlands,  and  the  North  and  West  of  England,  and  some  went  as 
far  as  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Mr.  Smiles  says  that  "Colchester  became  exceedingly 
prosperous  in  consequence  of  the  settlement  of  the  Flemish  artizans  there.  In  1609, 
it  contained  as  many  as  1,300  Walloons  and  other  persons  of  foreign  parentage." 
He  also  mentions  that,  in  manv  towns,  where  the  refueees  fixed  their  abode,  "  the 
artizans  set  up  their  looms,  and  began  to  work  at  the  manufacture  of  sayes,  bayes, 
and  other  kinds  of  cloth,  which  met  with  a  ready  sale."  This  information  is  very 
interesting  to  me,  for  in  my  early  days  in  Essex  I  used  to  hear  a  great  deal  about 
"the  bay  and  say  industry."  I  daresay  our  fathers  were  poor  weavers,  but  I  had 
far  rather  be  descended  from  one  who  suffered  for  the  faith  than  bear  the  blood  of 
all  the  emperors  within  my  veins.  I  remember  speaking  with  a  Christian  brother, 
who  seemed  right  happy  to  tell  me  that  he  spring  of  a  family  which  came  from 
Holland  during  the  persecution  of  the  Duke  of  Alva,  and  I  felt  a  brotherhood  with 
him  in  claimino-  a  like  descent  from  Protestant  forefathers. 


One  namesake,  and  perhaps  an  ancestor,  job  Spurgeon,  of  Dedham,  had  to 
suffer  both  in  purse  and  in  person,  "  for  the  testimony  of  a  good  conscience,"  as  the 
Quaker  record  puts  it.  In  1677,  a  distress  was  levied  upon  him,  and  some  of  his 
goods  were  seized,  because  he  had  committed  the  atrocious  crime  of  attending  a 
Nonconformist  meeting  at  Dedham  !  Six  years  larter,  for  a  similar  offence,  he  and 
three  other  godly  men  "  were  required  to  give  sureties  for  their  good  behaviour, 
which  refusing  to  do,  they  were  re-committed  to  prison,  where  three  of  them  lay  upon 
straw  about  fifteen  weeks  in  the  midst  of  a  winter  remarkable  for  extremity  of  cold  ; 
but  the  fourth.  Job  Spurgeon,  being  so  weak  that  he  was  unable  to  lie  down,  sat  up 
in  a  chair  the  most  part  of  that  time."  In  my  seasons  of  suffering,  I  have  often 
pictured  to  myself  this  modern  Job  in  Chelmsford  gaol,  and  thanked  God  that  I  bore 
the  same  name  as  this  persecuted  Spurgeon  of  two  hundred  years  ago.  So  far  as  I 
can  make  out  the  genealogy,  it  appears  to  me  that  this  Essex  Quaker  was  my  great- 
grandfather's grandfather,  and  I  sometimes  feel  the  shadow  of  his  broad  brim  come 
over  my  spirit.  Grace  is  not  tied  to  families,  but  yet  the  Lord  delights  to  bless  to  a 
thousand  generations.  There  is  a  sweet  fitness  in  the  passing  on  of  holy  loyalty 
from  grandsire  to  father,  and  from  father  to  son.  I  like  to  feel  that  I  serve  God 
"  from  my  fathers."  I  can  cast  my  eye  back  through  four  generations,  and  see  that 
God  has  been  pleased  to  hear  the  prayers  of  our  grandfather's  father,  who  used  to 
supplicate  with  God  that  his  children  might  live  before  Him   to  the  last  generation  ; 


C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  9 

and  God  has  never  deserted  the  house,  and  has  been  pleased  to  brinc(  first  one  and 
then  another  to  fear  and  love  His  name.  I  was  amused  when  I  read  that  a  friend  in 
China  wrote  concerning  my  name: — "The  Chinese  cannot  pronounce  '  Spurgeon  * 
correctly,  so  we  call  him  in  this  quarter,  '  Sze-Pah-ng,'  i.e.,  'the  successor  or 
continuator  of  a  hundred  virtues.'  The  word  'hundred'  in  Chinese  stands  for  an 
indefinite  number."  My  godly  ancestors  possessed  many  more  than  a  hundred 
virtues  ;  and  I  am  very  grateful  to  God  tor  the  grace  which  has  enabled  me  to  be 
the  continuator  of  any  of  them. 

^  -TT  ^  ^ 

I  notice  how  very  particular  the  Holy  Ghost  is  that  a  good  man  should  not  be 
confounded  with  a  bad  one.      He  says,  when  mentioning  one  of  the  twelve, — "Judas 

not  Iscariot"  (John  xiv.  22).     There  were  two  apostles  of  the  name  of  Judas  ; 

the  one  who  betrayed  our  Lord,  and  the  other  who  wrote  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  who 
should  properly  have  been  called  Judas.  Some  of  us,  in  reading  the  name  Judas, 
might  have  said,  "Ah!  it  was  that  traitor  Judas  Iscariot  who  asked  the  question." 
But  the  Holy  Spirit  would  not  allow  this  mistake  to  be  made.  This  should  teach 
us  that  it  is  not  an  idle  wish  for  us  to  desire  that  our  name  should  be  handed  down 
to  posterity  untarnished.  We  ought  all  to  seek  to  have  an  unblemished  character  ; 
we  ought  to  desire  to  have  that  promise  fulfilled,  "The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 
I  would  not  like  my  name  to  be  mistaken  for  that  of  some  criminal  who  was  hanged. 
I  would  not  wish  to  have  my  name  written  even  by  mistake  in  the  calendar  ot 
infamy.  However  much  I  may  now  be  misrepresented,  it  will  one  day  be  known 
that  I  have  honestly  striven  for  the  glory  of  my  Master. 

'>  *  *  * 

My  second  Christian  name — Haddon — has  often  reminded  me  of  my  godly 
ancestry.  When  I  have  had  to  endorse  a  great  heap  of  cheques  for  the  College 
and  Orphanage,  I  have  wished  that  my  father  had  not  given  me  so  many  initials,  and 
I  took  care  that  my  own  sons  should  not  have  the  same  cause  for  complaint,  for  they 
are  simply  "  Charles  "  and  "  Thomas."  Yet  there  is  such  a  pleasing  story  associated 
with  the  name  of  "  Haddon  "  that  I  am  very  glad  it  was  given  to  me.  It  appears 
that,  before  my  grandfather  became  a  minister,  he  had  several  years  of  business  life 
as  a  country  shop-keeper.  Amongst  other  things,  he  sold  cheese,  which  he  used  to 
buy  of  a  wholesale  dealer  in  that  useful  article  of  commerce.  One  day,  a  friend, 
named  Haddon,  said  to  him,  "  Mr.  Spurgeon,  you  should  go  down  to  the  cheese 
fairs  at  Derby  and  Leicester,  and  buy  what  you  want  at  first  hand  ;  you  would  get  a 
much  larger  profit  if  you  did  so."  "  Oh  !  "  replied  grandfather,  "  I  could  not  do  that, 
for  I  have  not  sufficient  money  to  spare  for  such  a  purpose."  "  You  need  not  have 
any  difficulty  on  that  score,"  said  the  generous  man  ;  "  if  you  tell  me  when  the  next 


jQ  C.     n.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOCrLXPHY.     • 

fair  is  to  be  held,  I  will  let  you  have  the  money,  and  you  can  pay  me  back  when  you 
have  sold  the  cheese.  I  have  such  confidence  in  your  Christian  integrity,  that  I  shall 
be  glad  to  aid  you  in  this  w^ay." 

Accordingly,   grandfather  bought  the  cheese,   sold  them   at  a  good  profit,  and 
went  to  his  friend  who  had  lent  him  the  money.     This  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
parts  of  the  story.     When   the   amount   was   repaid,    grandfather  asked   how  much 
interest  was  due  from    him  ;    but   the   lender   replied,    "  Oh,    Mr.    Spurgeon,    that   is 
not   my   way   of  transacting  business  !      I   had  that  money  lying  idle,  and  you  have 
done  me  great  service  in  putting  it  to  such  good  use,  so  I  mean  to  give  you  five  per 
cent,  for  yotw  trouble  in   laying  it  out  for  me ;  and  when   the  season   comes  round 
again,  I   want  you  to  buy  another  lot  of  cheese  on   the  same  terms."     That  very 
sino-ular  arrangement  was  continued   until   there  was   no   further  need  of  the  good 
man's  help  ;  and,  afterwards,  when  grandfather  had  a  son  born  to  him,  he  gave  him 
the  name  of  "  Haddon  "  in  remembrance  of  his  generous  friend.      That  son  was  my 
Uncle  Haddon,  who,  in  my  childhood  days,  used  to  give  out  the  hymns  at  Stambourne 
Meeting-house  ;  and   when   my   father  also   had  a  son,   he  gave   him   the   name  of 
Charles   Haddon   Spurgeon;  and   now,  without  any  wish   on   my  part,  Mr.  William 
Olney  and  his  friends   in   Bermondsey  have  perpetuated   the  name  by  calling  their 
splendid  mission  premises  "  Haddon  Hall."      It  always  seems  to  me  that  this  chain 
of  circumstances  is  a  fresh  illustration  of  the  inspired  promise,  "  The  righteous  shall 
be  in  everlasting  remembrance." 


Genealogical   Table,    compiled   from   an   ancient    Family    Register. 


Clement. 
(>767-) 


John. 
(176S.) 


William. 
('771-) 


Thomas.  James.  Hannah.  (Also  6  who  died 

(1774.)  {Born,  Sep.  29,  \-n(>.)  (iT]?>.)  in  infancy.) 


I 


Sarah.  Haddon  Rudkin.  John.  Samuel.         Obadiah.  Eliza.  Ann 

(1807.)  (180S.)  (Born,  July  IS,  l?>\0.)  (1811.)  (1813.)  (1S15.)  (1S18.)  (1S20.) 

"Uncle  Haddon."  "Aunt  Ann." 


James.  Susannah. 

(1823-) 


Charles  Haddon. 
{Born,  June  19,  1834) 


I  I  II. 

Eliza.  James  Archer.  Emily.  Louisa. 


I 
Charlotte. 


I 
Eva. 


Flora. 


I. 


I 


Charles.  Thomas. 

[Born,  Sept.  20,  1S56.) 


C.     U.     Sl'URGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAI'H  V. 


I  I 


I'B     C;,^<H.€^5 


HADDON     HALL,    BERMONDSEY   NEW   ROAD,    LONDON. 


CHAPTER    III. 


?2nppiJ  CljilbljODb  at  Stamljournt 


THE   OLD    MANSE   AND    MEETING-HOL'SE,    STAMBOURNE. 

Oh,  the  old  house  at  home!  who  does  not  love  it,  the  place  of  our  childhood,  the  old  roof-tree, 
the  old  cottage?  There  is  no  other  village  in  all  the  world  half  so  good  as  that  particular  village! 
True,  the  gates,  and  styles,  and  posts  have  been  altered ;  but,  still,  there  is  an  attachment  to 
tliose  old  houses,  the  old  tree  in  the  park,  and  the  old  ivy-mantled  tower.  It  is  not  very  picturesque, 
perliaps,  but  we  love  to  go  to  see  it.  We  like  to  see  the  haunts  of  our  boyhood.  There  is  something 
pleasant  in  tliose  old  stairs  where  the  clock  used  to  stand  ;  and  in  the  room  where  grandmother 
was  wont  to  bend  her  knee,  and  where  we  had  family  prayer.  There  is  no  place  like  that  house  after 
all.— C.  H.  S. 

HIS  drawing  of  the  old  Manse  at  Stambourne  has  far  more  charms 
for  me  than  for  any  of  my  readers  ;  but  I  hope  that  their  generous 
kindness  to  the  writer  will  cause  them  to  be  interested  in  it.  Here 
my  venerable  grandfather  lived  for  more  than  fifty  years,  and  reared 
his  rather  numerous  family.  In  its  earlier  days  it  must  have  been 
a  very  remarkable  abode  for  a  dissenting  teacher  ;  a  clear  evidence 
that  either  he  had  an  estate  of  his  own,  or  that  those  about  him  had  larye  hearts  and 


14  C.     H.     SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

pockets.  It  was  in  all  respects  a  gentleman's  mansion  of  the  olden  times.  The 
house  has  been  supplanted  by  one  which,  I  doubt  not,  is  most  acceptable  to  the 
excellent  minister  who  occupies  it ;  but  to  me  it  can  never  be  one-half  so  dear  as  the 
revered  old  home  in  which  I  spent  some  of- my  earliest  years.  It  is  true  the  old 
parsonage  had  developed  devotional  tendencies,  and  seemed  inclined  to  prostrate  its 
venerable  form,  and  therefore  it  might  have  fallen  down  of  itself  if  it  had  not  been 
removed  by  the  builder  ;  but,  somehow,  I  wish  it  had  kept  up  for  ever  and  ever.  I 
could  have  cried,  "  Builders,  spare  that  home.  Touch  not  a  single  tile,  or  bit  of 
plaster  ; "  but  its  hour  was  come,  and  so  the  earthly  house  was  happily  dissolved,  to 
be  succeeded  by  a  more  enduring  fabric.  The  new  house,  as  Smith  told  me,  was 
"built  on  the  same  destruction."  It  stood  near  the  chapel,  so  that  the  pastor  was 
close  to  his  work. 

It  looks  a  very  noble  parsonage,  with  its  eight  windows  in  front  ;  but  at  least 
three,  and  I  think  four,  of  these  were  plastered  up,  and  painted  black,  and  then 
marked  out  in  lines  to  imitate  glass.  They  were  not  such  very  bad  counterfeits,  or 
the  photograph  would  betray  this.  Some  of  us  can  remember  the  window  tax,  which 
seemed  to  regard  light  as  a  Latin  commodity — lux,  and  therefore  a  luxury,  and  as 
such  to  be  taxed.  So  much  was  paid  on  each  aperture  for  the  admission  of  light ; 
but  the  minister's  small  income  forced  economy  upon  him,  and  so  room  after  room  of 
the  manse  was  left  in  darkness,  to  be  regarded  by  my  childish  mind  with  reverent 
awe.  Over  other  windows  were  put  up  boards  marked  d.\irv,  or  cheese-room, 
because  by  being  labelled  with  these  names  they  would  escape  the  tribute.  What  a 
queer  mind  must  his  have  been  who  first  invented  taxing  the  light  ot  the  sun  !  It 
was,  no  doubt,  meant  to  be  a  fair  way  of  estimating  the  size  of  a  house,  and  thus 
getting  at  the  wealth  of  the  inhabitant  ;  but,  incidentally,  it  led  occupiers  of  large 
houses  to  shut  out  the  light  for  which  they  were  too  poor  to  pay. 


Let  us  enter  by  the  front  floor.  We  step  into  a  spacious  hall,  innocent  of 
carpet.  There  is  a  great  fireplace,  and  over  it  a  painting  of  David,  and  the 
Philistines,  and  Giant  Goliath.  The  hall-floor  was  of  brick,  and  carefully  sprinkled 
with  fresh  sand.  We  see  this  in  the  country  still,  but  not  often  in  the  minister's 
house.  In  the  hall  stood  "the  child's"  rocking-horse.  It  was  a  grey  horse,  and 
could  be  ridden  astride  or  side-saddle.  When  I  visited  Stamboume,  in  the  year 
1889,  a  man  claimed  to  have  rocked  me  upon  it.  I  remembered  the  horse,  but  not 
the  man, — so  sadly  do  we  forget  the  better,  and  remember  the  baser.  This  was  the 
only  horse  that  I  ever  enjoyed  riding.  Living  animals  are  too  eccentric  in  their 
movements,  and  the  law  of  gravitation  usually  draws  me  from  my  seat  upon  them  to 
a  lower  level  ;  therefore  I  am  not  an  inveterate  lover  of  horseback.     I  can,  however, 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGKAPHY.  '5 

testify  of  my  Stambourne  steed,  that  it  was  a  horse  on  which  even  a  member  of 
ParHament  might  have  retained  his  seat. 

How  I  used  to  deUght  to  stand  in  the  hall,  with  the  door  open,  and  watch  the 
rain  run  off  the  top  of  the  door  into  a  wash-tub  !  How  much  better  to  catch  the 
overflow  of  the  rain  in  a  tub  than  to  have  a  gutter  to  carry  it  off !  So  I  thought ; 
but  do  not  now  think.  What  bliss  to  float  cotton-reels  in  the  miniature  sea!  How 
fresh  and  sweet  that  rain  seemed  to  be  !  The  fragrance  of  the  water  which  poured 
down  in  a  thunder-shower  comes  over  me  now. 

Where  the  window  is  open  on  the  right,  was  the  best  parlour.  Roses  generally 
grew  about  it,  and  bloomed  in  the  i-oom  if  they  could  find  means  to  insert  their  buds 
between  the  wall  and  the  window-frame.  They  generally  found  ample  space,  for 
nothing  was  quite  on  the  square.  There  had  evidently  been  a  cleaning  up  just 
before  my  photograph  was  taken,  for  there  are  no  roses  creeping  up  from  below. 
What  Vandals  people  are  when  they  set  about  clearing  up  either  the  outsides  or  the 
insides  of  houses  !  On  the  sacred  walls  of  this  "best  parlour"  hung  portraits  of  my 
grandparents  and  uncles,  and  on  a  piece  of  furniture  stood  the  fine  large  basin  which 
grandfather  used  for  what  he  called  "baptisms."  In  my  heart  of  hearts,  I  believe  it 
was  originally  intended  for  a  punch-bowl  ;  but,  in  any  case,  it  was  a  work  of  art, 
worthy  of  the  use  to  which  it  was  dedicated.  This  is  the  room  which  contained  the 
marvel  to  which  I  have  often  referred, — 

An   Apple    in   a    Bottle. 

I  remember  well,  in  my  early  days,  seeing  upon  my  grandmother's  mantel-shelf 
an   apple  contained  in  a   phial.     This   was  a  great  wonder   to   me,   and   I   tried   to 


investigate  it.  My  question  was,  "  How  came  the  apple  to  get  mside  so  small  a 
botde  ? "  The  apple  was  quite  as  big  round  as  the  phial  ;  by  what  means  was  it 
placed  within  it  ?     Though  it  was  treason  to  touch  the  treasures  on  the  mantel-piece. 


t6  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

I  took  down  the  bottle,  and  convinced  my  youthful  mind  that  the  apple  never  passed 
through  its  neck  ;  and  by  means  of  an  attempt  to  unscrew  the  bottom,  I  became 
equally  certain  that  the  apple  did  not  enter  from  below.  I  held  to  the  notion  that 
by  some  occult  means  the  bottle  had  been  made  in  two  pieces,  and  afterwards  united 
in  so  careful  a  manner  that  no  trace  oi  the  join  remained.  I  was  hardly  satisfied 
with  the  theory,  but  as  no  philosopher  was  at  hand  to  suggest  any  other  hypothesis, 
I  let  the  matter  rest.  One  clay,  the  next  summer,  I  chanced  to  see  upon  a  bough 
another  phial,  the  first  cousin  of  my  old  friend,  within  which  was  growing  a  little 
apple  which  had  been  passed  through  the  neck  of  the  bottle  while  it  was  extremely 
small.  "  Nature  well  known,  no  prodigies  remain."  The  grand  secret  was  out.  I 
did  not  cry,  ''Eureka!  Eureka!''  but  I  might  have  done  so  if  I  had  then  been 
versed  in  the  Greek  tongue. 

This  discovery  of  my  juvenile  days  shall  serve  for  an  illustration  at  the  present 
moment.  Let  us  get  the  apples  into  the  bottle  while  they  are  little  :  which,  being 
translated,  signifies,  let  us  bring  the  young  ones  into  the  house  ol  God,  by  means  of 
the  Sabbath-school,  in  the  hope  that,  in  after  days,  they  will  love  the  place  where 
His  honour  dwelleth,  and  there  seek  and  find  eternal  life.  By  our  making  the 
Sabbath  dreary,  many  young  minds  may  be  prejudiced  against  religion  :  we  would  do 
the  reverse.  Sermons  should  not  be  so  long  and  dull  as  to  weary  the  young  folk,  or 
mischief  will  come  of  them  ;  but  with  interesting  preaching  to  secure  attention,  and 
loving  teachers  to  press  home  the  truth  upon  the  youthful  heart,  we  shall  not  have  to 
complain  of  the  next  generation,  that  they  have  "forgotten  their  resting-places." 


In  this  best  parlour  grandfather  would  usually  sit  on  Sunday  mornings,  and 
prepare  himself  for  preaching.  I  was  put  into  the  room  with  him  that  I  might 
be  quiet,  and,  as  a  rule.  The  Evangelieal  Magazme  was  given  me.  This  contained  a 
portrait  of  a  reverend  divine,  and  one  picture  of  a  mission-station.  Grandfather 
often  requested  me  to  be  quiet,  and  always  gave  as  a  reason  that  I  "had  the 
magazine."  I  did  not  at  the  time  perceive  the  full  force  of  the  argument  to  be 
derived  from  that  fact ;  but  no  doubt  my  venerable  relative  knew  more  about  the 
sedative  effect  of  the  magazine  than  I  did.  I  cannot  support  his  opinion  from 
personal  experience.  Another  means  of  stilling  "  the  child  "  was  much  more 
effectual.  I  was  warned  that  perhaps  grandpa  would  not  be  able  to  preach  if  I 
distracted  him,  and  then, — ah  !  then,  what  would  happen,  if  poor  people  did  not 
learn  the  way  to  Heaven  ?  This  made  me  look  at  the  portrait  and  the  missionary- 
station  once  more.  Little  did  I  dream  that  some  other  child  would  one  day  see  my 
face  in  that  wonderful  Evangelical  portrait-gallery. 


H.     SI'URGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 


'7 


When  I  was  a  very  small  boy,  I  was  allowed  to  read  the  Scriptures  at  family 
prayer.  Once  upon  a  time,  when  reading  the  passage  in  Revelation  which  mentions 
the   bottomless  pit,    I   paused,    and   said,    "Grandpa,   what    can  this   mean?"     The 


"^ 


answer  was  kind,  but  unsatisfactory,  "  Pooh,  pooh,  child,  go  on."  The  child, 
however,  intended  to  have  an  explanation,  and  therefore  selected  the  same  chapter 
morning  after  morning,  and  always  halted  at  the  same  verse  to  repeat  the  enquiry, 
hoping  that  by  repetition  he  would  importune  the  good  old  gentleman  into  a  reply. 


1 8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

The  process  was  successful,  for  it  is  by  no  means  the  most  edifying  thing  in  the 
world  to  hear  the  history  of  the  Mother  of  Harlots,  and  the  beast  with  seven  heads, 
every  morning  in  the  week,  Sunday  included,  with  no  sort  of  alternation  either  of 
Psalm  or  Gospel  ;  the  venerable  patriarch  of  the  household  therefore  capitulated  at 
discretion,  with,  "Well,  dear,  what  is  it  that  puzzles  you?"  Now  "the  child"  had 
often  seen  baskets  with  but  very  frail  bottoms,  which  in  course  of  wear  became 
bottomless,  and  allowed  the  fruit  placed  therein  to  drop  upon  the  ground  ;  here,  then, 
was  the  puzzle, — if  the  pit  aforesaid  had  no  bottom,  where  would  all  those  people 
fall  to  who  dropped  out  at  its  lower  end  ? — a  puzzle  which  rather  startled  the 
propriety  of  family  worship,  and  had  to  be  laid  aside  for  explanation  at  some  more 
convenient  season.  Queries  of  the  like  simple  but  rather  unusual  stamp  would 
frequently  break  up  into  paragraphs  of  a  miscellaneous  length  the  Bible-reading  of 
the  assembled  family,  and  had  there  not  been  a  world  of  love  and  license  allowed  to 
the  inquisitive  reader,  he  would  very  soon  have  been  deposed  from  his  office.  As  it 
was,  the  Scriptures  were  not  very  badly  rendered,  and  were  probably  quite  as 
interesting  as  if  they  had  not  been  interspersed  with  original  and  curious  enquiries. 

I  can  remember  the  horror  of  my  mind  when  my  dear  grandfather  told  me  what 
his  idea  of  "  the  bottomless  pit"  was.  There  is  a  deep  pit,  and  the  soul  is  falling 
down, — oh,  how  fast  it  is  falling  !  There  !  the  last  ray  of  light  at  the  top  has 
disappeared,  and  it  falls  on — on — on,  and  so  it  goes  on  falling — on — on — on  for  a 
thousand  years  !  "  Is  it  not  getting  near  the  bottom  yet  ?  Won't  it  stop  ?  "  No,  no, 
the  cry  is,  "  On — on — on."  "  I  have  been  falling  a  million  years  ;  am  I  not  near  the 
bottom  yet  ?  "  No,  you  are  no  nearer  the  bottom  yet  ;  it  is  "  the  boi/om/ess  pit."  It 
is  on — on — on,  and  so  the  soul  goes  on  falling  perpetually  into  a  deeper  depth  still, 
falling  for  ever  into  "  the  bottomless  pit  "- — on — on — on — into  the  pit  that  has  no 
bottom  !     Woe,  without  termination,  without  hope  of  its  coming  to  a  conclusion  ! 


In  my  grandfather's  garden  there  was  a  fine  old  hedge  of  yew,  of  considerable 
length,  which  was  clipped  and  trimmed  till  it  made  quite  a  wall  of  verdure.  Behind 
it  was  a  wide  grass  walk,  which  looked  upon  the  fields  ;  the  grass  was  kept  mown, 
so  as  to  make  pleasant  walking.  Here,  ever  since  the  old  Puritanic  chapel  was  built, 
godly  divines  had  walked,  and  prayed,  and  meditated.  My  grandfather  was  wont 
to  use  it  as  his  study.  Up  and  down  it  he  would  walk  when  preparing  his  sermons, 
and  always  on  Sabbath-days' when  it  was  fair,  he  had  half-an-hour  there  before 
preaching.  To  me,  it  seemed  to  be  a  perfect  paradise  ;  and  being  forbidden  to  stay 
there  when  grandfather  was  meditating,  I  viewed  it  with  no  small  degree  of  awe. 
I  love  to  think  of  the  green  and  quiet  walk  at  this  moment ;  but  I  was  once  shocked 
and    even    horrified    by    hearing  a  farming    man    remark    concerning    this    sanctum 


SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGKAl'IlY. 


19 


sanctorum,  "  It  'ud  grow  a  many  'taturs  if  it  wor  ploughed  up.  "  What  cared  he  for 
holy  memories  ?  What  were  meditation  and  contemplation  to  him  ?  Is  it  not  the 
chief  end  of  man  to  grow  potatoes,  and  eat  them  ?  Such,  on  a  larger  scale,  would  be 
an  unconverted  man's  estimate  of  joys  so  elevated  and  refined  as  those  of  Heaven. 
Alphonse,  Karr  tells  a  story  of  a  servant-man  who  asked  his  master  to  be  allowed  to 
leave  his  cottage,  and  sleep  over  the  stable.  What  was  the  matter  with  his  cottage.? 
"Why,  sir,  the  nightingales  all  around  the  cottage  make  such  a  'jug,  jug,  jug,' at 
night  that  I  cannot  bear  them."     A  man  with  a  musical  ear  would  be  charmed  with 


■v,>. 


THE   \'EW   HEDGE,    STAMBOURNE. 


the  nightingales'  song,  but  here  was  a  man  without  a  musical  soul  who  found  the 
sweetest  notes  a  nuisance.  This  is  a  feeble  image  of  the  incapacity  of  unregenerate 
man  for  the  enjoyments  of  the  world  to  come,  and  as  he  is  incapable  of  enjoying 
them,  so  is  he  incapable  of  longing  for  them. 

*  #  *  # 

While  my  grandfather  was  preacher  at  the  meeting-house,  Mr.  Hopkins  was 
Rector  at  the  church.  They  preached  the  same  gospel,  and  without  surrendering 
their  principles,  were  great  friends.  The  Bible  Society  held  its  meetings  alternately 
in  connection  with  the  church  and  the  meetinsf-house.  At  times,  the  leading  resident 
went  to  church  in  the  morning,  and  to  chapel  in  the  afternoon  ;  and,  when  I  was  a 
boy,  I   have,  on   Monday,  gone   to  the    Squire's   to  tea,   with   Mr.   Hopkins  and  my 


20  C.     H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

grandfather.  The  glory  of  that  tea-party  was  that  we  lour,  the  three  old  gentlemen, 
and  the  little  boy,  all  ate  sugared  bread  ami  butler  together  for  a  treat.  The  sugar 
was  very  brown,  but  the  young  boy  was  very  pleased,  and  the  old  boys  were  merry 
also.      Yes,  Stambourne  had  its  choice  pleasures  ! 

It  is  pleasant  to  read  of  the  harmony  between  these  two  men  of  God  :  they 
increased  in  mutual  esteem  as  they  increased  in  years.  As  Mr.  Hopkins  had  more 
of  the  meat,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  more  of  the  mouths,  the  Rector  did  not  forget  to 
help  his  friend  in  divers  quiet  ways  ;  such  as  a  five-pound  note  for  a  sick  daughter  to 
go  to  the  sea-side,  and  presents  of  comforts  in  illness.  On  one  occasion,  it  is  said 
that,  having  a  joint  of  beef  on  the  Rectory  table,  the  clergyman  cut  it  in  halves,  and 
sent  his  man  on  horseback  with  one  half  of  it  to  the  Independent  Parsonage,  while  it 
was  yet  hot, — a  kind  of  joke  not  often  practised  between  established  and  dissenting 

ministers. 

*  *  *  # 

In  the  front  of  the  house,  towards  the  left,  nearly  hidden  by  a  shrub,  is  a  very 
important  window,  for  it  let  light  into  the  room  wherein  were  the  oven,  the  mangle, 
and,  best  of  all,  the  kneading-trough.  How  often  have  I  gone  to  that  kneading- 
trough  ;  for  it  had  a  little  shelf  in  it,  and  there  would  be  placed  ''  something  for  the 
child  I "  A  bit  of  pastry,  which  was  called  by  me,  according  to  its  size,  a  pig  or  a 
rabbit,  which  had  little  ears,  and  two  currants  for  eyes,  was  carefully  placed  in  that 
sacred  shrine,  like  the  manna  in  the  ark.  Dear  grandmother,  how  much  you 
laboured  to  spoil  that  "  child  "  !  Yet  your  memory  is  more  dear  to  him  than  that  of 
wiser  folks,  who  did  not  spoil  "  the  child."  Do  you  now  look  down  from  your 
mansion  above  upon  your  petted  grandson  ?  Do  you  feel  as  if  he  would  have  been 
better  it  you  had  been  sour  and  hard  ?  Not  a  bit  of  it.  Aunt  Ann,  who  had  a  finger 
in  it  all,  would  spoil  "the  child"  again  if  she  had  a  chance.  I  have  put  in  such  an 
approach  to  a  portrait  of  my  grandmother  as  I  could  find  :  it  was  taken  by  some 
travelling  artist  who  visited  the  district,  and  took  off  several  of  the  family. 

The  dairy  at  the  back  of  the  house  was  by  no  means  a  bad  place  for  a  cheese- 
cake, or  for  a  drink  of  cool  milk.      It  makes  one  think  of  th-e  hymn, — - 

"  I  have  been  there  ;  and  still  would  go." 

The  cupboard  under  the  stairs,  where  they  kept  the  sand  for  the  floors,  would 
be  a  real  Old  Curiosity  Shop  nowadays  ;  but  there  it  was,  and  great  was  the  use  of 
it  to  the  cottagers  around. 

There  was  a  sitting-room  at  the  back  of  the  house,  where  the  family  met  for 
meals.  In  that  which  looks  like  a  blank  side  in  our  picture  there  certainly  was  a 
window  looking  out  upon  the  garden  ;  perhaps  it  was  a  litde  further  back  than  the 
picture  goes.     A  very  pleasant  outlook  there  was  from  that  window  down  the  green 


C.      H.      SrURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


21 


garden  paths,  and  over  the  hedge  into  the  road.  When  I  last  saw  the  "  keeping- 
room  ",  a  bit  of  ivy  had  forced  its  way  through  the  lath  and  plaster,  and  had  been 
trained  along  the  inside  of  the  room  ;  but  in  my  childish  days  we  were  not  so  verdant. 
I  remember  a  mark  on  the  paper  which  had  been  made  by  the  finger  of  one  of  my 
uncles,  so  they  told  me,  when  one  year  the  flour  was  so  bad  that  it  turned  into  a 
paste,    or  pudding,    inside   the   loaf,    and   could   not   be   properly   made   into   bread. 


MY  GRANDMOTHER. 


History  has  before  this  been  learned  from  handwritings  on  the  wall.  The  times  of 
the  old  Napoleon  wars,  and  of  the  Corn  Laws,  must  often  have  brought  straitness  of 
bread  into  the  household  ;  and  a  failure  in  the  yield  of  the  little  farm  made  itself  felt 
in  the  family. 

There  was  a  mysterious  jack  over  the  fire-place,  and  with  that  fire-place  itself  I 
was  very  familiar ;  for  candles  were  never  used  extravagantly  in  grandfather's  house. 


22  C.      H.      STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

and  if  anyone  went  out  of  the  room,  and  took  the  candle  with  him,  it  was  just  a 
little  darker,  not  very  much  ;  and  if  one  wished  to  read,  the  fire-li^ht  was  the  only 
resort.  There  were  mould  candles  now  and  then  in  the  best  room,  but  that  was  only 
on  very  high  days  and  holidays.  My  opinion,  derived  from  personal  observation, 
was  that  all  every-day  candles  were  made  of  rushes  and  tallow. 

Our  young  readers  in  London  and  other  large  towns  have  probably  never  seen 
a  pair  of  snuffers,  much  less  the  flint  and  steel  with  which  a  light  had  to  be  painfully 
obtained  by  the  help  of  a  tinder-bo.x  and  a  brimstone  match.  What  a  job  on  a  cold 
raw  morning  to  strike,  and  strike,  and  see  the  sparks  die  out  because  the  tinder  was 
damp  !  We  are  indeed  living  in  an  age  of  light  when  we  compare  our  incandescent 
gas-burners  and  electric  lights  with  the  rushlights  of  our  childhood.  And  yet  the 
change  is  not  all  one  way  ;  for  if  we  have  more  light,  we  have  also  more  fog  and 
smoke,  at  least  in  London.  Our  "  keeping-room  "  was  a  very  nice,  large,  comfortable 
dining-room,  and  it  had  a  large  store-closet  at  one  end.  You  should  have  seen  the 
best  china!  It  only  came  out  on  state  occasions,  but  it  was  very  marvellous  in  "  the 
child's  "  eyes. 

A  quaint  old  winding  stair  led  to  the  upper  chambers.  The  last  time  I  occupied 
the  best  bedroom,  the  floor  appeared  anxious  lo  go  out  of  the  window,  at  least,  it 
inclined  that  way.  There  seemed  to  be  a  chirping  of  birds  very  near  my  pillow  in  the 
morning,  and  I  discovered  that  swallows  had  built  outside  the  plaster,  and  sparrows 
had  found  a  hole  which  admitted  them  inside  of  it,  that  there  they  might  lay  their 
young.  It  is  not  always  that  one  can  lie  in  bed  and  study  ornithology.  I  confess 
that  I  liked  all  this  rural  life,  and  the  old  chintz  bed-furniture,  and  the  paper  round 
the  looking-glass  cut  in  the  furm  of  horse-chestnut  leaves  and  dahlias,  and  the  tottery 
old  mansion  altogether. 


The  Boy  among  the  Books. 

I  am  afraid  I  am  amusing  myself  rather  than  my  reader,  and  so  I  w  ill  not  weary 
him  with  more  than  this  one  bit  more  of  rigmarole  just  now.  But  there  was  one 
place  upstairs  which  I  cannot  omit,  even  at  the  risk  of  being  wearisome.  Opening 
out  of  one  of  the  bedrooms,  there  was  a  little  chamber  of  which  the  window  had 
been  blocked  up  through  that  wretched  window-duty.  When  the  original  founder  of 
Stambourne  Meeting  quitted  the  Church  of  England,  to  form  a  separate  congrega- 
tion, he  would  seem  to  have  been  in  possession  of  a  fair  estate,  and  the  house 
was  quite  a  noble  one  for  those  times.  Before  the  lioht-excludino'  tax  had  come  into 
operation,  that  little  room  was  the  minister's  study  and  closet  for  prayer;  and  a  very 
nice  cosy  room,  too.  In  my  time,  it  was  a  dark  den  ; — but  it  contained  books,  and  this 
made  it  a  gold  mine  to  me.     Therein  was  fulfilled  the  promise,  "  I  will  give  thee  the 


C.      H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  23 

treasures  of  darkness."  Some  of  these  were  enormous  folios,  such  as  a  boy  could 
hardly  lift.  Here  I  first  struck  up  acquaintance  with  the  martyrs,  and  specially  with 
"Old  Bonner",  who  burned  them;  next,  with  Bunyan  and  his  "Pilgrim";  and 
further  on,  with  the  great  masters  of  Scriptural  theology,  with  whom  no  moderns 
are  worthy  to  be  named  in  the  same  day.  Even  the  old  editions  of  their  works,  with 
their  margins  and  old-fashioned  notes,  are  precious  to  me.  It  is  easy  to  tell  a  real 
Puritan  book  even  by  its  shape  and  by  the  appearance  of  the  type.  I  confess  that  I 
harbour  a  prejudice  against  nearly  all  new  editions,  and  cultivate  a  preference  for  the 
originals,  even  though  they  wander  about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,  or  are  shut 
up  in  the  hardest  of  boards.  It  made  my  eyes  water,  a  short  time  ago,  to  see  a 
number  of  these  old  books  in  the  new  Manse  :  I  wonder  whethe-r  some  other  boy 
will  love  them,  and  live  to  revive  that  grand  old  divinity  which  will  yet  be  to  England 
her  balm  and  benison. 

Out  of  that  darkened  room  I  fetched  those  old  authors  when  I  was  yet  a  youth, 
and  never  was  I  happier  than  when  in  their  company.  Out  of  the  present  contempt, 
into  which  Puritanism  has  fallen,  many  brave  hearts  and  true  will  fetch  it,  by  the 
help  of  God,  ere  many  years  have  passed.  Those  who  have  daubed  up  the  windows 
Avill  yet  be  surprised  to  see  Heaven's  light  beaming  on  the  old  truth,  and  then 
breaking  forth  from  it  to  their  own  confusion. 

=:f  *  *  # 

(The  following  incident  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  childhood's  days  is  here  given  as  it 
Avas  related  by  his  "  Aunt  Ann  "  on  the  occasion  when  he  visited  Stambourne  in 
the  summer  of  1887. 

One  of  the  members  of  the  church  at  Stambourne,  named  Roads,  was  in  the 
habit  of  frequenting  the  public-house  to  have  his  "drop  of  beer",  and  smoke  his 
pipe,  greatly  to  the  grief  of  his  godly  pastor,  who  often  heaved  a  sigh  at  the  thought 
of  his  unhappy  member's  inconsistent  conduct.  Little  Charles  had  doubtless  noticed 
his  grandfather's  grief  on  this  account,  and  laid  it  to  heart.  One  day  he  suddenly 
exclaimed,  in  the  hearing  of  the  good  old  gentleman,  "  I'll  kill  old  Roads,  that  I 
will!"  "Hush,  hush!  my  dear,"  said  the  good  pastor,  "you  mustn't  talk  so;  it's 
very  wrong,  you  know,  and  you'll  get  taken  up  by  the  police,  if  you  do  anything 
wrong."  "  I  shall  not  do  anything  bad  ;  but  I'll  kill  him  though,  that  I  will."  Well, 
the  good  grandfather  was  puzzled,  but  yet  perfectly  sure  that  the  child  would  not  do 
anything  which  he  knew  to  be  wrong,  so  he  let  it  pass  with  some  half-mental  remark 
about  "that  strange  child."  Shortly  after,  however,  the  above  conversation  was 
brought  to  his  mind  by  the  child  coming  in  and  saying,  "  I've  killed  old  Roads  ; 
he'll  never  grieve  my  dear  grandpa  any  more."  "  My  dear  child,"  said  the  good  man^ 
"  what  have  you  done  ?  Where  have  you  been  ?  "  "I  haven't  been  doing  any  harm, 
grandpa,"  said  the  child  ;   "  I've  been  about  the  Lord's  work,  that's  all." 


24  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

Nothing  more  could  be  elicited  from  little  Charles  ;  but,  before  long,  the  mystery- 
was  cleared  up.  "  Old  Roads  "  called  to  see  his  pastor,  and,  with  downcast  looks 
and  evident  sorrow  of  heart,  narrated  the  story  of  how  he  had  been  killed,  somewhat 
in  this  fashion  : — "  I'm  very  sorry  indeed,  my  dear  pastor,  to  have  caused  you  such 
grief  and  trouble.  It  was  very  wrong,  I  know  ;  but  I  always  loved  you,  and  wouldn't 
have  done  it  if  I'd  only  thought."  Encouraged  by  the  good  pastor's  kindly  Christian 
words,  he  went  on  with  his  story.  "  I  was  a-sitting  in  the  public  just  having  my  pipe 
and  mug  of  beer,  when  that  child  comes  in, — to  think  an  old  man  like  me  should  be 
took  to  task,  and  reproved  by  a  bit  of  a  child  like  that  I  Well,  he  points  at  me  with 
his  finger,  just  so,  and  says,  '  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah  .-*  sitting  with  the  ungodly  ; 
and  you  a  member  of  a  church,  and  breaking  your  pastor's  heart.  I'm  ashamed  of 
you!  I  wouldn't  break  my  pastor's  heart,  I'm  sure.'  And  then  he  walks  away. 
Well,  I  did  feel  angry  ;  but  I  knew  it  was  all  true,  and  I  was  guilty  ;  so  I  put  down 
my  pipe,  and  did  not  touch  my  beer,  but  hurried  away  to  a  lonely  spot,  and  cast 
myself  down  before  the  Lord,  confessing  my  sin  and  begging  for  forgiveness.  And 
I  do  know  and  believe  the  Lord  in  mercy  pardoned  me  ;  and  now  I've  come  to  ask 
you  to  forgive  me  ;  and  I'll  never  grieve  you  any  more,  my  dear  pastor."  It  need 
not  be  said  that  the  penitent  was  freely  forgiven,  and  owned  a  brother  in  the  Lord, 
and  the  Lord  was  praised  for  the  wonderful  way  in  which  it  had  all  come  about.) 

(The  genuineness  of  the  backslider's  restoration  is  evident  from  the  testimony 
of  Mr.  Houchin,  the  minister  at  Stambourne  who  succeeded  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
grandfather,  and  who  has  also  ascertained  from  official  records  the  correct  way  of 
spelling  "Old  Roads'"  name.      Mr.  Houchin  writes: — 

"  Thomas  Roads  was  one  of  the  old  men  of  the  table-pew, — an  active,  lively, 
little  man,  but  quite  illiterate, — not  much  above  a  labourer,  but  he  kept  a  pony  and 

cart,  and  did  a  little  buying  and  selling  on  his  own  account I  found  him 

an  earnest  and  zealous  Christian,  striving  to  be  useful  in  every  way  possible  to  him  ; 
especially  in  the  prayer-meetings  and  among  the  young  people,  opening  his  house 
for  Christian  conversation  and  prayer.  He  only  lived  about  four  years  of  my  time, 
and  was  sustained  with  a  cheerful  confidence  to  the  end.  When  near  death,  on  my 
taking  up  the  Bible  to  read  and  pray  with  him,  he  said,  '  I  have  counted  the  leaves, 
sir.'  I  said,  'Why  !  what  did  you  do  that  for.-*'  and  he  replied,  '  I  never  could  read 
a  word  of  it,  and  thought  I  would  know  how  many  leaves  there  were.'  This  was 
very  pathetic,  and  revealed  much.  We  had  a  good  hope  of  him,  and  missed  him 
greatly.") 


CHAPTER    IV. 


Stambourttt  ftlcctlng^IjDttsc. 


•^■^llT  was  a  rare  old  chapel.  I  wish  it  could  have  remained  for  ever  as 
I  used  to  know  it  :  let  me  see  if  I  can  sketch  it  with  my  pen. 
When  I  was  a  boy  of  twelve,  I  made  this  draw^ing  of  the  back  of 
the  old  meeting-house.  I  have  been  welcomed  at  a  farmer's  table 
on  the  promise  of  making  a  picture  of  his  house.  I  am  rather 
glad  that  this  pencil  memorial  was  preserved  by  my  dear  Aunt 
Ann  ;  but  I  must  now,  forty-five  years  after,  use  the  pen  on  the  same  subject. 


-  ^--/^ 


»>■:' 


1%f 

> 

UACK    VIEW   OF  THE   OLD    MEETING-HOUSE,    STAMBOURNE. 


The  pulpit  was  glorious  as  "the  tower  of  the  flock."  Over  it  hung  a  huge 
sounding-board  ;  I  used  to  speculate  as  to  what  would  become  of  grandfather  if  it 
ever  dropped  down  upon  him.  I  thought  of  my  Jack-in-the-box,  and  hoped  that  my 
dear  grandpapa  would  never  be  shut  down  and  shut  up  in  such  a  fashion.  At  the 
back  of  the  pulpit  was  a  peg  to  hold  the  minister's  hat  :  inside,  there  was  room  for 
two,  for  I  have  sat  there   with  grandfather  when  quite  a  little  boy  ;  but  I  guess  that 


26  c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography. 

two  grown-up  people   would  have  found   it  "  quite  too  small  enough,"  as  my  Dutch 
friend  puts  it. 

Just  below,  and  in  front  of  the  pulpit,  was  the  table-pew,  wherein  sat  the  elders 
of  the  congregation,  the  men  of  gracious  "light  and  leading."  There  Uncle 
H addon  generally  stood,  and  gave  out  the  hymns  and  the  notices  ;  and  from  that 
semi-sacred  region  was  raised  the  block  of  wood  by  which  to  the  singers  upstairs  the 
metre  of  the  hymn  was  made  known, — Common,  Long,  or  Short.  There  were  big 
tomb-stones  forming  the  bottoni  of  this  large  pew,  which  took  its  name  from 
containing  the  table,  on  which  were  spread  the  bread  and  wine  on  days  zvhen 
they  had  the  ordinance :  I  think  that  was  the  correct  phrase  when  our  good  folks 
intended  "the  communion."  I  don't  remember  hearing  them  style  infant  baptism 
"  the  ordinance  "  ;  but  I  suppose  they  thought  it  to  be  one.  A  few  had  qualms  upon 
the  question,  and  were  baptized  quietly  at  some  Baptist  Chapel. 

The  pews  in  the  middle  were  mostly  square  in  form,  and  roomy.  Those  on 
either  side  were  aristocratic,  and  lined  with  green  baize,  lor  the  most  part  very  faded. 
In  some  cases,  bfass  rods  carried  up  little  curtains,  which  made  the  family  pew  quite 
private,  and  shut  out  all  sights  but  that  of  the  grave  and  reverend  senior  who 
dispensed  to  us  the  Word  of  Life.  There  were  flaps  inside  the  pew  so  as  not  to  lose 
the  space  where  the  door  opened,  and  flaps  tor  the  poor  to  sit  upon  in  the  aisle  outside 
of  these  pews  ;  and  when  the  time  came  to  go  home,  there  was  such  a  lifting  up  and 
letting  down  of  flaps,  and  flap-seats,  within  the  pew,  and  without  the  pew,  as  one 
never  does  see  in  these  degenerate  days.  A  little  boy  on  a  hassock  on  the  floor  of 
one  of  these  holy  loose-boxes  ought  to  have  been  good  ;  and  no  doubt  was  as  good 
there  as  anywhere,  especially  if  he  had  a  peppermint  to  suck,  and  nobody  to 
play  with. 

I  cannot  forget  the  big  clock  which  had  a  face  outside  the  chapel  as  well  as  one 
inside.  When  his  long  body  had  been  newly  grained,  he  seemed  a  very  suitable 
piece  of  furniture  for  a  nice,  clean,  old-fashioned  Puritan  meeting-house.  If  I  am 
rightly  informed,  the  veteran  time-keeper  was  bought  by  the  miller,  and  is  now  upon 
one  of  his  sheds.     To  what  strange  uses  we  may  come  at  last ! 

The  people  were  mainly  real  Essex:  they  talked  of  places  down  in  "the  Shires" 
as  if  they  were  quite  foreign  parts;  and  young  fellows  who  went  down  into  "the 
Hundreds"  were  e.xplorers  of  a  respectable  order  of  hardihood.  They  loved  a  good 
sermon,  and  would  say,  "  Mr.  Spurgeon,  I  heard  you  well  this  morning."  I  thought 
the  good  man  had  preached  well,  but  their  idea  was  not  so  much  to  his  credit  ;  they 
judged  that  they  had  heard  him  well,  and  there's  something  in  the  different  way  of 
putting  it ;  at  any  rate,  it  takes  from  the  preacher  all  ground  of  glorying  in  what  he 
has  done.  They  were  a  people  who  could  and  would  hear  the  gospel,  but  I  don't 
think  they  would  have  put  up  with  anything  else.     They  were  as  apt  at  criticism  as 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOIilOGRArHV.  2  7 

ht^re  and  there  one  :  some  of  them  were  very  wise  in  their  remari<s,  and  some 
were  otherwise.  Well  do  I  remember  an  occasion  upon  which  the  preacher  had 
treated  "  the  tares "  after  the  manner  of  the  East,  and  was  altogether  right  in  so 
doing;  but  they  said,  "  He  wouldn't  know  a  tare  if  he  saw  one.  It  was  painful  to 
hear  a  man  talk  so  ignorant.  To  say  that  you  couldn't  tell  wheat  from  tares  when 
they  were  a-growing  was  ridiculous."  The  rustic  critics  were  wrong  for  once  ;  but 
on  matters  of  doctrine  or  experience,  you  would  have  found  them  quite  a  match 
for  you. 

I  do  not  think  our  folks  were  anything  like  so  superstitious  and  weak  as  the 
peasants  I  came  to  know  ten  years  after  in  Cambridgeshire.  Tales  of  white  wizards 
and  witches  were  unknown  to  my  juvenile  mind  ;  though  I  heard  enough  of  them 
when  my  age  was  between  sixteen  and  twenty.  Then  one  of  my  best  workers  told  me 
that  a  witch  had  dragged  a  cat  down  his  naked  back  by  its  tail  :  he  did  not  show  me 
the  marks,  but  he  fully  believ^ed  in  the  feline  operation.  We  cannot  forget  that  in 
the  villacre  of  Hedineham,  which  is  not  more  than  five  miles  from  .Stambourne,  a 
murder  was  committed  so  late  as  1865,  which  grew  out  of  popular  belief  in  witch- 
craft. The  old  men  I  talked  with,  as  a  little  child,  were,  I  am  sure,  far  above  all 
such  nonsense  ;  and  upon  many  a  Biblical,  or  political,  or  ecclesiastical,  or  moral 
subject,  they  would  have  uttered  great  and  weighty  thoughts  in  their  own  savoury 
Essex  dialect. 

There  were,  no  doubt,  in  Stambourne  a  few  rough  fellows  who  did  not  go  to 
any  place  of  worship  ;  but  those  who  came  to  the  meeting-house  were  the  great 
majority,  and  the  plain,  practical,  common-sense  sermons  which  they  heard  had  lifted 
them  out  of  that  dense  superstition  which  still  benumbs  the  brains  of  too  many  of  the 
East  Anglian  peasantry. 

The  Singing  at  Stambourne  Meeting-hou.se. 
The  prayer-meetings  during  the  week  were  always  kept  up  ;  but  at  certain 
seasons  of  the  year  grandfather  and  a  few  old  women  were  all  that  could  be  relied 
upon.  It  occurred  to  me,  in  riper  years,  to  ask  my  venerated  relative  how  the 
singing  was  maintained.  "  Why,  grandfather,"  said  I,  "we  always  sang,  and  yet  you 
don't  know  any  tunes,  and  certainly  the  old  ladies  didn't."  "  Why,  child,"  said  he, 
"there's  one  Common  metre  tune  which  is  all,  '  Hum  Ha,  Hum  Ha,' and  I  could 
manage  that  very  well."  "  But  how  'if  it  happened  to  be  a  Long  or  Short  metre 
hymn?"  "Why,  then,  I  either  put  in  more  Hum  Ha's,  or  else  I  left  some  out  ;  but 
we  managed  to  praise  the  Lord."  Ah,  shade  of  my  dear  old  grandsire  !  your 
grandson  is  by  no  means  more  gifted  as  to  crotchets  and  quavers  than  you  were,  and 
to  this  day  the  only  solo  he  has  ever  ventured  to  sing  is  that  same  universally  useful 


28  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

tune !  *       Even   that    he  has  abandoned ;    for  audiences    are    growing    either    more 
intelligent  or  less  tolerant  than  they  used  to  be. 

My  grandfather  once  ventured  upon  publishing  a  volume  of  hymns.  I  never 
heard  anyone  speak  in  their  favour,  or  argue  that  they  ought  to  have  been  sung  in 
the  congregation.  In  that  volume  he  promised  a  second,  if  the  first  should  prove 
acceptable.  We  forgive  him  the  first  collection  because  he  did  not  inflict  another. 
The  meaning  was  good,  but  the  dear  old  man  paid  no  attention  to  the  mere  triviality 
of  rhyme.  We  dare  not  quote  even  a  verse.  It  may  be  among  the  joys  of  Heaven 
for  my  venerated  grandsire,  that  he  can  now  compose  and  sing  new  songs  unto  the 
Lord.  When  we  say  we  dare  not  quote,  we  do  not  refer  to  the  meaning  or  the 
doctrine  :  in  that  respect,  we  could  quote  every  line  before  the  Westminster 
Assembly,  and  never  fear  that  a  solitary  objection  would  or  could  be  raised. 

The  Stambourne  style  of  singing  led  me  into  trouble  when  I  returned  to  my 
home.  The  notion  had  somehow  entered  my  little  head  that  the  last  line  of  the 
hymn  must  always  be  repeated,  and  grandfather  had  instilled  into  me  as  a  safe  rule 
that  I  must  never  be  afraid  to  do  what  I  believ^ed  to  be  right  ;  .so,  when  I  went  to  the 
chapel  where  my  parents  attended,  I  repeated  the  last  line  whether  the  congregation 
did  so  or  not.  It  required  a  great  deal  of  punishment  to  convince  me  that  a  little 
boy  must  do  what  his  parents  think  to  be  right  ;  and  though  my  grandfather  made  a 
mistake  in  that  particular  instance,  I  have  always  been  grateful  to  him  for  teaching 
me  to  act  according  to  mv  belief  wh'atever  the  consequences  might  be. 

I  recollect,  wbcn  first  I  left  ni)-  grandfather,  how  grieved  I  was  to  part  from  him  ; 
it  was  the  great  sorrow  of  my  little  life.  Grandfather  seemed  very  sorry,  too,  and  we 
had  a  cry  together;  he  did  not  quite  know  what  to  say  to  me,  but  he  said,  "  Now 
child,  to-night,  when  the  moon  shines  at  Colchester,  and  you  look  at  it,  don't  forget 
that  it  is  the  same  moon  your  grandfather  will  be  looking  at  from  Stambourne  ;  "  and 
for  years,  as  a  child,  I  used  to  love  the  moon  because  I  thought  that  my  grand- 
father's eyes  and  my  own  somehow  met  there  on  the  moon. 

*  =;;=  *  * 

Outside  the  Meeting,  near  that  long  side,  which  was  really  the  front,  there  stood 
a  horsing-block.  Ladies  went  up  the  steps,  and  found  themselves  on  a  platform  of 
the  same  height  as  their  horse's  back.  It  was  a  commendable  invention:  how  often 
have  I  wished  for  something  of  the  sort  when  I  have  had  to  climb  my  Rosinante  ! 
To  me,  this  horsing-block  was  dear  for  quite  another  reason.  The  grand  old  lime 
trees  shed  their  leaves  in  profusion,  and  when  these  were  swept  up,  the  old  chapel- 
keeper  would  ram  a  large  quantity  of  them  under  the  horsing-block.  When  I  had 
pulled  out  about  as  many   as  fitted   my  size,  I  could  creep  in  ;  and  there  lie  hidden 

_^ • 

*  Tho33  who  heard  it  sung  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  June  4th.  i8Sg.  on  the  occasion  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  address  on  "  Old 
Fugal  Tunes,"  are  never  hkely  to  forget  the  enthusiasm  evoked  by  the  beloved  Pastor's  solo,  which  was  rapturously  encored. 


H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOIJIOGRAPHV. 


29 


beyond  fear  of  discovery.  My  friend,  Mr.  Manton  Smith,  has  written  a  book  called 
Stray  Leaves,  and  another  which  he  has  entitled  More  Stray  Leaves;  I  entered  into 
his  work  before  he  was  born.  So  good  was  the  hiding-place,  that  it  remained  a 
marvel  where  "  the  child  "  could  be.  The  child  would  get  alone  ;  but  where  he  went 
to,  his  guardian  angels  knew,  but  none  on  earth  could  tell.  Only  a  little  while  ago, 
my  dear  old  Aunt  Ann  said,  "  But,  Charles,  where  did  you  get  to  when  you  were 
such  a  little  child  ?  We  used  to  look  everywhere  for  you,  but  we  never  found  you 
till  you  came  walking  in  all  by  yourself"  The  horsing-block  was  the  usual  haunt 
when  there  were  leaves,  and  an  old  tomb  would  serve  at  other  times.  No,  I  did 
not  get  into  the  grave  ;  but  it  had  a  sort  of  altar  tomb  above  it,  and  one  of  the  side 
stones  would  move  easily,  so  that  I  could  get  inside,  and  then  by  setting  the  slab  of 
stone  back  again  I  was  enclosed  in  a  sort  of  large  box  where  nobody  would  dream  of 
looking  for   me.      1   went  to  the  aforesaid  tomb  to  show  my  aunt  my  hiding-place  ; 


PRESENT    MEETING-HOUSE  AND   GRAVEY.\RD,    STAMBOURNE. 


but  the  raised  altar  was  gone,  and  the  top  of  it,  with  the  name  of  the  deceased 
thereon,  was  laid  flat  on  the  ground.  Some  of  the  side-stones,  which  formerly  held 
up  the  memorial,  were  used  to  make  door-steps  when  the  buildings  were  put  into 
their  present  state  of  repair,  and  the  top  stone  was  made  to  occupy  the  same  space, 
only  it  lay  Bat  upon  the  ground,  instead  of  being  raised  some  two  feet  above  it. 

Still,  I  remembered  well  the  place,  and  what  the  tomb  had  formerly  been.      How 


30  C.     H.     SrURGF.ON  S     AUTOIlIOGRArHV. 

often  have  I  listened  to  the  good  people  calliny  me  by  my  name  !  I  heard  their  feet 
close  to  my  den,  but  I  was  wicked  enough  still  to  be  "lost",  though  the  time  for 
meals  was  gone. '''  Dreaming  of  days  to  come  befell  me  every  now  and  then  as  a 
/  child,  and  to  be  quite  alone  was  my  boyish  heaven.  Yet,  there  was  a  seventh  heaven 
above  that  :  let  me  but  hear  the  foxhounds,  and  see  the  red  coats  of  their  pursuers, 
and  I  had  seen  the  climax  of  delight.  When  the  huntsmen  did  come  down  by 
Stambourne  woods,  it  was  a  season  of  delirious  excitement  to  others  besides  "  the 
child."  At  other  times,  all  the  women  and  children  were  solemnly  working  at  straw- 
plait  ;  but  what  they  did  when  the  fox  went  by  I  will  not  venture  upon  guessing,  for 
I  don't  remember  what  I  did  myself  The  woods  at  the  back  of  the  chapel  had  a 
charming  mystery  about  them  to  my  little  soul,  for  who  could  tell  but  a  fox  was 
there  ?  As  a  child,  when  asked  what  I  would  be,  I  usually  said  I  was  going  to  be  a 
huntsman.  A  fine  profession,  truly !  Many  young  men  have  the  same  idea  of  being 
parsons  as  I  had  of  being  a  huntsman, — a  mere  childish  notion  that  they  would  like 
the  coat  and  the  horn-blowing  ;  the  honour,  the  respect,  the  ease, — and  they  are 
probably  even  fools  enough  to  think — the  riches  of  the  ministry.  (Ignorant  beings 
they  must  be  if  they  look  for  wealth  in  connection  with  the  Baptist  ministry.)  The 
fascination  of  the  preacher's  office  is  very  great  to  weak  minds,  and  hence  I  earnestly 
caution  all  young  men  not  to  mistake  whim  for  inspiration,  and  a  childish  preference 
for  a  call  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

I  once  learnt  a  lesson,  while  thus  fox-hunting,  which  has  been  very  useful  to  me 
as  a  preacher  of  the  gospel.  Ever  since  the  day  I  was  sent  to  shop  with  a  basket, 
and  purchased  a  pound  of  tea,  a  quarter-of-a-pound  ol  mustard,  and  three  pounds  of 
rice,  and  on  my  way  home  saw  a  pack  of  hounds,  and  felt  it  necessary  to  follow  them 
over  hedge  and  ditch  (as  I  always  did  when  I  was  a  boy),  and  found,  when  I  reached 
home,  that  all  the  goods  were  amalgamated, — tea,  mustard,  and  rice, — into  one  awful 
mess,  I  have  understood  the  necessity  of  packing  up  my  subjects  in  good  stout 
parcels,  bound  rountl  with  the  thread  of  my  discourse  ;  and  this  makes  me  keep  to 
firstly,  secondly,  and  thirdly,  however  unfashionable  that  method  may  now  be. 
People  will  not  drink  mustardy  tea,  nor  will  they  enjoy  muddled-up  sermons,  in 
which  they  cannot  tell  head  from  tail,  because  they  have  neither,  but  are  like 
Mr.  Bright's  Skye  terrier,  whose  head  and  tail  were  both  alike. 

*  *  *  * 

Somehow,  I  don't  think  our  Sunday-school  came  to  so  very,  very  much.  It  was 
a  great  day  when  every  child  brought  his  own  mug,  and  there  was  real  cake,  and  tea, 
or  milk  and  water,  and  an  address  ;  but  that  high  festival  came  but  once  a  year. 
Having  been  on  one  occasion  pressed  into  the  service  when  I  was  still  a  boy,  but 
was  in  Stambourne  on  a  visit,  I  felt  myself  a  failure,  and  I  fancied  that  some  around 
me  were  not  brilliant  successes.      Still,  in  those  early  times,  teaching  children  to  read. 


C.      TI.     SPURGEON's     AUTORIOGRArilY.  31 

and  to  repeat  verses  of  hymns,  antl  to  say  the  Catechism  by  heart,  were  a  good 
beginning.  Dr.  Watts's  Catechism,  which  I  learned  myself,  is  so  simple,  so 
interesting,  so  suggestive,  that  a  better  condensation  of  Scriptural  knowledge  will 
never  be  written  ;  and  the  marvel  is  that  such  a  little  miracle  of  instruction  should 
have  been  laid  aside  by  teachers.  While  I  am  writing,  one  question  and  answer 
come  to  me  with  special  freshness  : — ■ 

"  Who  was  Isaiah  }  " 

"  He  was  that  prophet  who  spake  more  of  Jesus  Christ  than  all  the  rest." 

At  the  distance  of  fifty-three  years,  I  remember  a  litde  book  which  was  read  to 
me  about  a  pious  child  at  Colchester  ;  I  recollect  Janeway's  Token  for  Children,  and 
I  recall  the  bad  conduct  of  some  juveniles  of  my  own  age,  who  not  only  kicked  up 
a  dust,  but  literally  kicked  the  teachers.  Memory  makes  a  selection  as  she  goes 
along ;  and  in  my  case,  the  choice  of  things  retained  is  so  miscellaneous,  that  I 
cannot  discover  my  own  character  by  their  guidance. 

The  week-day  school  for  the  very  juveniles  was  kept  by  old  Mrs.  Burleigh,  and 
to  that  fane  of  useful  knowledge  I  was  sent.  The  only  thing  that  I  remember  was 
that  I  heard  a  good  deal  of  her  son  Gabriel,  and  therefore  asked,  as  a  great  favour, 
that  when  he  came  home  from  the  town  where  he  lived,  he  might  come  and  see  me. 
I  had  my  desire  ;  but  after  all  these  years,  I  have  not  got  over  my  disappointment. 
To  see  Gabriel  !  I  don't  think  I  had  absolutely  reckoned  upon  the  largest  kind  of 
wings  ;  but  wings  certainly,  or  something  otherwise  angelic.  To  see  only  a  young 
man,  a  youth  in  trousers,  with  no  trace  of  cherubim  or  seraphim  about  him,  was  too 
much  of  a  come-down.  "  What's  in  a  n?ime  ?  "  was  a  question  not  yet  known  to  me  ; 
but  no  one  will  ever  need  to  ask  me  now.  Names  are  mere  labels,  and  by  no  means 
proofs  that  the  things  are  there. 

*  *  #  * 

To  come  back  to  the  old  chapel,  the  best  point  about  it  was  the  blessing  which 
rested  on  the  ministry  carried  on  within.  The  dew  of  the  Spirit  from  on  high  never 
left  the  ministry.  Wherever  my  grandfather  went,  souls  were  saved  under  his 
sermons.  My  own  beloved  father.  Rev.  John  Spurgeon,  constantly  reports  to  me 
fresh  instances  of  the  old  gentleman's  usefulness.  When  I  first  of  all  became  a 
preacher,  there  were  persons  who  said,  "  I  heard  your  grandfather,  and  I  would  run 
my  shoes  off  my  feet  any  day  to  hear  a  Spurgeon."  This  was  encouraging. 
Another  told  me  that,  to  hear  my  grandfather  once,  made  his  wing-feathers  grow  a 
foot.  He  could  mount  as  eagles,  after  being  fed  with  such  Heavenly  food.  "  He 
was  always  so  experimental,"  was  the  summing-up  of  one  of  the  most  devout  of 
working-men.  "  You  felt  as  if  he  had  been  inside  of  a  man."  Buildings  may.  perish, 
and  new  shrines  may  succeed  them  ;  but  no  earthly  house  will  accommodate  a 
sounder  or  more  useful  ministry  than  that  of  my  grandtather. 


CHAPTER   V. 


%  ftltmorablc  5Fisit  to  Stamijouruc— JHt.  ftnill's  l^ropljecs- 


HE  story  of  Mr.  Knill's  prophesying  that  I  should  preach  the  gospel 

in  Rowland  Hill's  Chapel,  and  to  the  largest  congregations  in  the 

world,  has  been  regarded  by  many  as  a  legend,  but  it  was  strictly 

true.      Mr.  Knill  took  the  county  of  Essex  in  the  year   1S44,  and 

traversed  the  region   from   town   to  town,   as  a  deputation  for  the 

London  Missionary  Society.     In  the  course  ot  that  journey,  he  spent 

a  little  time  at  Stambourne  Parsonage.     In  his  heart  burned  the  true  missionary  spirit, 

for  he  sought  the  souls  of  young  and  old,  whenever  they  came  in  his  way.     He  was  a 

great  soul-winner,  and  he  soon  spied  out  the  boy.      He  said  to  me,  "  Where  do  you 


V.       \      \\' 


'^<;^— ^-^-'^-'i^ 


34  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

sleep  ?  for  I  want  to  call  you  up  in  the  morning."  I  showed  him  my  little  room,  and 
he  took  good  note  of  it.  At  six  o'clock  he  called  me  up.  There  stood  in  my 
grandfather's  garden  two  arbours  made  of  yew  trees,  cut  into  sugar-loaf  fashion. 
Though  the  old  manse  has  given  way  to  a  new  one,  and  the  old  chapel  has  gone 
also,  yet  the  yew  trees  flourish  as  aforetime.  We  went  into  the  right-hand  arbour, 
and  there,  in  the  sweetest  way,  he  told  me  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  of  the 
blessedness  of  trusting  in  Him  and  loving  Him  in  our  childhood.  With  many  a 
story  he  preached  Christ  to  me,  and  told  me  how  good  God  had  been  to  him,  and 
then  he  prayed  that  I  might  know  the  Lord  and  serve  Him.  He'knelt  down  in  that 
arbour,  and  prayed  for  me  with  his  arms  about  my  neck.  He  did  not  seem  content 
unless  I  kept  with  him  in  the  interval  between  the  services.  He  heard  my  childish 
talk  with  patient  love,  and  repaid  it  with  gracious  instruction.  On  three  successive 
days  he  taught  me,  and  prayed  with  me  ;  and  before  he  had  to  leave,  my  grandfather 
had  come  back  from  the  place  where  he  had  gone  to  preach,  and  all  the  family  were 
gathered  to  morning  prayer.  Then,  in  the  presence  of  them  all,  Mr.  Knill  took  me 
on  his  knee,  and  said,  "  This  child  will  one  day  preach  the  gospel,  and  he  will 
preach  it  to  great  multitudes.  I  am  persuaded  that  he  will  preach  in  the  chapel  of 
Rowland  Hill,  where  (I  think  he  said)  I  am  now  the  minister."  He  spoke  very 
solemnly,  and  called  upon  all  present  to  witness  what  he  said;  Then  he  gave  me 
si.xpence  as  a  reward  ii  I  would  learn  the  hymn, — 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

I  was  made  to  promise  that,  wh'jn  I  preached  in  Rowland  Hill's  Chapel,  that  hymn 
should  be  sung.  Think  of  that  as  a  promise  from  a  child  !  Would  it  ever  be  other 
than  an  idle  dream  ?  Years  flew  by.  After  I  had  begun  for  some  little  time  to 
preach  in  London,  Dr.  Alexander  Fletcher  was  engaged  to  deliver  the  annual 
sermon  to  children  in  .Surrey  Chapel  ;  but  as  he  was  taken  ill,  I  was  asked  in  a 
hurry  to  preach  to  the  children  in  his  stead.  "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  I  will,  if  you  will 
allow  the  children  to  sing,  '  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way.'  I  have  made  a 
promise,  long  ago,  that  so  that  hymn  should  be  sung."  And  so  it  was  :  I  preached 
in  Rowland  Hill's  Chapel,  and  the  hymn  was  sung.  My  emotions  on  that  occasion  I 
cannot  describe,  for  the  word  of  the  Lord's  servant  was  fulfilled.  Still,  I  fancy  that 
Surrey  was  not  the  chapel  which  Mr.  Knill  intended.  How  was  I  to  go  to  the 
country  chapel  ?  All  unsought  by  me,  the  minister  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  which 
was  Mr.  Hill's  summer  residence,  invited  me  to  preach  there.  I  went  on  the 
condition  that  the  congregation  should  sing,  "  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way," — 
which  was  also  done.  To  me  it  was  a  very  wonderful  thing,  and  I  no  more 
understood  at  that  time  how  it  came  to  pass  than  I  understand  to-day  why  the  Lord 
should  be  so  gracious  to  me. 


C.      H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRATHV.  35 

Did  the  words  of  Mr.  Knill  help  to  bring  about  their  own  fulfilment?  I  think. 
so.  I  believed  them,  and  looked  forward  to  the  time  when  1  should  preach  the 
Word  :  I  felt  very  powerfully  that  no  unconverted  person  might  dare  to  enter  the 
ministry  ;  this  made  me,  I  doubt  not,  all  the  more  intent  upon  seeking  salvation,  and 
more  hopeful  of  it,  and  when  by  grace  enabled  to  cast  myself  upon  the  Saviour's 
love,  it  was  not  long  before  my  mouth  began  to  speak  of  His  redemption.  How 
came  that  sober-minded  minister  to  speak  thus  of  one  into  whose  future  God  alone 
could  see  ?  How  came  it  that  he  lived  to  rejoice  with  his  young  brother  in  the 
truth  of  all  that  he  had  spoken  ?  We  think  we  know  the  answer  ;  but  each  reader 
has  a  right  to  his  own  :  so  let  it  rest,  but  not  till  we  have  marked  one  practical  lesson. 
Would  to  God  that  we  were  all  as  wise  as  Richard  Knill,  and  habitually  sowed 
beside  all  waters  !  /  On  the  day  of  his  death,  in  his  eightieth  year,  David  Brainerd 
"  the  apostle  of  the  Indians,"  was  occupied  in  teaching  the  alphabet  to  an  Indian 
child  at  his  bedside.  A  friend  said,  "Why  not  rest  from  your  labours  now.'*" 
"  Because,"  replied  the  man  of  God,  "  I  have  prayed  God  to  render  me  useful  in  my 
sphere,  and  He  has  heard  my  prayers  ;  for  now  that  I  am  unable  to  preach,  He  leaves 
me  strength  enough  to  teach  this  poor  child  his  letters."  /To  despise  no  opportunity 
of  usefulness,  is  a  leading  rule  with  those  who  are  wise  to  win  souls.  Mr.  Knill 
might  very  naturally  have  left  the  minister's  little  grandson  on  the  plea  that  he  had 
other  duties  of  more  importance  than  praying  with  children,  and  yet  who  shall  say 
that  he  did  not  effect  as  much  by  that  act  of  humble  ministry  as  by  dozens  of 
sermons  addressed  to  crowded  audiences  ?  At  any  rate,  to  mc  his  tenderness  in 
considering  the  little  one  was  fraught  with  everlasting  consequences,  and  I  must  ever 
feel  that  his  time  was  well  laid  out.  May  we  do  good  everywhere  as  we  have 
opportunity,  and  results  will  not  be  wanting  ! 

Those  who  are  curious  as  to  further  evidence  of  this  story  will  find  it  in 
Mr.  Birrell's  biography  of  Richard  Knill,  though  scarcely  so  fully  told.  No 
biographer  was  likely  to  know  so  much  about  it  as  myself  ;  but  yet  the  main  facts 
are  the  same. 

^  ^l"  ^  lit- 

The  following  letter  from  Mr.  Knill  to  my  grandfather  is  very  interesting,  as 
showing  how  the  good  man  thought  of  the  matter  : — 

"Chester,  i/th  April,  1855. 
"  Revd.   Mr.   Spurgeon, 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  Perhaps  you  have  forgotten  me  :  but  I  have  not  forgotten  my  visit  to 
you  and  your  ancient  chapel,  and  the  fine  trees  which  surround  it,  and  your  garden 


36  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

with  the  box  and  yew  trees,  and  your  dear  grandson  with  whom  I  conversed,  and  on 
whose  head  I  placed  my  hand,  when  I  prayed  with  him  in  the  arbour. 

"Two  years  ago,  he  wrote  to  me,  reminding  me  of  these  things,  and  of  his  warm 
feeHngs  on  the  occasion. 

"  Last  week  I  was  at  Leamington,  and  dined  with  a  young  artist,  who  had  come 
from  London  to  see  his  parents.  His  conversation  was  much  about  a  popular  young 
minister  from  the  country,  whom  he  had  heard  preach  at  Exeter  Hall,  whose  name 
was  Spurgeon.  I  said  I  knew  him.  '  How  is  it  possible.'^'  said  the  gentleman.  I 
told  him  of  my  visit,  and  of  your  grandson's  letter  to  me,  and  of  his  preaching  to 
John  Berridge's  people  at  Waterbeach,  near  Cambridge.  Oh,  it  was  a  fine  season  of 
interest  and  rejoicing  !      I  hardly  slept  the  following  night  for  joy. 

"A  day  or  two  afterwards  I  dined  near  Warwick  with  a  party  of  friends.  Their 
conversation  was  also  about  your  grandson,  not  knowing  that  I  had  heard  of  him. 
Two  of  the  party  had  been  his  hearers  in  London,  and  were  very  full  of  the  subject. 
One  of  them  said,  '  He  mentioned  your  praying  with  him  at  his  relative's  in  the 
garden.'  I  have  prayed  much /or  him  and  adou^  him,  that  God  may  keep  him  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  that  popularity  may  not  puff  him  up. 

"  Will  you  please  give  me  his  address,  as  1  should  like  to  write  to  him  .'' 
Forgive  me  for  this  intrusion.  I  feel  much  about  this  dear  youth,  very  much.  I 
have  four  or  five  of  our  ministers  in  London,  and  my  heart  goes  out  much  after  them. 
I  have  been  settled  in  this  city  upwards  of  seven  years,  and  have  received  more  than 
four  hundred  members  into  the  church.  Matthew  Henry's  Chapel  is  still  standing, 
but  is  in  the  possession  of  the  Unitarians.  Ours  is  an  off-shoot  Irom  some  of 
Matthew's  old  members,  who  would  have  orthodox  preaching. 

"  The   Lord   bless   you   and   all   your  family  !      I   have  a  distant  recollection  of 

seeing  some  of  them  at  your  house. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  Richard    Knill." 

After  that,  I  went  to  preach  for  Mr.  Knill  himself  who  was  then  at  Chester. 
What  a  meeting  we  had  !  He  was  preaching  in  the  theatre,  and  consequently  I  had 
to  take  his  place  at  the  footlights.  His  preaching  in  a  theatre  took  away  from  me 
all  fear  about  preaching  in  buildings  of  doubtful  use,  and  set  me  free  for  the 
campaigns  in  Exeter  Hall  and  the  Surrey  Music  Hall.  How  much  this  had  to  do 
with  other  theatre  services  many  know. 

"  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way, 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

After  more  than  forty  years  of  the  Lord's  lovingkindness,  I  sat  again  in  that 
arbour  in  the  year  1887.     No  doubt  it  is  a  mere  trifle  for  outsiders  to  hear  about,  but 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  37 

to  me  it  was  an  overwhelming  moment.  In  July  of  the  year  1887,  I  went  down  to 
Stambourne,  and  walked  about  the  place  like  one  in  a  dream.  The  present  minister 
of  Stambourne  Meeting-house,  and  the  members  of  his  family,  including  his  son  and 
his  grandchildren,  were  in  the  garden,  and  I  could  not  help  calling  them  together 
around  that  arbour,  while  I  praised  the  Lord  for  His  goodness  to  me.  One  irresistible 
impulse  was  upon  me  :  it  was  to  pray  God  to  bless  those  lads  that  stood  around 
me.  Memory  begat  prayer.  He  who  had  blessed  me,  would  bless  others  also.  I 
wanted  the  lads  to  remember,  when  they  grew  up,  my  testimony  of  God's  goodness 
to  me.  God  has  blessed  me  all  my  life  long,  and  redeemed  me  from  all  evil,  and  I 
pray  that  He  may  be  the  God  of  all  the  young  people  who  read  this  story. 

The  following  is  the  letter  mentioned  by  Mr.  Knill  on  page  35  : — 

"No.  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge. 

"Feb.  7/53. 
"Rev.  R.  Knill, 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  feel  confident  that  you  will  pardon  the  liberty  I  take  when  you  read 
the  occasion  of  it.  I  have  for  some  time  wished  to  write  to  you,  but  could  not  find 
you  out,  until  in  the  Banner  I  observed  a  notice  of  your  preaching  in  the  theatre  of 
Chester. 

"  Eight  or  nine  years  ago,  you  were  travelling,  as  a  deputation  from  the  London 
Missionary  Society,  in  the  county  of  Essex.  Among  other  places,  you  preached  at 
the  village  of  Stambourne.  I  was  then  a  litde  boy  staying  at  my  grandfather's 
(Rev.  Jas.  Spurgeon).  You  kindly  noticed  me  ;  I  read  at  family  prayer  ;  you  took 
me  by  your  side,  and  talked  to  me  in  a  very  affectionate  manner.  You  told  me  a 
tale  of  a  little  boy  in  Colchester  ;  we  went  into  an  arbour  in  the  garden,  there  you 
asked  me  to  sing,  and  I  joined  in  as  well  as  I  could.  I  shall  never  forget  the  way 
in  which  you  tried  to  lead  me  to  the  Saviour.  Your  conversation  and  spirit  were  all 
a  father's  could  have  been,  and  that  one  interview  has  made  my  heart  yours.  My 
eyes  rejoice  to  see  your  name,  and  the  mention  of  it  brings  up  emotions  ot  gratitude. 
In  fact,  unknown  to  you,  a  few  words  you  then  spoke  have  been  a  sort  of  star  to  my 
existence,  and  my  friends  look  on  them  with  half  the  reverence  of  prophecy.  You 
meant  them  not  perhaps  to  last  so  long,  but  now  they  are  imperishable  ;  they  were 
to  this  effect,  and  were  heard  by  more  than  one  : — '  /  think  this  little  man  wtll  one 
day  be  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  and  I  hope  a  successful  one.  I  think  you  will  preach 
in  Rowland  HilPs  Chapel ;  and  when  you  do,  tell  the  people  this  verse,  "  God  moves 
in  a  mysterious  way,"  &c.'  You  told  me  to  learn  the  hymn,  and  said  it  seemed 
perhaps  unlikely,   but  Providence  had  wrought  wonders,    and  you  thought  it  would 


^8  c.    H.    spurceon's   autobiography. 

de  so.  This  is  often  mentioned  by  my  grandfather  ;  and  somehow,  though  I  am  far 
enough  from  being  superstitious,  it  holds  me  fast,  and  I  do  confidently,  and  yet, 
somehow  (and  paradoxically),  distrustfully,  look  forward  to  the  time  when  the  whole 
shall  come  to  pass. 

"  When  sixteen  and  a  half  years  old,  I  was  persuaded  to  preach  in  the  villages, 
having  for  some  time  been  often  called  to  address  children  in  Sabbath  Schools,  and 
always  gaining  attention,  perhaps  from  my  youth  as  much  as  anything.  Once 
started  in  lay-preaching  around  Cambridge, — where  I  was  and  am  still  assistant  in  a 
school, — I  put  my  soul  into  the  work.  Having  been  invited  to  supply,  for  one 
Sabbath,  the  Baptist  Church  at  VYaterbeach,  I  did  so  ;  I  was  invited  to  continue, 
and  have  now  been  the  minister  of  the  congregation  for  one  year  and  four  months. 
The  chapel  is  always  full,  many  profess  to  have  felt  the  power  of  Divine  grace,  and 
residents  in  the  neighbourhood  say  that  there  is  a  visible  reform  manifest  ;  God  has 
used  things  that  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are.  I  preach  thrice  on 
the  Sabbath  ;  and  often,  indeed,  almost  constantly,  five  times  in  the  week-nights. 
My  salary  being  insufficient,  I  still  remain  in  the  school.  Though  the  congregation 
is  large,  they  being  poor,  or  men  of  small  property,  are  unable  to  do  much, — though 
their  kindness  may  be  judged  of  from  the  fact  that  I  have  been  to  sixty-two  different 
houses  to  dine  on  the  Lord's-day.      Thus  are  your  words  in  part  realized. 

"Though  I  do  not  say  that  your  conversation  did  then  lead  to  my  conversion, 
yet  the  thought  of  what  I  conceived  might  be  my  position  one  day  ever  worked 
in  me  a  desire  to  gain  true  religion,  which  even  then  I  knew  was  the  great  essential 
in  a  minister.  I  long  for  nothing  more  earnestly  than  to  serve  God  with  all  my 
might.  My  education  is  amply  sufficient  for  my  present  station,  and  I  have  means 
and  desires  for  further  improvement. 

"  The  particulars  I  have  given  are  perhaps  too  lengthy,  but  you  will  excuse  it. 

I   could  not  refrain  from  letting  you   know   what   is   no  doubt  more  interesting  to 

me  than  to  you.      I  pray  that,  while   standing  on   the   polluted   ground  (in  Chester 

theatre),   you   may   consecrate   it    in    many   a   heart    by   being    the   means   of   their 

conversion.     Your  words  spoken  in  season  have  been  good  to  me  ;  and  if  I  am  ot 

any  use   in   the  army  of  the  living  God,  I  owe  it  in  great  part  to  you   that   I   ever 

enlisted  in  it.      I  am  not  nineteen  yet  ;  and  need,  and  trust  I   shall  have,  a  mention 

in  your  prayers. 

"  With  the  greatest  respect, 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  Charles  Spurgeon." 

"  P.S. — Since  you  are  much  engaged,  I  shall  scarcely  expect  a  line  from  you  ; 
but  if  I  should  be  happy  enough  to  receive  one,  I  shall  be  rejoiced." 


CHAPTER    VI. 


]:)tcilicnts  of  finmt  auti  Scljool  lift. 


fr\;ui\ 


THE   HOUSE  AT  KELVEDON,    ESSEX,   WHERE  C.    H.    SPURGEON   WAS  BORN. 

O  man  can  write  the  whole  of  his  own  biography.  I  suppose,  if  the 
history  of  a  man's  thoughts  and  words  could  be  written,  scarce  the 
world  itself  would  contain  the  books,  so  wonderful  is  the  tale  that 
might  be  told.  Of  my  life  at  home  and  at  school,  I  can  only  give  a 
few  incidents  as  I  am  able  to  recall  them  after  the  lapse  of  forty  or 
fifty  years.  One  of  the  earliest,  and  one  that  impressed  itself  very 
deeply  upon  my  childish  mind,  relates  to — 

My  First  and  Last  Debt. 
When  I  was  a  very  small  boy,  in  pinafores,  and  went  to  a  woman's  school,  it  so 
happened  that  I  wanted  a  stick  of  slate  pencil,  and  had  no  money  to  buy  it  with.      I 
was  afraid  of  beino-  scolded  for  losing  my  pencils  so  often,  for  I  was  a  real  careless 


40 


C.     K.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


little  fellow,  and  so  did  not  dare  to  ask  at  home  ;  what  then  was  I  to  do  ?  There 
was  a  little  shop  in  the  place,  where  nuts,  and  tops,  and  cakes,  and  balls  were  sold 
by  old  Mrs.  Pearson,*  and  sometimes  I  had  seen  boys  and  girls  get  trusted  by  the 
old  lady.  I  argued  with  myself  that  Christmas  was  coming,  and  that  somebody  or 
other  would  be  sure  to  give  me  a  penny  then,  and  perhaps  even  a  whole  silver 
sixpence.  I  would,  therefore,  go  into  debt  for  a  stick  of  slate  pencil,  and  be  sure  to 
pay  at  Christmas.  I  did  not  feel  easy  about  it,  but  still  I  screwed  my  courage  up, 
and  went  into  the  shop.  One  farthing  was  the  amount,  and  as  I  had  never  owed 
anything  before,  and  my  credit  was  good,  the  pencil  was  handed  over  by  the  kind 
dame,  and  /  zvas  in  debt.  It  did  not  please  me  much,  and  \  felt  as  if  I  had  done 
wrong,  but  I  little  knew  how  soon  I  should  smart  for  it. 

How  my  father  came  to  hear  of  this  little  stroke  of  business,  I  never  knew,  but 
some  little  bird  or  other  whistled  it  to  him,  and  he  was  very  soon  down  upon  me  in 
right  earnest.  God  bless  him  for  it  ;  he  was  a  sensible  man,  and  none  of  your 
children-spoilers  ;  he  did  not  intend  to  bring  up  his  children  to  speculate,  and  play  at 
what  big  rogues  call  financing,  and  therefore  he  knocked  my  getting  into  debt  on  the 
head  at  once,  and  no  mistake.  He  gave  me  a  very  powerful  lecture  upon  getting 
into  debt,  and  how  like  it  was  to  stealing,  and  upon  the  way  in  which  people  were 
ruined  by  it  ;  and  how  a  boy  who  would  owe  a  farthing,  might  one  day  owe  a 
hundred  pounds,  and  get  into  prison,  and  bring  his  family  into  disgrace.  It  was  a 
lecture,  indeed  ;  I  think  I  can  hear  it  now,  and  can  feel  my  ears  tingling  at  the 
recollection  of  it.  Then  I  was  marched  off  to  the  shop,  like  a  deserter  marched  into 
barracks,  cr^'ing  bitterly  all  down  the  street,  and  feeling  dreadfully  ashamed,  because 
I  thought  everybody  knew  I  was  in  debt.  The  farthing  was  paid  amid  many  solemn 
warnings,  and  the  poor  debtor  was  set  free,  like  a  bird  let  out  of  a  cage.  How  sweet 
it  felt  to  be  out  of  debt!  How  did  my  little  heart  vow  and  declare  that  nothing 
should  ever  tempt  me  into  debt  again  !  It  was  a  fine  lesson,  and  I  have  never 
forgotten  it.  If  all  boys  were  inoculated  with  the  same  doctrine  when  they  were 
young,  it  would  be  as  good  as  a  fortune  to  them,  and  save  them  waggon-loads  of 
trouble  in  after  life.  God  bless  my  father,  say  I,  and  send  a  breed  of  such  fathers 
into  old  England  to  save  her  from  being  eaten  up  with  villainy,  for  what  with 
companies,  and  schemes,  and  paper-money,  the  nation  is  getting  to  be  as  rotten  as 
touchwood  !  Ever  since  that  early  sickening,  I  have  hated  debt  as  Luther  hated 
the  Pope. 

*  Extract  from  The  Essex  Telegraph,  February  8th,  1881  : — 

Interments  at  Colchester  Cemetery  for  the  week  ended  February  7th,  1881 : — 
February  2nd. — Emily  Florence  Norman,  St.  Mary,  7  weeks. 
,,         2nd. — Ruthford  Dickerson,  St.  Botolph,  4  months. 
„  3rd. — Elizabeth  Bantock.  St.  Giles,  91  years. 

,,  5th. — Esther  Pearson, f  St.  Leonard.  96  years. 

t  Esther  Pearson  is  the  old  lady  at  whose  shop  I  had  trust  for  a  farthing. — C.  H.  S. 


c.    H.    sruRGEON  s    AUTor.innRAniv.  .  41 

.  Another  occurrence  of  those  early  days  is  rather  more  to  my  credit.  Long  after 
my  own  sons  had  grown  to  manhood,  I  recalled  to  my  father's  recollection  an 
experience  of  which,  until  then,  he  had  never  had  an  explanation.  My  brother, 
as  a  child,  suffered  from  weak  ankles,  and  in  consequence  frequently  fell  down, 
and  so  got  into  trouble  at  home.  At  last,  hoping  to  cure  him  of  what  father  thought 
was  only  carelessness,  he  was  threatened  that  he  should  be  whipped  every  time  he 
came  back  showing  any  signs  of  having  fallen  down.  When  I  reminded  my  father 
of  this  regulation,  he  said  quite  triumphantly,  "Yes,  it  was  so,  and  he  was  completely 
cured  from  that  time.  "  "Ah!"  I  answered,  "so  you  thought,  yet  it  was  not  so,  for 
he  had  many  a  tumble  afterwards  ;  but  I  always  managed  to  wash  his  knees,  and 
to  brush  his  clothes,  so  as  to  remove  all  traces  ot  his  tails." 

tF  -iP  tF  •       tP 

Illustrations    from    Childhood's     Days. 

I  recollect,  when  a  child,  seeing  on  the  mantel-piece  a  stone  apple, — wonderfully 
like  an  apple,  too,  and  very  well  coloured.  I  saw  that  apple  years  after,  but  it  was 
no  riper.  It  had  been  in  favourable  circumstances  for  softening  and  sweetening,  if  it 
ever  would  have  become  mellow  ;  but  I  do  not  think,  if  the  sun  of  the  Equator  had 
shone  on  it,  or  if  the  dews  of  Hermon  had  fallen  on  it,  it  would  ever  have  been  fit 
to  be  brouo'ht  to  table.  Its  hard  marble  substance  would  have  broken  a  giant's 
teeth.  It  was  a  hypocritical  professor,  a  hard-hearted  mocker  of  little  children,  a 
mere  mimic  of  God's  fruits.  There  are  church-members  who  used  to  be  unkind, 
covetous,  censorious,  bad-tempered,  egotistical,  everything  that  was  hard  and  stony  ; 
are  they  so  now?  Have  they  not  mellowed  with  the  lapse  of  years?  No  ;  they  are 
worse,  if  anything,  very  dogs  in  the  house  for  snapping  and  snarling,  rending  and 
devouring  ;  great  men  at  hewing  down  the  carved  work  of  the  sanctuary  with  their 
axes,  or  at  filling  up  wells,  and  marring  good  pieces  of  land  with  stones.  When  the 
devil  wants  a  stone  to  fiing  at  a  minister,  he  is  sure  to  use  one  of  them. 

When  we  were  small  children,  we  had  a  little  plot  of  garden-ground,  and  we  put 
our  seeds  into  it.  I  well  recollect  how,  the  day  after  I  had  put  in  my  seed,  I  went 
and  scraped  the  soil  away  to  see  if  it  was  not  growing,  as  I  expected  it  would  have 
been  after  a  day  or  so  at  the  very  longest,  and  I  thought  the  time  amazingly  long 
before  the  seed  would  be  able  to  make  its  appearance  above  the  ground.  "  That 
was  childish,"  you  say.  I  know  it  was,  but  I  wish  you  were  as  childish  with  regard 
to  your  prayers,  that  you  would,  when  you  have  put  them  in  the  ground,  go  and 
see  if  they  have  sprung  up  ;  and  if  not  at  once, — be  not  childish  in  refusing  to  wait 
till  the  appointed  time  comes, — always  go  back  and  see  if  they  have  begun  to  sprout. 
If  you  believe  in  prayer  at  all,  expect  God  to  hear  you.  If  you  do  not  expect, 
you   will   not  have.      God  will  not   hear  you   unless  you  believe   He  will  hear  you; 


42  C.      H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHV. 

but  if  you  believe  He  will,  He  will  be  as  good  as  your  faith.  He  will  never  allow 
you  to  think  better  of  Him  than  He  is  ;  He  will  come  up  to  the  mark  of  your 
thoughts,  and  according  to  your  faith  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  you. 

When  we  used  to  go  to  school,  we  would  draw  houses,  and  horses,  and  trees 
on  our  slates,  and  I  remember  how  we  used  to  write  "house"  under  the  house, 
and  "horse"  under  the  horse,  for  some  persons  might  have  thought  the  horse  was 
a  house.  So  there  are  some  people  who  need  to  wear  a  label  round  their  necks 
to  show  that  they  are  Christians  at  all,  or  else  we  might  mistake  them  for  sinners, 
their  actions  are  so  like  those  of  the  ungodly. 

I  remember  once,  when  a  lad,  having  a  dog,  which  I  very  much  prized,  and 
some  man  in  the  street  asked  me  to  give  him  the  dog  ;  I  thought  it  was  pretty 
impudent,  and  I  said  as  much.  A  gentleman,  however,  to  whom  I  told  it,  said, 
"  Now  suppose  the  Duke  of  So-and-so  " — who  was  a  great  man  in  the  neighbour- 
hood,— "asked  you  for  the  dog,  would  you  give  it  to  him.'^"  I  answered,  "  I  think 
1  would."  So  the  gentleman  said,  "  Then  you  are  just  like  all  the  world  ;  you  would 
cfive  to  those  who  do  not  need." 

I  have  seen,  when  I  was  a  boy,  a  juggler  in  the  street  throw  up  half-a-dozen 
balls,  or  knives  and  plates,  and  continue  throwing  and  catching  them,  and  to  me  it 
seemed  marvellous  ;  but  the  religious  juggler  beats  all  others  hollow.  He  has  to 
keep  up  Christianity  and  worldliness  at  the  same  time,  and  to  catch  two  sets  of  balls 
at  once.  To  be  a  freeman  of  Christ  and  a  slave  of  the  world  at  the  same  time,  must 
need  fine  acting.  One  of  these  days  you.  Sir  Juggler,  will  make  a  slip  with  one  ot 
the  balls,  and  your  game  will  be  over.  A  man  cannot  always  keep  it  up,  and  play 
so  cleverly  at  all  hours  ;  sooner  or  later  he  fails,  and  then  he  is  made  a  hissing 
and  a  by-word,  and  becomes  ashamed,  if  any  shame  be  left  in  him. 

■^  -jp  ^  ^ 

I  can  never  forget  the  rushlight,  which  dimly  illuminated  the  sitting-room  of 
the  old  house  ;  nor  the  dips,  which  were  pretty  fair  when  there  were  not  too  many 
of  them  to  the  pound  ;  nor  the  mould  candles,  which  came  out  only  when  there 
was  a  party,  or  some  special  personage  was  expected.  Short  sixes  were  very 
respectable  specimens  of  household  lights.  Composites  have  never  seemed  to  me 
to  be  so  good  as  the  old  sort,  made  of  pure  tallow  ;  but  I  daresay  I  may  be  wrong. 
Nevertheless,  I  have  no  liking  for  composites  in  theology,  but  prefer  the  genuine 
article  without  compromise. 

A  night-light  is  a  delightful  invention  for  the  sick.  It  has  supplanted  the 
rushlight,  which  would  frequently  be  set  in  a  huge  sort  of  tower,  which,  to  me,  as 


C.     H.     SPURGEOX'S     AUTOBIOGRArilV.  43 

a  sick  child  at  night,  used  to  suggest  dreadful  things.  With  its  light  shining 
through  the  round  holes  at  the  side,  like  so  many  ghostly  eyes,  it  looked  at  me 
staringly  ;  and  with  its  round  ring  on  the  ceiling,  it  made  me  think  of 
Nebuchadnezzar's  burning  fiery  furnace. 

Once,  I  thoughtlessly  hung  a  pound  of  tallow  candles  on  a  clothes-horse. 
This  construction  was  moved  near  the  fire,  and  the  result  was  a  mass  of  fat  on 
the  fioor,  and  the  cottons  of  the  candles  almost  divested  of  tallow  ; — a  lesson  to 
u^s  all  not  to  expose  certain  things  to  a  great  heat,  lest  we  dissolve  them.  I  fear 
that  many  a  man's  good  resolutions  only  need  the  ordinary  fire  of  daily  life  to  make 
them  melt  away.  So,  too,  with  fine  professions,  and  the  boastings  of  perfection 
M'hich   abound  in   this  age  of  shams. 

I  have  a  distinct  remembrance  of  a  mission-room,  where  my  father  frequently 
preached,  which  was  illuminated  by  candles  in  tin  sconces  which  hung  on  the  wall. 
These  luminaries  frequently  went  ver)'  dim  for  want  of  snuffing,  and  on  one  occasion 
an  old  man,  who  wanted  to  see  his  hymn-book,  took  the  candle  from  its  original 
place  :  out  of  his  hand  he  made  a  candlestick  ;  his  finger  and  thumb  he  used  as 
a  pair  of  snufters  ;  and,  finding  it  needful  to  cough,  he  accidentally  made  use  of 
his  mouth  as  an  exting-uisher.  Thus  the  furniture  of  a  candle  was  all  contained 
in   his   own   proper  person. 

We  had  practical  fun  with  candles,  too  ;  for  we  would  scoop  out  a  turnip,  cut 
eyes  and  a  nose  in  the  rind,  and  then  put  a  candle  inside.  This  could  be  judiciously 
used  to  amuse,  tut  it  might  also  be  injudiciously  turned  to  purposes  of  alarming 
youngsters  and  greenhorns,  who  ran  away,  under  the  apprehension  that  a  ghost  was 
visible.  Other  things  besides  turnips  can  be  used  to  frighten  foolish  people  ;  but  it 
is  a  shame  to  use  the  light  of  truth  with  such  a  design. 

*  =:;=  *  * 

During  one  of  my  many  holidays  at  Stambourne,  I  had  a  varied  e.xperience 
which  I  am  not  likely  to  forget.  My  dear  grandfather  was  very  fond  of  Dr.  Watts's 
hymns,  and  my  grandmother,  wishing  to  get  me  to  learn  them,  promised  me  a  penny 
for  each  one  that  I  should  say  to  her  perfectly.  I  found  it  an  easy  and  pleasant 
method  of  earning  money,  and  learned  them  so  fast  that  grandmother  said  she  must 
reduce  the  price  to  a  halfpenny  each,  and  afterwards  to  a  farthing,  if  she  did  not 
mean  to  be  quite  ruined  by  her  extravagance.  There  is  no  telling  how  low  the 
amount  per  hymn  might  have  sunk,  but  grandfather  said  that  he  was  getting 
overrun  with  rats,  and  offered  me  a  shilling  a  dozen  for  all  I  could  kill.  I  found,  at 
the  time,  that  the  occupation  of  rat-catching  paid  me  better  than  learning  hymns, 
but  I  know  which  employment  has  been  the  more  permanently  profitable  to  me.     No 


44  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

matter  on  what  topic  I  am  preaching",  I  can  even  now,  in  the  middle  of  any  sermon, 
quote  some  verse  of  a  hymn  in  harmony  with  the  subject ;  the  hymns  have  remained 
with  me,  while  those  old  rats  for  years  have  passed  awav,  and  the  shillings  I  earned 
by  killing  them  have  been  spent  long  ago. 

*  *  *  * 

Many  memories  were  awakened,  one  day,  when  I  opened  my  copy  of  White's 
Natural  Historv  of  Sclbonie,  and  read  the  following  inscription  :— 

Stockwell    School,    Colchester. 

Adjudged  to 

Master    C.    Spurgeon, 

as  the   First  Class   English   Prize, 

at   the    Half-yearly   E.xamination, 

December   iith,   1844. 

T.    W.     Davids,  Exaniiner. 

After  I  had  once  succeeded  in  gaining  my  position  at  the  top  of  the  class,  I 
was  careful  to  retain  it,  except  at  one  particular  period,  when  I  made  up  my  mind 
to  get  right  down  to  the  bottom.  My  teacher  could  not  understand  my  unusual 
stupidity,  until  it  suddenly  occurred  to  him  that  I  had  purposely  worked  my  way 
from  the  head  of  the  class,  which  was  opposite  a  draughty  door,  down  to  the  foot, 
which  was  next  to  the  stove.  He  therefore  reversed  the  position  of  the  scholars, 
and  it  was  not  long  before  I  had  again  climbed  to  the  place  of  honour,  where  I  had 
also  the  enjoyment  of  the  heat  from  the  fire. 

^  ^p  -W^  •«• 

(Writing  to  The  Christian  World,  in  February,  1892,  Mr.  R.  D.  Cheveley,  of 
Harrogate,  who  had  been  a  fellow-scholar  with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  Colchester,  said  : — 

"  Stockwell  House,  Colchester,  where  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  being 
educated  from  the  age  of  eleven  to  fifteen  [ten  to  fourteen],  was  a  thoroughly  good 
middle-class  classical  and  commercial  school.  Mr.  Henry  Lewis,  the  principal,  was 
a  man  whose  literary  attainments  were  of  a  superior  order,  and  for  years  he  was 
assisted  by  a  very  scholarly  man  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Leeding,  whose  death  occurred 
only  very  recently.  Mr.  Leeding  was  the  classical  and  mathematical  tutor  ;  his 
teaching  was  very  thorough,  and  in  Charles  Spurgeon  he  possessed  a  pupil  of  a 
very  recepti\e  mind,  especially  with  Latin  and  Euclid.  I  remember  well  that  in  both 
of  these  subjects  he  was  very  advanced,  so  that  he  left  Stockwell  House  a  thoroughly 
well-educated  youth  ;  in  fact,  quite  as  much  so  as  it  was  possible  for  him  to  attain 
outside  the  Universities.") 

*  *  *  * 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  45 

(In  The  Sivord  and  the  Troivcl,  October,  1S90,  Mr.  Spurgeon  made  the  following 
kind  reference  to  the  home-going  of  his  old  tutor : — ) 

The  Norwood  papers  contain  the  following  death: — Leeding — September  11, 
at  the  Academy,  West  Norwood,  Edwin  Sennit  Leeding,  aged  ']']  years. 

This  Mr.  Leeding  was  usher  at  the  school  of  Mr.  Henry  Lewis,  of  Colchester, 
in  1845,  '^nd  I  (C.  H.  Spurgeon)  was  one  of  the  boys  under  his  care.  He  was  a 
teacher  who  really  taught  his  pupils  ;  and  by  his  diligent  skill  I  gained  the  foundation 
upon  which  I  built  in  after  years.  He  left  Colchester  to  open  a  school  of  his  own  in 
Cambridge,  and  I  to  go,  first  to  Maidstone,  and  then  to  Newmarket  for  some  two 
years.  Then  we  came  together  again  ;  for  I  joined  him  at  Cambridge  to  assist  in 
his  school,  and  in  return  to  be  helped  in  my  studies.  He  has  left  on  record  that  he 
did  not  think  that  there  was  need  for  me  to  go  to  any  of  the  Dissenting  Colleges, 
since  I  had  mastered  most  of  the  subjects  studied  therein  ;  and  his  impression  that  I 
might,  while  with  him,  have  readily  passed  through  the  University  if  the  pulpit  had 
not  come  in  the  way.  His  school  did  not  succeed,  for  he  was  not  well  enough 
to  attend  to  it  ;  and  in  after  years  I  found  my  old  tutor  struggling  at  West  Norwood 
against  the  difficult  circumstances  which  Board  Schools  have  created  for  private 
ventures.  He  was  a  good  man  and  true, — a  man  of  prayer,  faith,  and  firm  principle. 
His  life  was  full  of  trials,  and  I  have  seen  him  greatly  depressed,  but  he  has 
honourably  finished  his  course,  and  has  gone  to  his  reward.  I  have  always  looked 
to  him,  among  the  many  of  whom  I  have  gathered  help,  as  my  tutor.  Thus  the 
tutor  has  gone  home,  and  the  scholar  must  not  forget  that  in  due  course  he  will 
follow. 


CHAPTER    VII. 


JHtmorks  of  ixlaibstaut  aub  fltlumarkct. 


ST.  Augustine's  college,  maidstone  (where  c.  h.  spurgeon  went  to  school,  1S4S-9). 


RECOLLECT  that,  when   I   first  came  to  London  as  a  boy,  to  go 

to  school  at  Maidstone,  while  I  was  sitting  in  the  coach,  ready  to 

start,  a  man  came  along  selling  knives  with  a  great  number  of  blades. 

He  put  one  in   at  the  window,  and  stuck   it   right  before  my  face. 

Why  did  he  want  to  intrude  on  me  like  that  ?      He  had  no  business 

to  poke  a  knife  into  my  eye  ;  but  he  had  never  studied  that  kind  of 

modesty  which  some  of  us  have.      If  he  had  kept  that  many-bladed  knife  in  his  pocket, 

and  quietly  said,  "If  there  should  be  a  person  in  the  coach  who  would  like  to  look  at 

a  knife  with  ever  so  many  blades.  I  have  one  in  my  pocket,"  he  would  not  have  sold 


48  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

one  in  a  century  ;  but  he  picked  me  out  as  a  likely  customer,  and  opened  the  blades 
as  if  he  knew  that  such  a  knife  would  be  wonderfully  fascinating  to  a  boy  going  to 
school.  That  man's  energy  taught  me  a  lesson  which  I  have  often  turned  to  good 
accoin:  when  I  have  been  trying  to  induce  people  to  "buy  the  truth." 

*  *  *  * 

I  was  about  the  age  of  fourteen  when  I  was  sent  to  a  Church  of  England 
school, — now  called  St.  Augustine's  College,  Maidstone.  We  had  three  clergymen 
■who  came  by  turns  to  teach  us  their  doctrines  ;  but,  somehow  or  other,  the  pupils 
did  not  seem  to  get  on  much,  for  when  one  of  them  was  asked  by  a  clergyman  how 
many  sacraments  there  were,  he  said,  "  Seven,"  and  when  that  was  denied,  he  said, 
"  Oh,  sir,  there  is  one  that  they  take  at  the  //altar !  "  upon  which  I  could  not  help 
saying,  "That's  hanging,  I  should  think,"  which  suggestion  made  even  the  reverend 
gentleman  smile,  although,  of  course,  I  was  bidden  not  to  be  so  rude  as  to  interrupt 
again.  I  am  sure  many  of  the  sons  of  the  gentry  in  that  establishment  were  more 
ignorant  of  Scripture  than  the  boys  in  some  of  our  Ragged  Schools. 


One  of  the  clergy  was,  I  believe,  a  good  man  ;  and  it  is  to  him  I  owe  that  ray 
of  light  which  sufficed  to  show  me  believers'  baptism.  I  was  usually  at  the  head  of 
the  class,  and  on  one  occasion,  when  the  Church  of  England  Catechism  was  to  be 
repeated,  something  like  the  following  conversation  took  place : — 

Clergyman. — What  is  your  name  ? 

Spurgeon. — Spurgeon,  sir. 

C. — No,  no  ;  what  is  your  name."* 

S. — Charles  Spurgeon,  sir. 

C. — No,  you  should  not  behave  so,  for  you  know  I  only  want  your  Christian 
name. 

S. — If  you  please,  sir,  I  am  afraid  1  haven't  got  one. 

C. — Why,  how  is  that  ? 

S. — Because  I  do  not  think  I  am  a  Christian. 

C. — What  are  you,  then, — a  heathen  ? 

S. — No,  sir  ;  but  we  may  not  be  heathens,  and  yet  be  without  the  grace  of  God, 
and  so  not  be  truly  Christians. 

C. — Well,  well,  never  mind  ;  what  is  your  first  name? 

S. — Charles. 

C. — Who  gave  you  that  name  ? 

S. — I  am  sure  I  don't  know,  sir  ;  I  know  no  godfathers  ever  did  anything  for 
me,  for  I  never  had  any.      Likely  enough,  my  mother  and  father  did. 

C. — Now,  you  should  not  set  these  boys  a-laughing.  Of  course,  1  do  not  wish 
you  to  say  the  usual  answer. 


C.     n.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  49 

He  seemed  always  to  have  a  respect  for  me,  and  gave  me  The  Christian  Year, 
in  calf,  as  a  reward  for  my  great  proficiency  in  religious  knowledge.  Proceeding 
with  the  Catechism,  he  suddenly  turned  to  me,  and  said, — 

Spurgeon,  you  were  never  properly  baptized. 

S. — Oh,  yes,  sir,  I  was  ;  my  grandfather  baptized  me  in  the  little  parlour,  and  he 
is  a  minister,  so  I  know  he  did  it  right  ! 

C. — Ah,  but  you  had  neither  faith  nor  repentance,  and  therefore  ought  not 
to  have  received  baptism  ! 

S. — Why,  sir,  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  it  !  All  infants  ought  to  be 
baptized. 

C. — How  do  you  know  that  ?  Does  not  the  Prayer  Book  say  that  faith  and 
repentance  are  necessary  before  baptism  ?  And  this  is  so  Scriptural  a  doctrine,  that 
no  one  ought  to  deny  it.  (Here  he  went  on  to  show  that  all  the  persons  spoken  of 
in  the  Bible  as  being  baptized  were  believers  ;  which,  of  course,  was  an  easy  task, 
and  then  said  to  me, — )  Now,  Charles,  1  shall  give  you  till  next  week  to  find  out 
whether  the  Bible  does  not  declare  faith  and  repentance  to  be  necessary  qualifications 
before  baptism. 

I  felt  sure  enough  of  victory  ;  for  I  thought  tnat  a  ceremony  my  grandfather  and 
father  both  practised  in  their  ministry  must  be  right  ;  but  I  could  not  find  it, — I  was 
beaten, — and  made  up  my  mind  as  to  the  course  I  would  take. 

C. — Well,  Charles,  what  do  you  think  now  ? 

S. — Why,  sir,  I  think  you  are  right ;  but  then  it  applies  to  you  as  well  as  to  me  ! 

C. — 1  wanted  to  show  you  this  ;  for  this  is  the  reason  why  we  appoint  sponsors. 
It  is  that,  without  faith,  I  had  no  more  right  than  you  to  holy  baptism  ;  but  the 
promise  of  my  sponsors  was  accepted  by  the  Church  as  an  equivalent.  You  have  no 
doubt  seen  your  father,  when  he  has  no  money,  give  a  note-of-hand  for  it  ;  and  this 
is  regarded  as  an  earnest  of  payment,  because,  as  an  honest  man,  we  have  reason  to 
expect  he  will  honour  the  note  he  has  given.  Now,  sponsors  are  generally  good 
people,  and  in  charity  we  accept  their  promise  on  behalf  of  the  child.  As  the  child 
cannot  at  the  time  have  faith,  we  accept  the  bond  that  he  will  ;  which  promise 
he  fulfils  at  confirmation,  when  he  takes  the  bond  into  his  own  hands 

S. — Well,  sir,  1  think  it  is  a  very  bad  note-of-hand. 

C. — I  have  no  time  to  argue  that,  but  I  believe  it  to  be  good.  I  will  only  ask 
you  this, — Which  seems  to  have  the  greater  regard  to  Scripture, — I,  as  a  Churchman, 
or  your  grandfather  as  a  Dissenter?  He  baptizes  in  the  very  teeth  of  Scripture  ; 
and  I  do  not,  in  my  opinion,  do  so,  for  I  require  a  promise,  which  I  look  upon  as 
an  equivalent  of  repentance  and  faith,  to  be  rendered  in  future  years. 

S. — Really,  sir,  I  think  you  are  more  like  right  ;  but  since  it  seems  to  be  the 

P 


50  C.     n.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

truth  that  only  believers  should  be  baptized,  I  think  you  are  both  wrong,  though  you 
seem  to  treat  the  Bible  with  the  greater  politeness. 

C. — Well,  then,  you  confess  that  you  were  not  properly  baptized  ;  and  you  would 
think  it  your  duty,  if  in  your  oower,  to  join  with  us,  and  have  sponsors  to  promise  on 
your  behalf? 

S. — Oh,  no  !  I  have  oeen  baptized  once,  before  I  ought  ;  I  will  wait  next  time 
till  I  am  fit  for  it. 

C. — (Smiling.)  Ah,  you  are  wrong  ;  but  I  like  to  see  you  keep  to  the  Word  of 
God  !  Seek  from  Him  a  new  heart  and  Divine  direction,  and  you  will  see  one  truth 
after  another,  and  very  probably  there  will  be  a  great  change  in  those  opinions  which 
now  seem  so  deeply  rooted  in  you. 

I  resolved,  from  that  moment,  that  if  ever  Divine  grace  should  work  a  change 
in  me,  I  would  be  baptized,  since,  as  I  afterwards  told  my  friend  the  clergyman,  "  I 
never  ought  to  be  blamed  for  improper  baptism,  as  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  it ;  the 
error,  if  any,  rested  with  my  parents  and  grandparents." 

*  *  #  # 

When  at  Mentone,  on  one  occasion,  I  was  greatly  pleased  to  receive  the 
following  note  from  a  lady  I  met  there,  as  it  enabled  me  to  identify  the  esteemed 
clergyman  who  had  shown  himself  so  interested  in  my  welfare  while  at  Maidstone  : — 

"  Mrs.  S wrote  me,  the  other  day,  that  she  had  been  dining  out,  and  sat 

next  to  Canon  Jeftreys,  of  Hawkhurst.  The  conversation  turned  upon  Mr. 
Spurgeon  and  his  valuable  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  The  Canon  said  that  he 
once  examined  at  some  Grammar  School  where  the  boy  Spurgeon  was,  and  that  he 
was  the  only  boy  out  of  I  forget  how  many,  who  could  answer  most  of  the  questions. 
Some  boys  could  not  do  any,  while  young  Spurgeon  did  all  excepting  those  on  the 

Church  Catechism." 

*  *  *  *         • 

It  was  while  I  was  at  Maidstone  that  I  had  the  opportunity  of  attending  the 
services  of  the  Established  Church,  and  therefore  was  able,  long  afterwards,  to  say 
to  the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College  : — "  There  is  an  ecclesiastical  twang  which  is 
much  admired  in  the  Establishment,  a  sort  of  steeple-in-the-throat  grandeur,  an 
aristocratic,  theologic,  parsonic,  supernatural,  infra-human  mouthing  of  language  and 
rolling  over  of  words.  It  may  be  illustrated  by  the  following  specimen, — '  He  that 
hath  yaws  to  yaw,  let  him  yaw,'  which  is  a  remarkable,  if  not  impressive,  rendering 
of  a  Scripture  text.  Who  does  not  know  the  hallowed  way  of  pronouncing — 
'  Dearly-beloved  brethren,  the  Scripture  moveth  us  in  divers  places  '  .''  It  rolls  in  my 
ears  now  like  Big  Ben,  coupled  with  boyish  memories  of  monotonous  peals  of  '  The 
Prince  Albert,  Albert  Prince  of  Wales,  and  all  the  Royal  Family.     .     .     .     Amen." 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


51 


Now,  if  a  man  who  talks  so  unnaturally  does  not  get  bronchitis,  or  some  other 
disease,  I  can  only  say  that  throat  diseases  must  be  very  sovereignly  dispensed.  At 
the  Nonconformist  hobbies  of  utterance  I  have  already  struck  a  blow,  and  I  believe 
it  is  by  them  that  larynx  and  lungs  become  delicate,  and  good  men  succumb  to 
silence  and  the  erave." 


t5 


I  had  a  variety  of  experiences  while  at  that  Church  school.  One  piece  of 
mischief  I  remember  to  this  day.  There  was  a  large  jar  of  ammonia  in  a  certain 
cupboard,  and  I  used  to  lead  the  new  boys  to  it,  and  tell  them  to  take  a  good  sniff, 
the  usual  result  being  that  they  would  be  quite  overpowered.  Once,  when  a  boy  fell 
down  in  a  dead  faint,  I  was  really  frightened,  and  I  did  not  want  to  play  the  same 
trick  on  anyone  else.  Perhaps  I  took  the  more  liberty  as  the  master  (Mr.  David 
Walker)  was  my  uncle  ;  at  any  rate,  I  was  a  great  favourite  with  my  aunt,  and  that 
fact  helped  me  out  of  many  a  difticulty. 

Mr.  Walker's  usual  plan  of  punishing  his  pupils  was  to  make  the  sentence  bear 
as  much  resemblance  as  possible  to  the  offence  they  had  committed.  For  instance, 
the  boys  had  gone  one  night*  and  borrowed  a  boat  from  the  river  ;  so,  the  next  night, 
they  were  roused  from  their  slumbers,  and  made  to  go  at  once  to  return  it  to  its 
proper  place.  They  would  probably  be  all  the  more  careful  not  to  repeat  their 
wrong-doing  when  they  found  how  much  discomfort  it  brought  to  themselves. 

It  often  happened  that,  when  corporal  punishment  was  to  be  administered, 
my  uncle  would  send  me  out  to  find  a  cane  for  him.  It  was  not  a  very  pleasant  task, 
and  I  noticed  that  I  never  once  succeeded  in  selecting  a  stick  which  was  liked  by 
the  boy  who  had  to  feel  it.  Either  it  was  too  thin,  or  too  thick  ;  and,  in  consequence, 
I  was  threatened  by  the  sufferers  with  condign  punishment  if  I  did  not  do  better 
next  time.  I  learned  from  that  experience  never  to  expect  God's  children  to  like  the 
particular  rod  with  which  they  are  chastened. 

I  greatly  offended  my  uncle,  on  one  occasion,  by  pointing  out  an  error  in  an 
arithmetical  problem  he  was  working  on  the  blackboard.  He  said  that  it  was 
derogatory  to  his  dignity  to  be  corrected  before  his  pupils,  but  I  maintained  that  it 
was  not  right  for  me  to  let  the  mistake  pass  without  mentioning  it  after  I  had 
detected  the  blunder.  I  think,  after  that  incident,  he  judged  that  I  could  employ  my 
time  to  the  greatest  advantage  by  taking  my  books,  and  studying  by  myself  beneath 
an  old  oak-tree  by  the  river  Medway  ;  at  all  events,  he  showed  his  appreciation  of 
my  mathematical  progress  by  allowing  me  to  make  the  calculations  which  are,  I 
believe,  still  used  by  a  certain  Life  Insurance  Society  in  London. 

*  *  * 

(In  the  month  of  July,   1889,  Mr.  Spurgeon  paid  a  short  visit  to  the  town  of 


52  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Maidstone.     On  the  Sabbath  evening  after  his  drive  into  Kent,  he  preached  at  the 
MetropoHtan  Tabernacle  a  sermon  upon  Psalm  Ixxi.  17,  in  which  he  said  : — ) 

I  went  down,  last  week,  to  Maidstone,  in  Kent.  It  is  as  near  as  possible  to  the 
day,  forty  years  ago,  when  I  left  the  school  called  a  "College"  there.  I  thought 
that  I  must  go  down  and  look  at  the  spot,  and  specially  at  a  tree  which  stands  by  the 
river  Med  way.  Under  that  tree  I  spent  many  hours,  and  many  days,  and  even 
many  weeks,  reading  all  day  long.  "  In  school-time.''"  say  you.  Yes,  my  master 
thought  that  I  should  do  better  under  that  tree  than  in  the  class  ;  and  he  was  a  wise 
man.  He  gave  me  my  book,  and  left  me  to  myself;  and  as  1  stood  last  week  under 
that  tree,  with  the  smoothly-flowing  river  at  my  feet,  I  could  thank  God  for  His 
mercy  to  me  for  all  these  forty  years,  and  I  could  say,  "  O  God,  Thou  hast  taught 
me  from  my  youth  :  and  hitherto  have  I  declared  Thy  wondrous  works."  There 
may  be  some  young  people  here  to-night,  just  come  back  from  school,  boys  and 
girls  who  are  just  finishing  their  school  days.  I  would  to  God  that  they  would 
spend  some  time  in  holy,  quiet  thought  about  their  future,  about  whom  they  will 
serve,  who  shall  be  their  Teacher,  for  whom  they  will  become  teachers,  and  how  the 
life  which  has  now  become  more  public  than  before  shall  be  spent. 

As  I  stood  there,  last  week,  I  could  not  help  praising  God  that,  not  long  after  I 
left  that  school,  He  led  me  to  faith  in  Christ,  and  to  rest  in  Him,  and  find  eternal 
life  ;  and  I  could  not  but  thank  God  that  I  went  to  that  school  for  twelve  months. 
It  was  a  Church  of  England  school.  I  had  never  seen  anything  of  Church  of 
Englandism  till  that  time  ;  but  there  was  a  turning  in  my  life,  through  being  there, 
to  which  I  owe  my  being  here.  The  Church  of  England  Catechism  has  in  it,  as 
some  ot  you  may  remember,  this  question,  "  What  is  required  of  persons  to  be 
baptized  ?  "  and  the  answer  I  was  taught  to  give,  and  did  give,  was,  "  Repentance, 
whereby  they  forsake  sin  ;  and  faith,  whereby  they  steadfastly  believe  the  promises 
of  God  made  to  them  in  that  sacrament."  I  looked  that  answer  up  in  the  Bible,  and 
I  found  it  to  be  strictly  correct  as  far  as  repentance  and  faith  are  concerned  ;  and  of 
course,  when  I  afterwards  became  a  Christian,  I  also  became  a  Baptist  ;  and  here  I 
am,  and  it  is  due  to  the  Church  of  England  Catechism  that  I  am  a  Baptist.  Having 
been  brought  up  amongst  Congregationalists,  I  had  never  looked  at  the  matter  in 
my  life.  I  had  thought  myself  to  have  been  baptized  as  an  infant  ;  and  so,  when  I 
was  confronted  with  the  question,  "What  is  required  of  persons  to  be  baptized?" 
and  I  found  that  repentance  and  faith  were  required,  I  said  to  myseli,  "  Then  I  have 
not  been  baptized  ;  that  infant  sprinkling  of  mine  was  a  mistake  ;  and  please  God 
that  I  ever  have  repentance  and  faith,  I  will  be  properly  baptized."  I  did  not  know 
that  there  was  one  other  person  in  the  world  who  held  the  same  opinion  ;  for  so  little 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 


53 


do  Baptists  make  any  show,  or  so  little  did  they  do  so  then,  that  I  did  not  know  of 
their  existence.  So  I  feel  grateful  to  the  Church  school,  and  grateful  to  the  Church 
C?itechism,  for  what  I  learnt  at  Maidstone.  I  do  not  know  that  I  have  any  vivid 
gratitude  for  any  other  question  in  the  Catechism  ;  but  I  am  very  thankful  for  that 
particular  one,  for  it  led  me  where  it  was  never  intended  to  lead  me  by  those  who 
wrote  it.  It  led  me,  however,  as  I  believe,  to  follow  the  Scriptural  teaching  that 
repentance  and  faith  are  required  before  there  can  be  any  true  baptism. 


The  Young  Usher's  Teacher  in  Theology. 

The  first  lessons  I  ever  had  in  theology  were  from  an  old  cook  in  the  school  at 
Newmarket  where  I  was  an  usher.  She  was  a  good  old  soul,  and  used  to  read  The 
Gospel  Standard.  She  liked  something  very  sweet  indeed,  good  strong  Calvinistic 
doctrine  ;  but  she  lived  strongly  as  well  as  fed  strongly.  Many  a  time  v/e  have  gone 
over  the  covenant  of  grace  together,  and  talked  of  the  personal  election  of  the  saints, 
their  union  to  Christ,  their  final  perseverance,  and  what  vital  godliness  meant ;  and  I 
do  believe  that  I  learnt  more  from  her  than  I  should  have  learned  from  any  six 
doctors  of  divinity  of  the  sort  we  have  nowadays.  There  are  some  Christian  people 
who  taste,  and  see,  and  enjoy  religion  in  their  own  souls,  and  who  get  at  a  deeper 
knowledge  of  it  than  books  can  ever  give  them,  though  they  should  search  all  their 
days.  The  cook  at  Newmarket  was  a  godly  experienced  woman,  from  whom  I 
learned  far  more  than  I  did  from  the  minister  of  the  chapel  we  attended.  I  asked 
her  once,  "Why  do  you  go  to  such  a  place.'*"  She  replied,  "Well,  there  is  no 
other  place  of  worship  to  which  I  can  go."  I  said,  "  But  it  must  be  better  to  stay 
at  home  than  to  hear  such  stuff."  "  Perhaps  so,"  she  answered  ;  "  but  I  like  to  go 
out  to  worship  even  if  I  get  nothing  by  going.  You  see  a  hen  sometimes  scratching 
all  over  a  heap  of  rubbish  to  try  to  find  some  corn  ;  she  does  not  get  any,  but  it 
shows  that  she  is  looking  for  it,  and  using  the  means  to  get  it,  and  then,  too,  the 
exercise  warms  her."  So  the  old  lady  said  that  scratching  over  the  poor  sermons 
she  heard  was  a  blessing  to  her  because  it  exercised  her  spiritual  faculties  and 
warmed  her  spirit.  On  another  occasion  I  told  her  that  I  had  not  found  a  crumb  in 
the  whole  sermon,  and  asked  how  she  had  fared.  "  Oh  !  "  she  answered,  "  I  got  on 
better  to-night,  for  to  all  the  preacher  said,  I  just  put  in  a  not,  and  that  turned  his 
talk  into  real  gospel." 

tP  *  'Hf-  ^ 

(After  Mr.  Spurgeon  was  "called  home,"  Professor  J.  D.  Everett,  F.R.S.,  of 
Queen's  College,  Belfast,  wrote  to  The  Christian  World : — "  In  the  summer  of  1849, 
when  I  was  not  quite  eighteen,  I  went  to  Newmarket  to  assist  in  a  school  kept  by  a 


i;4.  C.     H.     SPURCxEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Mr.  Swindell,*  who  had  been  an  old  friend  of  my  father's,  and  who  had  my  brothers, 
Percy  and  John,  as  pupils.  There  were  two  other  assistants,  but  not  long  after  my 
arrival  they  went  off,  and  I  was  left  for  a  week  or  so  as  the  sole  assistant.  I  was 
then  relieved  of  part  of  my  duty  by  a  lad  of  fifteen,  who  came  as  an  articled  pupil. 
This  was  Charles  H.  Spurgeon,  and  for  the  next  three  months  we  shared  the  work 
between  us.  We  boarded  in  the  house,  occupied  the  same  bedroom,  took  our  walks 
together,  discussed  our  common  grievances,  and  were  the  best  ot  friends.  He  was 
a  keen  observer  of  men  and  manners,  and  very  shrewd  in  his  judgments.  He 
enjoyed  a  joke,  but  was  earnest,  hard-working,  and  strictly  conscientious.  He  had  a 
wonderful  memory  for  passages  of  oratory  which  he  admired,  and  used  to  pour  forth 
to  me  with  great  gusto,  in  our  walks,  long  screeds  from  open-air  addresses  of  a  very 
rousino-  description,  which  he  had  heard  delivered  at  Colchester  Fair,  by  the 
Congregational  minister,  Mr.  Davids.  His  imagination  had  evidently  been  greatly 
impressed  by  these  services,  at  which,  by-the-by,  his  father  was  selected  to  give  out 
the  hymns  on  account  of  the  loudness  of  his  voice, — a  quality  which  would  appear  to 
have  run  in  the  family,  but  which  had  not  at  that  time  shown  itself  in  my  young 
friend.  I  have  also  heard  him  recite  long  passages  from  Bunyan's  Grace  Aboiuiding. 
He  was  a  delightful  companion,  cheerful  and  sympathetic  ;  a  good  listener  as  well  as 
a  good  talker.  And  he  was  not  cast  in  a  common  conventional  mould,  but  had  a 
strong  character  of  his  own. 

"  As  to  the  early  history  of  his  theological  views,  I  can  add  something  to  what 
has  been  already  published.  In  Mr.  Swindell's  household  there  was  a  faithful  old 
servant, — a  big,  sturdy  woman,  who  was  well  known  to  me  and  all  the  inmates  as 
'cook.'  She  was  a  woman  of  strono-  religrious  feelings,  and  a  devout  Calvinist. 
Spurgeon,  when  under  deep  religious  conviction,  had  conversed  with  her,  and  been 
deeply  impressed  with  her  views  of  Divine  truth.  He  explained  this  to  me,  and  told 
me,  in  his  own  terse  fashion,  that  it  was  '  cook  '  who  had  taught  him  his  theology.  I 
hope  I  am  not  violating  his  confidence  in  mentioning  this  fact.  It  is  no  discredit  to 
the  memory  of  a  great  man  that  he  was  willing  to  learn  from  the  humblest  sources.") 

(When  the  above  article  appeared  in  print,  Mr.  Robert  Mattingly,  of  Great 
Cornard,  Sudbury,  wrote  to  the  same  paper  : — 

"About  twenty-five  years  ago,  I  became  acquainted  with  the  person  referred  to, 
Mary  King  by  name.      She  was  then  living  in  cottage  lodgings,  facing  St.  IVlargaret's 


{Copy  oj  memorial  card.) 

*  JOHN    SWINDELL, 

Died  at  Jeffries  Road,  Clapham, 

i8th  September,   1882, 

Aged  Si   years. 

This  ts  the  person  with  whom  I  lived  as  usher  at  Newwarliet. 

C.  H.  Spukgeon. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S  •AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  55 

Church,  Ipswich,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Bethesda  Strict  Baptist  Church,  close  by. 
She  was  a  staunch  Calvinist,  logical,  clear-headed,  and  had  a  wonderful  knowledge  of 
the  Bible.  I  have  often  heard  from  her  lips  the  account  of  her  intercourse  with  the 
youthful  Spurgeon,  of  which  she  was  naturally  not  a  little  proud,  as  he  had  then 
attained  the  height  of  his  marvellous  popularity.  Professor  Everett  says  she  was 
known  as  'cook.'  She  always  spoke  of  herself  as  'housekeeper',  and  as  the  inter- 
course between  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  herself  seemed  to  be  quite  within  the  order  of  the 
household,  she  probably  occupied  something  more  than  a  menial  position.  During 
my  acquaintance  with  her,  I  learned  that  she  had  outlived  all,  or  nearly  all,  ot  a 
small  income  (I  do  not  remember  from  what  source).  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
acquainting  him  with  the  facts,  and  received  from  him  a  prompt  reply,  thanking  me 
for  my  letter,  sending  a  hearty  greeting  to  his  old  friend,  and  with  characteristic 
generosity  he  enclosed  a  cheque  for  ^5,  with  a  request  that  I  would  minister  to  her 
immediate  necessities,  pay  her  5s.  a  week,  and  generally  use  my  discretion  in 
dispensing  the  amount  in  his  behalf  This  I  did,  and  reported  to  Mr.  Spurgeon 
from  time  to  time,  always  receiving  a  fresh  cheque  when  the  fund  in  hand  became 
exhausted,  and  this  was  continued  until  her  death  about  three  years  later.") 

*  *  *  * 

(Professor  Everett  has  kindly  transcribed  from  his  journal  all  the  entries  relating 
to  Mr.  Spurgeon  while  at  Newmarket.  Most  of  the  matters  mentioned  are  not  of 
general  public  interest,  but  the  two  following  items  are  worthy  of  preservation  in  this 
volume  : — 

''Monday,  Sept.  10  (1849). — In  the  afternoon,  the  missionary  meeting  began. 
Mr.  Spurgeon  was  made  chairman.  [This  was  a  meeting  of  the  boys,  in  the  school- 
room. I  believe  it  was  the  first  time  Mr.  Spurgeon  ever  made  a  speech.  He  spoke 
fluently.] 

"  Tuesday,  October  9. — After  dinner,  I  took  Percy  and  four  other  boys  to  see  the 
races.  We  saw  the  Cesarewitch,  the  most  celebrated  race  at  Newmarket ;  thirty-one 
horses  ran.  We  also  saw  four  other  races.  I  saw  quite  enough  to  gratify  my 
curiosity,  and  did  not  wish  to  stop  to  see  any  more  races.  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  go, 
as  he  thought  he  should  be  doing  wrong  if  he  went.") 


CHAPTER    VIII. 


^  l^oliiias  JIastime — (l^ssag  on  JPoptrg- 

I  knew  a  lad  in  Christ,  who  adopted  the  principle  of  giving  a  tenth  to  God.  When  he  won 
a  money  prize  for  an  essay  on  a  religious  subject,  he  felt  that  he  could  not  give  less  than  one-fifth 
of  it.  He  had  never  after  that  been  able  to  deny  himself  the  pleasure  of  having  a  fifth  to  give. 
God  had  wonderfully  blessed  that  lad,  and  increased  his  means,  and  his  enjoyment  of  the  luxury 
of  luxuries, — the  luxury  of  doing  good. — C.  H.  S. 


N   the  library  at  "  Westwood,"  very  carefully  preserved,  Is  a  bound 
volume  containing  295   manuscript  pages,   lettered  on  the  back, — 

Spurgeon's 
Popery    Unmasked. 


On  the  front  outside  cover  is  a  red  leather  label,  with  the  follov/ing  words  printed 
upon  it  in  gold  letters  thus, — 


1  ANTICHRIST 

AND 

HER    BROOD; 1 

OR, 

j 
1 

POPERY 

UNMASKED. 

1 

BY 

C.     H.     SPURGEON 

JITAT. 

XV. 

5^  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


^Je^iA.  C^ 


CA^ 


/^ 


i>-t^     .'Oiji.^yt^     tr-i-T^^^      ^     /%^      (^':'-^-'>''''^T--e^-<^'Z><^    /rrt.    d. 


■^^yUA^      <^  ^-<^    c:>^^-<^ctyLc/e.  c/    ^^      ^=2--^^       c^^^/>^A^ '^~i>^<^  ^d^-^-T:::^    ^ri^ 


^^-^o^c^/iZcr-Y         ^^-L^yi         ^^^fc^<^<^T^      -/.tri.       /Ae      A.c.c.J^<^       ^.^-V^^^^^ 


c.  ^.^..^^^_^_^ 


^ 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  59 

On  the  opposite  page  is  a  fac-simile  of  Mr.  .Spurgeon's  own  account  of  the 
orio-in  of  the  volume,  and  of  its  appreciation  by  Mr.  Morley,  whose  Christian 
name  is  made  known  in  the  second  letter  from  Mr.  Smith,  who  was  at  that  time 
Congregational  minister  at  Poplar,  and  who,  on  August  i6th,  1859,  met  the  young 
essayist,  and  took  part  with  him  in  the  services  held  in  connection  with  the  laying 
of  the  first  stone  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle: — 

"  Poplar, 

"  Dec.  30,  185  [. 
"My  dear  Sir, 

"  Enclosed    is    an    order    for ,    which     my    brother-in-law,     Mr. 

Arthur    Morley,    of  Nottingham,    presents    to    you.       I    shall    be    obliged    by    your 
acknowledgment  of  the  same. 

"  It  gives  me  pleasure  to  hear  of  your  success  in  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
God  will,  I  trust,  continue  to  bless  you.  Depend  on  Him,  and  use  all  the  means 
within  your  reach  for  the  cultivation  and  improvement  of  your  mind. 

"  I   remain, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  G.    Smith. 
"  Mr.  C.  Spurgeon, 

"  No.  9,   Union   Road, 

"  Cambridge." 


A  letter  of  the  same  period,  written  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to  his  father,  gives 
further  particulars  concerning  the  Essay,  and  also  explains  how  the  writer  proposed 
to  use  most  of  the  money  that  had  thus  unexpectedly  reached  him.  It  furnishes 
besides  an  interesting  glimpse  of  the  young  preacher's  early  services  at  Waterbeach, 
of  which  more  will  appear  in  a  later  chapter,  and  also  of  the  way  in  which  he  was 
preparing  for  his  great  life-work  : — 

"  Cambridge, 

"  Dec.  31st,  1851. 
"  My   Dear  Father, 

"  Your  Christmas  letter  was  quite  as  welcome  to  me  as  [mine  was]  to 
you — no  good  action  is  ever  forgotten.  I  was  at  Waterbeach  staying  among  my 
people,  and  so  did  not  receive  your  letter  till  my  return.  I  preached  twice  on 
Christmas  [day]  to  crammed  congregations,  and  again  on  Sunday  quite  as  lull. 
The  Lord  gives  me  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  ;  they  come  for  miles,  and  are 


6o  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

wondrously  attentive.  I  am  invited  [to  preach  at  Waterbeach]  for  six  months.  My 
reputation  in  Cambridge  is  rather  great. 

"  This  letter  from  Mr.  Smith  is  an  honour.  I  have  now  more  money  for  books. 
When  I  wrote  my  essay  on  my  knees  in  the  Httle  room  upstairs,  I  solemnly  vowed  to 
give  two  tithes  of  anything  I  might  gain  by  it  to  the   Lord's  cause.      I  have  written, 

the  money  is  come My  MS.  will  arrive  here  shortly.      Now,  if  you  wish, 

I  will  send  you  £,  :        :        [five-sixths  of  the  amount  received]  as  a  little  present 

to  you  and  dear  Mother — that  shall  be  exactly  as  you  please — I  do  not  know  yet 
how  much  I  am  to  pay  Mr.  Leeding.  I  have  enough.  Mr.  L.  has  given  me  a  five- 
pound  note,  which  I  shall  not  touch  except  for  clothes.  I  mean  to  keep  that  money 
only  for  clothes  ;  what  I  earn  on  Sundays  is  my  own  for  books,  expenses,  &c.  I 
hope  I  am  sparing,  but  I  have  bought  several  books,  which  I  could  not  do  without. 
This  week  I  have  purchased  a  good  Septuagint,  which  is  a  Greek  translation  of  the 
Old  Testament ;  you  will  see  it  mentioned  by  commentators.  This  I  did  for  two 
reasons — i.  To  improve  my  Greek.  2.  To  assist  me  in  studying  the  Bible.  I  got  it 
in  two  volumes,  unbound,  for  12s.  6d. — at  that  price  it  is  reckoned  exceedingly  cheap. 

"  Now  and  then  you  must  give  me  leave  to  preach  three  times,  not  often.  I 
have  done  so  about  four  times,  I  was  not  at  all  tired.  I  shall  never  do  so  if  I  have 
had  a  hard  day.  When  I  feel  myself  in  tune  and  not  at  all  tired,  I  may  do  so  ;  but 
only  now  and  then.  I  must  say,  however,  I  always  get  the  best  congregation  in  the 
evening,  or  at  least  just  as  good,  for  sometimes  it  is  best  all  day  :  and  you  would  not 
have  me  give  up  so  good  a  place.  I  have  prayed  earnestly  that  prosperity  and  fame 
may  not  injure  me,  and  I  believe  strength  will  be  equal  to  my  day.  More  than  one 
in  Waterbeach  have  declared  themselves  on  the  Lord's  side — the  church  is  praying- 
hard,  and  they  seem  very  united. 

"  I  take  every  opportunity  of  improving  myself  and  seize  every  means  of 
improvement.  I  have  lately  attended  three  lectures  in  the  Town  Hall  to  get 
information  ;  I  trust  I  do." 

[The   conclusion  of   the  letter  is  missing.] 


In  order  that  readers  may  be  able  to  form  some  idea  of  the  Essay  written  by 
C.  H.  Spurgeon  when  fifteen  years  of  age,  the  headings  of  the  seventeen  chapters 
are  here  given,  with  one  chapter  as  a  specimen  of  the  other  sixteen.  That 
particular  portion  of  the  work  was  selected  to  show  how  the  writer,  even  before  his 
conversion,  had  very  clear  ideas  as  to  spiritual  matters.  It  is  remarkable  that  he 
should  have  quoted  in  this  part  of  the  Essay  (see  page  63)  the  very  passage  which, 
a  few  weeks  afterwards,  the  Lord  used  as  the  means  of  his  salvation  :  "  Look  unto 
Me,  and  be  yc  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth." 


C.      H.     SPL'RGEOn's     AUTUIJIOGRAI'HV.  6l 

ANTICHRIST   AND    HER    BROOD;    OR,    POPERY    UNMASKED. 

Heads  of  Chapters. 

Chap.  I.  Popery,  the  Apostate  Spirit. 

II.  Popery  Established  by  Cunning. 

III.  Popery,  a  Spiritual  Darkness. 

IV.  Popery,,  a  Mass  of  Superstition. 
V.  Popery,  a  Ravenous  Wolf. 

VI.  Examination  of  the  Claims  of  Popery. 

VII.  Popery,  a  CompHcated  Idolatry.     The  Worship  of  the  Virgin  Mary 

VIII.  Popery,  a  Polytheism.     Worship  of  Saints. 

IX.  Popery,  the  Worship  of  Cast  Clouts  and  Rotten  Rags. 

X.  Popery,  vi  Violation  of  the  Second  Commandment. 

XI.  Popery  Teaches  the  Adoration  of  a  Breaden  God. 

XII.  Popery  Perverts  and  Destroys  the  Sacred  Ordinances  of  Christianity. 

XIII.  Popery  Surrounds  Itself  with  Rites  and  Ceremonies. 

XIV.  Popery,  the  Inventor  of  a  False  Purgation. 
XV.  Popery,  a  Gigantic  Horseleech. 

XVI.     Popery,  the  Religion  of  Fools,  who  make  a  Mock  at  .Sin. 
XVII.     Popery,  the  Enemy  of  Science,  and  the  Bane  of  the  Human  Race. 
*  #  #  # 

Chapter  III. 
Popery,  a  Spiritual  Darkness. 
The  Bible  withheld. — ^False  statement  of  a  priest. — The  Scriptures  unintelligible 
because  in  an  unknown  tongue. — Bible  burnt  round  the  necks  of  heretics. — Council 
of  Trent. — Blasphemy  of  its  decrees. — Case  in  point. — Testimony  of  Du  Moulin. 
— Bible  Societies. — Bull  of  Pius  VII. — Bible  mystified  by  notes. — Bible  the  Word  of 
God. — Popery  unchanged. — Bishop  of  Nice  burns  Bibles  in  1S41. — Declaration  of 
Popish  Bishops. — Duty  to  read  the  Bible. — Sermons  omitted. — Ignorance  of  the 
Priests. — Sermons  nothing  but  ribaldry. — Immense  service  of  Ignorance. 

The  three  most  powerful  and  most  apparent  means  used  by  Rome  to  retain  her 
power  over  the  minds  of  her  votaries  are  Ignorance,  Superstition,  and  Persecution. 

First,  then,  let  us  look  at  lonorance  which,  though  not  "the  mother  of 
devotion,"  is  certainly  the  favourer  of  superstition.  This  has  been  one  of  the  grand 
agents  of  Popery  ever  since  her  establishment  ;  by  it,  the  eyes  of  men  have  been  so 
blinded  that  they  can  scarcely  discern  between  good  and  evil,  and  follow  implicitly 
any  guide  even  until  they  fall  into  the  ditch  of  perdition. 

The    grossest    ignorance    is    spiritual    ignorance ;    and    the    greatest    spiritual 


62  C.     11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

darkness  is  to  be  ignorant  of  the  only  way  of  salvation  as  it  is  revealed  alone  in 
the  Scriptures. 

The  Church  which  withholds  the  Bible  from  its  members,  or  takes  away  from 
them  the  genuine  Word  of  God,  is  guilty  of  bringing  the  most  dreadful  famine  upon 
the  minds  of  men,  and  will  be  in  a  great  measure  guilty  of  their  blood.  This  charge 
is  one  of  the  most  weighty  ever  brought  against  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  one  which 
can  be  very  easily  substantiated. 

The  Rev.  A.  Scott,  of  Glasgow,  in  a  letter  against  The  Pi'otestant,  a  contro- 
versial work  published  about  30  years  since,  says  : — "  I  can  publicly  declare — without 
danger  of  being  contradicted  by  my  brethren,  or  censured  by  my  superiors, — that  it 
never  was  a  principle  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  that  the  Scriptures  should  be 
withheld  from  the  laity,  and  there  never  was  any  law  enacted  by  the  supreme  legis- 
lative authority  in  the  Catholic  Church  by  which  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures  was 
prohibited.  If  it  was  indeed  a  principle  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  to  deprive 
her  members  of  the  use  of  the  Divine  Word  by  forbidding  them  to  read  and  search 
the  Scriptures,  she  would  indeed  be  cruel  and  unjust." 

Here,  then,  is  a  distinguished  Roman  Catholic  priest  publicly  disowning  this 
great  bulwark  of  Romanism. 

We  cordially  agree  with  the  rev.  gentleman,  that  it  is  cruel  and  unjust  to  with- 
hold the  Bible  ;  but  we  hope  to  be  able  to  disprove  his  barefaced  falsehood,  and 
convince  the  world  to  the  contrary. 

The  Scriptures  were  translated  into  the  Latin  tongue  by  Jerome  ,  but  that 
language  becoming  dead,  and  the  Church  neglecting  to  supply  translations,  it  was 
only  intelligible  to  the  learned  ;  it  was  not  forbidden  to  the  people,  but  it  was  of  no 
more  use  to  them  than  a  scroll  of  hieroglyphics.  This  state  of  things  continued  from 
the  eighth  to  the  thirteenth  centuries  when,  at  the  Council  of  Toulouse,  the  Scrip- 
tures were  forbidden  to  the  laity  both  in  the  Latin  and  ,vulgar  tongues.  We  all 
know  how  violently  the  Pope  was  enraged  against  Wycliffe  for  his  undertaking  to 
translate  the  Scriptures  into  I'higlish.  Had  the  Pope  had  his  will,  the  translator  and 
his  version  of  the  Bible  would  have  been  burnt  in  the  same  fire  ;  indeed,  it  was  no 
uncommon  thing,  previous  to  Luther's  Reformation,  to  burn  heretics  with  the  Bible 
about  their  necks. 

The  reading  of  the  Bible  was  understood  invariably  to  produce  heresy  ;  and 
there  were  many  who  suffered  death  for  no  other  crime. 

In  the  decisions  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  1564,  this  clause  occurs  : — "Seeing  it 
is  manifest,  by  experience,  that  if  the  Holy  Bible  be  permitted  to  be  read  every- 
where, without  difference,  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  more  harm  than  good  results  thence, 
through  the  rashness  of  men,  let  it  therefore  be  at  the  pleasure  of  the  bishop  or 
inquisitor,  with  the  advice  of  the  parish  clerk  or  confessor,  to  grant  the  reading  of  the 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  63 

Bible,  translated  by  Catholic  authors,  to  those  who,  in  their  opinion,  will  thereby 
receive  an  increase  of  faith  and  piety.  This  license  let  them  have  in  writing,  and 
whoever  shall  presume,  without  permission,  to  read  or  possess  such  Bibles,  may  not 
receive  the  absolution  of  sins  till  he  has  returned  them  to  the  ordinary." 

Abominable  blasphemy  !  So,  then,  the  Church  of  Kome.  permits  the  Almighty, 
under  certain  circumstances,  to  speak  to  His  own  creatures  !  !  \\. pcr»iits  fallen  and 
miserable  men  sometimes  to  hear  the  Word  of  their  Creator  ! 

In  the  Bible,  the  Almighty  addresses  us  as  by  a  voice  from  Heaven  :  "  Look 
unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  The  Church  of  Rome  stands 
by,  and  presumes  to  decide  who  shall  and  who  shall  not  hear  these  words  of  the 
Almighty  Saviour  ;  and  if  any  person  shall  at  all  hear  them,  it  is  by  her  permission. 
Surely,  then,  this  Church  of  Rome  is  that  Antichrist, — that  opposing  power  that 
exalts  itself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that  is  worshipped. 

To  assume  the  power  of  permitting  creatures  to  hear  what  God  shall  speak,  is 
assuming  an  authority  at  least  equal  to  that  of  God,  and  a  right  to  control  or  regulate 
the  manner  of  His  communicating  His  will  to  His  creatures. 

We  will  suggest  a  case  somewhat  similar.  Suppose  that,  in  the  City  of  London, 
there  were  a  number  of  traitors  who  had  openly  rebelled  against  the  Queen  ;  and 
that  she,  out  of  her  gracious  disposition,  and  aversion  to  destroy  those  traitors, 
should  issue  a  proclamation  promising  a  free  pardon  to  those  who  would  submit 
themselves  to  the  authority  of  the  laws.  Now  suppose  that  the  Lord  Mayor  and 
Aldermen  were  to  sit  in  Council,  and  consider  whether  or  not  they  would  permit  this 
proclamation  to  be  published  in  London  ;  and  suppose  that  they  should  even  come 
to  a  resolution  to  permit  this  proclamation  to  be  published,  would  not  this  lead  you 
strongly  to  suspect  their  loyalty  for  presuming  to  put  their  authority  on  a  footing 
with  that  of  the  Sovereign,  and  presuming  to  ''permit"  her  proclamation  to  be 
published  ? 

God  addresses  His  gospel  to  sinners  as  such,  in  order  that,  hearing  and 
believing  it,  sinners  may  be  saved  ;  but  the  Church  of  Rome  exercises  her  authority 
to  prevent,  as  far  as  she  is  able,  the  Word  of  God  from  reaching  the  ears  of  sinners. 
She  allows  it  to  be  addressed  only  to  such  as  will  "  thereby  receive  an  increase  of 
faith  and  piety;"  that  is,  to  persons  who  are  already  faithful  and  pious  in  some 
degree.  Thus,  she  proves  herself  to  be  in  league  with  Satan,  for  the  purpose  of 
keeping  men  under  the  bondage  of  sin  to  the  everlasting  ruin  of  their  souls. 

But,  to  return  to  history,  the  learned  and  excellent  Du  Moulin,  a  French 
Protestant  divine  of  the  seventeenth  century,  says,  "  That  the  people  may  be  blinded 
and  deceived  without  understanding  so  much,  the  Pope  hath  wrested  the  Scriptures 
out  of  their  hands,  and  taken  order  that  they  should  not  be  translated  into  a  known 
tongue.     Within  these  few  years,  the  Scriptures  were  no  more  known  to  the  people 


■64  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

than  the  Alcoran  ;  there  were  only  some  Latin  Bibles  in  monasteries  and  clergymen's 
houses." 

In  1824,  Pope  Leo  XI L  styles  the  Scriptures  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  "  Poisonous 
Pastures,"  and  exhorts  the  clergy  to  turn  the  flock  away  from  them.  In  a  Bull  of 
Pope  Pius  VII.,  against  Bible  Societies,  in  1816,  he  says: — "We  have  been  truly 
shocked  by  this  most  crafty  device  by  which  the  very  foundations  of  religion  are 
undermined.  The  Bible  printed  by  heretics  is  to  be  numbered  among  other  pro- 
hibited books,  conformably  to  the  rules  of  the  Index  ;  for  it  is  evident,  from 
experience,  that  the  Holy  Scriptures,  when  circulated  in  the  vulgar  tongue,  have 
through  the  temerity  of  men  produced  more  harm  than  benefit.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  that  no  versions  of  the  Bible  in  the  vulgar  tongue  be  permitted  except 
such  as  are  approved  by  the  Apostolic  see,  or  published  with  annotations  extracted 
from  the  writings  of  the  fathers  of  the  Church." 

Here,  then,  it  is  declared  that  the  circulation  and  reading  of  the  Scriptures 
undermine  the  foundations  of  religion,  which  is  certainly  true  if  Popery  be  the  only 
true  religion.  There  is  another  Church,  however,  which  has  its  foundations  laid 
more  firmly  than  the  Church  of  Rome  ;  this  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  which  embraces 
the  Scriptures  as  its  best  ally,  and  finds  in  them  nothing  but  what  is  in  harmony 
with  itself 

The  Church  of  Rome  is  afraid  to  trust  the  Bible  alone,  because  it  destroys  the 
foundations  of  its  religion.  If  the  Scriptures  were  given  to  the  people  simply  as 
they  are,  Romanism  would  never  be  able  to  stand  against  them  ;  it  would  soon  be 
known  that  Rome  is  the  very  Antichrist.  She  therefore  mystifies  the  Word  of  God 
by  means  of  the  words  of  men  ;  she  puts  her  own  perversions  side  by  side  with 
Scripture  ;  and  declares  that,  as  she  alone  can  interpret  them,  whatever  is  said  to  be 
the  meaning  of  them  must  really  be  so. 

Is  it  not  now  proved  that  Popery  withholds  the  Bible  from  the  people  ?  It  may 
serve  as  an  illustration  of  the  character  of  Popery  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  statement 
of  the  priest  who  declared  that  it  never  was  a  principle  of  Romanism  to  deny  the 
Scriptures  to  the  people.  Popery  is  a  system  of  lies  ;  she  will  deny  or  assert,  just  as 
it  suits  her  purpose.  However,  we  will  readily  believe  his  assertion  that,  in  denying 
the  Scriptures  to  the  people,  Popery  is  "  cruel  and  unjust." 

But  many  Papists  will  endeavour  to  justify  this  prohibition  of  the  Scriptures, 
and  say  that  it  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  His  Book  should  be  read  by  common 
people.  Such  men,  when  they  hear  it  said  that  the  Bible  contains  a  complete 
revelation  of  the  Divine  will  for  the  salvation  of  our  fallen  race,  and  is  a  proclamation 
of  grace  and  pardon  to  the  very  chief  of  sinners,  will  exclaim,  "  What  nonsense  !  " 
Such  was  actually  the  case  in  a  celebrated  discussion  at  Glasgow.  But  we  will  leave 
them   to  laugh  and  jeer  ;    we   know   that  it  is  the  only  Book  which  can  cheer  the 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTORIOGRAPHY.  65 

penitent  ;  it  is  God's  Word,  and  that  alone  upon  which  a  trembling  sinner  dares  to 
rely.  But  what  argument  can  be  of  avail  with  those  who  reject  truth,  who  despise 
the  very  essence  of  truth  ?  Some  among  them  have  said,  "  How  do  you  know  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God  ?  " 

Among  other  reasons  which  will  readily  suggest  themselves,  one  alone  will 
suffice.  Every  Christian  knows,  experimentally,  that  the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God. 
When  a  sinner  becomes  seriously  concerned  about  his  character,  state,  and  prospects, 
if  he  reads  the  Bible,  he  finds  at  first  that  it  is  all  against  him.  By  the  holy  law  of 
God  he  is  convicted  and  condemned  ;  and  he  is  conscious  of  a  power  and  dignity  in 
the  Word  of  condemnation  that  makes  him  feel  that  it  is  the  Word  of  God.  There 
is  a  power  in  the  Word  that  proves  it  Divine  ;  and  he  who  has  once  experienced  its 
influence  will  never  doubt  its  truth. 

All  the  Popish  arguments  do  but  prove  that  they  love  darkness  rather  than 
light.  The  Bible  is  a  light  unto  our  feet,  and  a  lamp  unto  our  path.  Man  by  nature 
is  blind,  he  runs  the  downward  road  with  alacrity,  he  sees  not  the  end  ;  he  would 
still  continue  to  follow  the  road  which  leadeth  to  destruction  had  not  God,  in  His 
infinite  mercy,  given  him  a  sure  guide  to  bring  him  from  this  treacherous  way  to  the 
straight  and  narrow  path,  which  leads  to  His  right  hand. 

Popery  could  never  have  been  what  it  is  if  men  had  been  allowed  to  read  the 
Bible  ;  the  light  of  truth  would  have  been  too  strong  for  her  ;  she  would  have 
perished  prematurely.  What  an  awful  account  will  her  great  men  have  to  give  in, 
of  the  blood  of  thousands  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge  ! 

But  you  will  say,  "  Popery  is  changed  now  ;  surely,  she  is  much  improved." 

She  has  not  yielded  a  point  more  than  she  could  help  !  The  true  spirit  of 
Popery  is  not  allowed  to  develop  itself  in  Protestant  countries.  Here,  in  England,  it 
would  seem  that  the  Catholic  is  under  little  restraint.  The  Bible  is  printed  for  his 
use  in  England,  though  always  with  explanatory  notes  as  if  it  could  not  be  trusted 
alone.  But  on  the  Continent  of  Europe,  and  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  system 
has  full  scope.      In  Rome,  very  few  of  the  people  know  what  you  mean  by  a  Bible. 

In  1 84 1,  the  Bishop  of  Nice  burnt  all  the  French  Bibles  he  could  collect.  Can 
any  more  flagitious  wickedness  be  conceived  than  for  a  creature  of  the  dust,  invested 
with  the  holy  character  of  a  bishop  of  the  living  God,  and  a  minister  of  Jesus,  to 
dare,  with  sacrilegious  hands,  to  cast  into  the  flames  the  blessed  Book  of  God, 
inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost?  In  the  great  dread  day  of  judgment,  what  excuse 
will  this  apostate  Church  and  her  Bible-burning  priesthood  have  to  prefer  before 
the  heart-searching  God  in  justification  of  these  things  ? 

Dr.  Doyle,  an  Irish  Roman  Catholic  bishop,  when  asked  whether  he  had  ever 
seen  a  translation  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  language  of  Portugal,  where  he  was 
brought   up,   answered,    "  No,    I   have   not."      Dr.   Murray,   another  bishop,   did   not 

E 


66  c.    II.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

know  for  a  fact  whether  there  was  a  Spanish  version  of  the  Bible.  They  both  stated 
that  they  would  refuse  the  Sacrament  to  any  person  who  should  persist  in  reading 
the  Bible. 

The  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  then,  is  still  condemned  by  the  Romish  Church, 
in  opposition  to  the  Word  of  God,  which  says,  "  Seek  ye  out  of  the  Book  of  the 
Lord,  and  read  "  (Isaiah  xxxiv.  i6);  "  Search  the  Scriptures  ;  for  in  them  ye  think 
ye  have  eternal  life  :  and  they  are  they  which  testify  of  Me  "  (John  v.  39)  ;  "  and  take 
the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God  " 
(Ephesians  vi.  17)  ;  and  numerous  other  exhortations. 

But  this  prohibition  of  the  Bible  might  not  have  been  so  great  an  evil,  if  the 
churchmen  had  preached  the  Word  of  Life  to  the  people.  The  first  triumphs  of 
Christianity  were  accomplished  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  by  the  mouth  of  the 
apostles,  and  not  by  the  written  Word  ;  and,  therefore,  some  amount  of  religious 
knowledge  might  have  been  communicated  to  the  people  by  preaching,  even  in  the 
absence  of  the  Scriptures.  But  the  prohibition  of  the  Bible,  together  with  the 
ignorance  of  the  priests,  soon  brought  the  sermon  into  disuse,  or  only  on  special 
occasions  were  any  discourses  delivered. 

About  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  "  the  ignorance  of  the  priests 
was  extreme."  Numbers  could  not  read,  most  pnly  muttered  mass  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  and  read  a  legend  on  festiv^al  days  ;  the  very  best  seldom  saw  the  Bible. 
It  was  held  by  many  that  the  doctrines  of  religion  were  so  properly  expressed  by  the 
schoolmen,  that  there  was  no  need  to  read  Scripture.  One  of  eminence  was  asked 
what  were  the  ten  commandments  ;  he  replied,  "  There  is  no  such  book  in  the 
library."  Many  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  declared,  and  confirmed  it  by  an  oath, 
that,  though  they  were  about  fifty  years  of  age,  yet  they  had  never  known  what  a 
New  Testament  was.  Luther  never  saw  a  Bible  till  after  he  was  twenty  years  old, 
and  had  taken  a  degree  of  arts.  Carolstadt  had  been  a  doctor  of  divinity  eight  years 
before  he  read  the  Scriptures  ;  and  yet,  when  he  stood  for  a  degree  in  the  University 
of  Wittemberg,  he  obtained  an  honour,  and  it  was  entered  in  the  University  records 
that  he  wa.s  '^ stijficienttsshmis."  Pelican  could  not  procure  one  Greek  Testament  in 
all  Germany  ;  the  first  he  got  was  from  Italy. 

Who  can  wonder  at  the  superstitions  and  errors  of  the  Church  of  Rome  .■* 
When  sermons  were  delivered,  they  were  a  collection  of  forced  interpretations, 
legends  fabricated  on  the  spot,  and  base  ribaldry.  The  people  would  have  been 
better  without  them,  many  of  these  mock  sermons  were  only  calculated  to  excite  the 
audience  to  laughter,  and  to  furnish  them  with  amusement  for  the  week.  Ignorance 
held  its  dark  reign,  with  scarcely  a  spark  of  light,  and  must  have  been  of  immense 
service  in  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  and  the  support  of  the 
dominion  of  Antichrist. 


CHAPTER     IXo 


€;arl2  Iveligious  Imprtssions. 


v  ■^  K?' 


MY   FATHER   AND    MOTHER. 

It  would  not  be  easy  for  some  of  us  to  recall  the  hour  when  we  first  heard  the  name  of  Jesus. 
In  very  infancy  that  sweet  sound  was  as  familiar  to  our  ear  as  the  hush  of  lullaby.  Our  earliest 
recollections  are  associated  with  the  house  of  God,  the  family  altar,  the  Holy  Bible,  the  sacred  song, 
and  the  fervent  prayer.  Like  young  Samuels,  we  were  lighted  to  our  rest  by  the  lamps  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  were  awakened  by  the  sound  of  the  morning  hymn  Many  a  time  has  the  man  of  God,  whom  a 
parent's  hospitality  has  entertained,  implored  a  blessing  on  our  head,  desiring  in  all  sincerity  that  we 
might  early  call  the  Redeemer  blessed;  and  to  his  petition  a  mother's  earnest  "Amen"  has  solemnly 
responded.  Perhaps  the  first  song  we  learned  to  sing  was  concerning  the  children's  best  Friend.  The 
first  book  that  we  began  to  read  contained  His  sweet  name,  and  many  were  the  times  when  we  were 
pressed  by  godly  ones  to  think  of  Jesus,  and  to  give  our  young  hearts  to  Him. — C.  H.  S. 

WAS  privileged  with  godly  parents,  watched  with  jealous  eyes, 
scarcely  ever  permitted  to  mingle  with  questionable  associates, 
warned  not  to  listen  to  anything  profane  or  licentious,  and  taught 
the  way  of  God  from  my  youth  up.  There  came  a  time  when  the 
solemnities  of  eternity  pressed  upon  me  for  a  decision,  and  when  a 
mother's  tears  and  a  father's  supplications  were  offered  to  Heaven 
on  my  behalf  At  such  a  time,  had  I  not  been  helped  by  the  grace  of  God,  but  had 
I  been  left  alone  to  do  violence  to  conscience,  and  to  struggle  against  conviction,  I 
might  perhaps  have  been  at  this  moment  dead,  buried,  and  doomed,  having  through 
a  course  of  vice  brought  myself  to  my  grave,  or  I  might  have  been  as  earnest  a 
ringleader  amongst  the  ungodly  as  I  now  desire  to  be  an  eager  champion  for  Christ 
and  His  truth. 

I  do  speak  of  myself  with  many  deep  regrets  of  heart.      I  hid  as  it  were  my 


68  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 

face  from  Him,  and  I  let  the  years  run  round, — not  without  twinges  of  conscience, 
not  without  rebukes,  when  I  knew  how  much  I  needed  a  Saviour  ;  not  without  the 
warnings  which  came  from  others  whom  I  saw  happy  and  rejoicing  in  Christ,  while  I 
had  no  share  in  His  salvation.  Still,  1  put  it  off,  as  others  are  doing,  from  day  to  day, 
and  month  to  month,  and  thought  that  Christ  might  come  in  some  odd  hour,  and 
when  I  had  nothinsr  else  to  do,  I  mig^ht  think  of  Him  whose  blood  could  cleanse  me. 
O  my  soul,  I  could  fain  smite  thee  now  !  Truly,  I  could  lay  this  rod  about  my  own 
heart  to  think  that  weeks  and  months  should  have  rolled  over  my  head,  and  I  should 
have  hid  as  it  were  my  face  from  Christ  in  wilful  neglect  of  my  dear  Lord  whose 
heart  had  bled  for  me. 

Children  are  often  very  reticent  to  their  parents.  Often  and  often  have  I  spoken 
with  young  lads  about  their  souls,  and  they  have  told  me  they  could  not  talk  to  their 
fathers  upon  such  matters.  I  know  it  was  so  with  me.  When  I  was  under  concern 
of  soul,  the  last  persons  I  should  have  elected  to  speak  to  upon  religion  would  have 
been  my  parents, — not  through  want  of  love  to  them,  nor  absence  of  love  on  their 
part  ;  but  so  it  was.  A  strange  feeling  of  diffidence  pervades  a  seeking  soul,  and 
drives  it  from  its  friends.  Yet  I  cannot  tell  how  much  I  owe  to  the  solemn 
words  of  my  good  mother.  It  was  the  custom,  on  Sunday  evenings,  while  we  were 
yet  little  children,  for  her  to  stay  at  home  with  us,  and  then  we  sat  round  the  table, 
and  read  verse  by  verse,  and  she  explained  the  Scripture  to  us.  After  that  was 
done,  then  came  the  time  of  pleading  ;  there  was  a  little  piece  of  Alleine's  A/arin,  or 
of  Baxter's  Ca/l  to  the  Uncotivei-ted,  and  this  was  read  with  pointed  observations 
made  to  each  of  us  as  we  sat  round  the  table  ;  and  the  question  was  asked,  how  long 
it  would  be  before  we  would  think  about  our  state,  how  long  before  we  would  seek 
the  Lord.  Then  came  a  mother's  prayer,  and  some  of  the  words  of  that  prayer  we 
shall  never  forget,  even  when  our  hair  is  grey.  I  remember,  on  one  occasion,  her 
praying  thus  :  "  Now,  Lord,  if  my  children  go  on  in  their  sins,  it  will  not  be  from 
ignorance  that  they  perish,  and  my  soul  must  bear  a  swift  witness  against  them  at 
the  day  of  judgment  if  they  lay  not  hold  of  Christ."  That  thought  of  a  mother's 
bearing  swift  witness  against  me,  pierced  my  conscience,  and  stirred  my  heart. 
When  I  was  a  child,  if  I  had  done  anything  wrong,  I  did  not  need  anybody  to  tell 
me  of  it ;  I  told  myself  of  it,  and  I  have  cried  myself  to  sleep  many  a  time  with  the 
consciousness  that  I  had  done  wrong  ;  and  when  I  came  to  know  the  Lord,  I  felt 
very  grateful  to  Him  because  He  had  given  me  a  tender  conscience. 

Fathers  and  mothers  are  the  most  natural  agents  for  God  to  use  in  the  salvation 
of  their  children.  I  am  sure  that,  in  my  early  youth,  no  teaching  ever  made  such  an 
impression  upon  my  mind  as  the  instruction  of  my  mother  ;  neither  can  I  conceive 
that,  to  any  child,  there  can  be  one  who  will  have  such  influence  over  the  young 
heart  as  the  mother  who  has  so  tenderly  cared  for  her  offspring.     A  man  with  a  soul 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  69 

so  dead  as  not  to  be  moved  by  the  sacred  name  of  "mother"  is  creation's  blot. 
Never  could  it  be  possible  for  any  man  to  estimate  what  he  owes  to  a  godly  mother. 
Certainly  I  have  not  the  powers  of  speech  with  which  to  set  forth  my  valuation  of 
the  choice  blessing  which  the  Lord  bestowed  on  me  in  making  me  the  son  of  one 
who  prayed  for  me,  and  prayed  ivith  me.  How  can  I  ever  forget  her  tearful  eye 
when  she  warned  me  to  escape  from  the  wrath  to  come .''  I  thought  her  lips  right 
eloquent  ;  others  might  not  think  so,  but  they  certainly  were  eloquent  to  me.  How 
can  I  ever  forget  when  she  bowed  her  knee,  and  with  her  arms  about  my  neck, 
prayed,  "  Oh,  that  my  son  might  live  before  Thee  !  "  Nor  can  her  frown  be  effaced 
from  my  memory, — that  solemn,  loving  frown,  when  she  rebuked  my  budding 
iniquities  ;  and  her  smiles  have  never  faded  from  my  recollection, — the  beaming  of 
her  countenance  when  she  rejoiced  to  see  some  good  thing  in  me  towards  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel. 

Well  do  I  remember  hearing  my  father  speak  of  an  incident  that  greatly 
impressed  him.  He  used  to  be  frequently  away  from  home  preaching,  and  at  one 
time,  as  he  was  on  his  way  to  a  service,  he  feared  that  he  was  neglecting  his  own 
family  while  caring  for  the  souls  of  others.  He  therefore  turned  back,  and  went  to 
his  home.  On  arriving  there,  he  was  surprised  to  find  no  one  in  the  lower  rooms  of 
the  house  ;  but,  on  ascendingf  the  stairs,  he  heard  a  sound  as  of  someone  ensraafed  in 
prayer.  On  listening  at  the  bedroom  door,  he  discovered  that  it  was  my  mother, 
pleading  most  earnestly  for  the  salvation  of  all  her  children,  and  specially  praying  for 
Charles,  her  first-born  and  strong-willed  son.  My  father  felt  that  he  might  safely  go 
about  his  Master's  business  while  his  dear  wife  was  caring  so  well  for  the  spiritual 
interests  of  the  boys  and  girls  at  home,  so  he  did  not  disturb  her,  but  proceeded 
at  once  to  fulfil  his  preaching  engagement. 

My  mother  said  to  me,  one  day,  "  Ah,  Charles  !  I  often  prayed  the  Lord  to 
make  you  a  Christian,  but  I  never  asked  that  you  might  become  a  Baptist."  I  could 
not  resist  the  temptation  to  reply,  "Ah,  mother  !  the  Lord  has  answered  your  prayer 
with  His  usual  bounty,  and  given  you  exceeding  abundantly  above  what  you  asked 
or  thought." 

Up  to  the  age  of  fourteen,  I  had  not  even  heard  of  people  called  Baptists  ;  and 
when  I  did  hear  of  them,  it  was  not  at  all  a  favourable  report  that  was  given  to  me 
concerning  them.  I  do  not  suppose  my  parents  meant  me  to  believe  that  Baptists 
were  bad  people  ;  but  I  certainly  did  think  so  ;  and  I  cannot  help  feeling  that, 
somewhere  or  other,  I  must  have  heard  some  calumnies  against  them,  or  else  how 
should  I  have  had  that  opinion  ? 

I  remember  seeing  a  baby  sprinkled  within  less  than  an  hour  of  its  death  ;  and  I 
seem  to  hear  even  now  the  comfort  which  a  certain  good  man  gave  to  the  bereaved 
parents, — "  What  a  mercy  the  child  was  baptized  !     What  a  consolation  it  must  be  !  " 


70  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGIiAPHY. 

This  was  in  an  Independent  family,  and  the  words  were  spoken  by  an  Independent 
minister. 

I  knew  an  instance  of  an  aged  minister,  of  the  same  persuasion,  who  sprinkled 
a  little  boy,  although  the  father  was  averse  to  it.  The  child  was  running  about  in 
the  hall  of  the  minister's  house,  and  his  mother  was  looking  on.      He  was  caught  up, 

and  the  pious  man  exclaimed,  "Come   along,  Mrs.  S ,  the  poor  child   shall   not 

live  like  a  heathen  any  longer."  So  the  conjuration  was  performed,  and  the  little 
boy  was  put  into  the  Paedo-Baptist  covenant.  He  was  not  only  suftered  to  come, 
but  forced  to  come  ;  and,  doubtless,  went  on  his  way  rejoicing  to  think  it  was  over. 

It  is  said  by  some  that  children  cannot  understand  the  great  mysteries  of 
religion.  We  even  know  some  Sunday-school  teachers  who  cautiously  avoid 
mentioning  the  great  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  because  they  think  the  children  are  not 
prepared  to  receive  them.  Alas  !  the  same  mistake  has  crept  into  the  pulpit  ;  for  it 
is  currently  believed,  among  a  certain  class  of  preachers,  that  many  of  the  doctrines 
of  the  Word  of  God,  although  true,  are  not  fit  to  be  taught  to  the  people,  since  they 
would  pervert  them  to  their  own  destruction.  Away  with  such  priestcraft  !  Whatever 
God  has  revealed  ought  to  be  preached.  Whatever  He  has  revealed,  if  I  am  not 
capable  of  understanding  it,  I  will  still  believe  and  preach  it.  I  do  hold  that  there 
is  no  doctrine  of  the  Word  of  God  which  a  child,  if  he  be  capable  of  salvation,  is  not 
capable  of  receiving.  I  would  have  children  taught  all  the  great  doctrines  of  truth 
without  a  solitary  exception,  that  they  may  in  their  after  days  hold  fast  by  them. 

I  can  bear  witness  that  children  can  understand  the  Scriptures  ;  for  I  am 
sure  that,  when  but  a  child,  I  could  have  discussed  many  a  knotty  point  of  contro- 
versial theology,  having  heard  both  sides  of  the  question  freely  stated  among  my 
father's  circle  of  friends.  In  fact,  children  are  capable  of  understanding  some  things 
in  early  life,  which  we  hardly  understand  afterwards.  Children  have  eminently  a 
simplicity  of  faith,  and  simplicity  of  faith  is  akin  to  the  highest  knowledge;  indeed, 
I  know  not  that  there  is  much  distinction  between  the  simplicity  of  a  child  and  the 
genius  of  the  profoundest  mind.  He  who  receives  things  simply,  as  a  child,  will 
often  have  ideas  which  the  man  who  is  prone  to  make  a  syllogism  of  everything  will 
never  attain  unto.  If  you  wish  to  know  whether  children  can  be  taught,  I  point  you 
to  many  in  our  churches,  and  in  pious  families, — not  prodigies,  but  such  as  we 
frequently  see, — Timothys  and  Samuels,  and  little  girls,  too,  who  have  early  come  to 
know  a  Saviour's  love.  As  soon  as  a  child  is  capable  of  being  lost,  it  is  capable 
of  being  saved.  As  soon  as  a  child  can  sin,  that  child  can,  if  God's  grace  assist 
it,  believe  and  receive  the  Word  of  God.  As  soon  as  children  can  learn  evil,  be 
assured  that  they  are  competent,  under  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  learn  good. 

In  the  household  in  which  I  was  trained,  no  cooking  was  ever  done  on  the 
Sabbath  ;  and  if  in  the  winter  time  something  hot  was  brought  on  the  table,  it  was  a 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  71 

pudding  prepared  on  the  Saturday,  or  a  few  potatoes,  which  took  but  little  trouble 
to  warm.  Is  not  this  far  better,  far  more  Christian-like,  than  preparing  a  great 
Sunday  feast,  and  compelling  servants  to  slave  in  the  kitchen  ?  If  the  horse  was 
taken  out  because  the  distance  to  the  meeting-house  was  too  great,  or  the  weather 
too  rough  for  walking,  Christians  of  the  good  old  school  always  gave  the  animal  its 
Sabbath  on  the  Saturday  or  the  Monday ;  and  as  to  the  coachman,  when  they 
employed  one,  they  always  took  care  to  give  him  time  to  put  up  the  horse,  that  he 
might  come  in  and  worship  with  the  family,  and  they  were  content  to  wait  till  he 
could  come  round  for  them  after  service,  for  they  did  not  want  him  to  lose  even 
the  Benediction. 

Ought  it  not  to  be  so  everywhere  ?  Our  servants  should  be  regarded  as  a  part 
of  the  family,  and  we  should  study  their  comfort  as  well  as  our  own,  if  for  no  other 
reason,  certainly,  because  they  will  then  study  ours ;  but,  above  all,  we  should 
remember  their  souls,  and  give  them  every  opportunity  to  enjoy  the  means  of  grace. 
How  can  they  do  this  if  we  make  the  Lord's-day  as  much  a  work-day  as  any  in  the 
week  ?  We  are  not  of  those  who  think  it  wicked  to  boil  a  ketde  for  tea  on  a 
Sunday,  nor  can  we  yield  to  the  demands  of  some,  that  everybody,  however  feeble, 
or  however  distant  his  abode,  should  walk  to  the  place  of  worship.  To  some,  such 
a  walk  would  be  working  with  a  vengeance,  and  to  many  an  absolute  deprivation 
of  the  means  of  grace  ;  but,  still,  we  must  not  allow  unnecessary  labour  in  or  about 
our  habitations  on  the  Lord's-day,  and  must  devise  means  to  make  the  necessary 
work  as  light  as  possible.  Is  a  hot  joint  preferable  to  a  servant's  soul  ?  Is  it  fair  to 
keep  a  girl  at  home  merelv  for  our  own  needless  gratification  ?  Especially,  is  this 
justifiable  in  the  case  of  those  who  fare  sumptuously  every  day .'' 

*  *  *  * 

I  recollect,  when  I  was  a  boy,  hearing  a  minister  preach  from  this  text,  "  Who 
can  find  a  virtuous  woman  ?  for  her  price  is  far  above  rubies."  The  opening  of  that 
memorable  discourse  was  somewhat  in  this  fashion  : — "  '  Who  can  find  a  virtuous 
woman  ? '  Why,  anyone  who  chooses  to  look  for  her ;  and  the  only  reason  why 
Solomon  could  not  find  her  was  because  he  looked  in  the  wrong  place.  Virtuous 
women  kept  clear  of  a  king  who  had  such  a  multitude  of  wives.  But,"  said  the 
preacher,  "  if  Solomon  were  here  now,  and  were  made  truly  wise,  he  would  not  long 
ask, — '  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman  .'' '  He  would  join  the  church,  and  find  himself 
at  once  among  a  band  of  holy  women,  whose  adornment  is  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit. 
If  he  were  permitted  to  look  in  upon  the  Dorcas  meeting,  he  would  see  many  of  the 
sort  of  whom  he  once  said,  '  She  stretcheth  out  her  hand  to  the  poor  ;  yea,  she 
reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  needy.'  If  he  would  adjourn  to  the  Sunday-school, 
he  would  there  meet  with  others  of  whom  he  would  say,  '  She  openeth  her  mouth 
with  wisdom  ;  and  ui  her  tongue  is  the  law  of  kindness.'     We,  who  serve  the  Lord 


72  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 

Jesus,  meet  many  a  time  with  virtuous  women,  of  each  of  whom  we  could  say  with 
the  wise  king,  '  Her  price  is  far  above  rubies.'" 

The  preacher  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  interested  me  by  the  remark,  "  Why 
'above  rubies' ?  Why  not  above  dianiojids?  My  brethren,  the  diamond  is  but  a  pale 
and  sickly  stone,  which  needs  the  glare  of  candle-light  or  gas  to  set  it  off;  but  the 
ruby  is  a  ruddy,  healthy  gem,  which  is  beautiful  by  daylight.  Lovely  is  the  woman 
whose  face  is  full  of  the  glow  of  activity  in  domestic  life.  That  is  the  kind  of  woman 
who  makes  the  housewife  in  whom  the  heart  of  her  husband  safely  trusteth." 

Whatever  one  may  think  of  the  correctness  of  the  exposition,  the  sentiment  of 
the  preacher  was  sound  and  practical. 

I  have  not  all  pleasant  reminiscences  of  the  preachers  of  my  boyhood.  I  used 
to  hear  a  divine  who  had  a  habit,  after  he  had  uttered  about  a  dozen  sentences,  of 
saying,  "  As  I  have  already  observed,"  or,  "  I  repeat  what  I  before  remarked." 
Well,  good  soul,  as  there  was  nothing  particular  in  what  he  had  said,  the  repetition 
only  revealed  the  more  clearly  the  nakedness  of  the  land.  If  it  was  very  good,  and 
you  said  it  forcibly,  why  go  over  it  again  .''  And  it  it  was  a  feeble  affair,  why  exhibit 
it  a  second  time  ?  Occasionally,  of  course,  the  repetition  of  a  few  sentences  may  be 
very  telling  ;  anything  may  be  good  occasionally,  and  yet  be  very  vicious  as  a  habit. 
Who  wonders  that  people  do  not  listen  the  first  time  when  they  know  it  is  all  to 
come  over  again  ."*  I  once  heard  a  most  esteemed  minister,  who  mumbled  sadly, 
compared  to  "  a  humble  bee  in  a  pitcher," — a  vulgar  metaphor,  no  doubt,  but  so 
exacdy  descriptive,  that  it  brings  to  my  mind  the  droning  sound  at  this  instant 
most  distinctly,  and  reminds  me  of  the  parody  upon  Gray's  Elegy  : — 

"Now  fades  the  glimmering  subject  from  the  sight, 
And  all  the  air  a  sleepy  stillness  holds, 
Save  where  the  parson  hums  his  droning  flight, 
And  drowsy  tinkliiigs  lull  the  slurab'ring  folds." 

What  a  pity  that  a  man  who  from  his  heart  delivered  doctrines  of  undoubted  value,  in 
language  the  most  appropriate,  should  commit  ministerial  suicide  by  harping  on  one 
string,  when  the  Lord  had  given  him  an  instrument  of  many  strings  to  play  upon  ! 
Alas  !  alas  !  for  that  dreary  voice,  it  hummed  and  hummed,  like  a  mill-wheel,  to  the 
same  unmusical  tune,  whether  its  owner  spake  of  Heaven  or  hell,  eternal  life  or  ever- 
lasting wrath.  It  might  be,  by  accident,  a  little  louder  or  softer,  according  to  the 
length  of  the  sentence  ;  but  its  tone  was  still  the  same,  a  dreary  waste  of  sound,  a 
howling  wilderness  of  speech  in  which  there  was  no  possible  relief,  no  variety,  no 
music,  nothing  but  horrible  sameness.  When  the  wind  blows  through  the  yEolian 
harp,  it  swells  through  all  the  chords  ;  but  the  Heavenly  wind,  passing  through  some 
men,  spends  itself  upon  one  string,  and  that,  for  the  most  part,  the  most  out  of  tune 
of  the  whole.     Grace  alone  could  enable  hearers  to  edily  under  the  drum- — drum — 


C.      II.     SPURGF.ON  S     AUTOnrOGRArHY.  73 

drum  of  some  divines.      I  think  an  impartial  jury  would  bring  in  a  verdict  of  justifi- 
able slumbering"  in  many  cases  where  the   sound  emanating  from   the  preacher  lulls  | 
to  sleep  by  its  reiterated  note. 

I  have  a  very  lively,  or  rather  a  deadly,  recollection  of  a  certain  series  of 
discourses  on  the  Hebrews,  which  made  a  deep  impression  on  my  mind  of  the  most 
undesirable  kind.  I  wished  frequently  that  the  Hebrews  had  kept  the  Epistle  to 
themselves,  for  it  sadly  bored  one  poor  Gentile  lad.  By  the  time  the  seventh  or 
eighth  discourse  had  been  delivered,  only  the  very  good  people  could  stand  it :  these, 
of  course,  declared  that  they  never  heard  more  valuable  expositions,  but  to  those  of 
a  more  carnal  judgment  it  appeared  that  each  sermon  increased  in  dulness.  Paul,  in 
that  Epistle,  exhorts  us  to  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation,  and  we  did  so.  I  also 
recollect  hearing  in  my  younger  days  long  passages  out  of  Daniel,  vvhich  might  have 
been  exceedingly  instructive  to  me  if  I  had  obtained  the  remotest  conception  of  what 
they  meant.  I  remember  hearing  a  sermon  from  these  words,  "Who  passing  through 
the  valley  of  Baca  make  it  a  well."  Certainly,  the  preacher  did  not  make  his  sermon 
a  well,  for  it  was  as  dry  as  a  stick,  and  not  worth  hearing.  There  was  nothing  like 
cheerfulness  in  it  ;  but  all  the  way  through  a  flood  of  declamation  against  hopeful 
Christians,  against  people  going  to  Heaven  who  are  not  always  grumbling,  and 
murmuring,  and  doubting  ;  fumbling  for  their  evidences  amidst  the  exercises  of  their 
own  hearts,  ever  reading  and  striving  to  rival  Job  and  Jeremiah  in  grief,  taking  the 
Lamentations  as  the  fit  expression  of  their  own  lips,  troubling  their  poor  brains,  and 
vexing  their  poor  hearts,  and  smarting,  and  crying,  and  wearying  themselves  with 
the  perpetual  habit  of  comiplaining  against  God,  saying,  "  My  stroke  is  heavier  than 
my  groaning." 

I  used  to  hear  a  minister  whose  preaching  was,  as  far  as  I  could  make  it  out, 
"  Do  this,  and  do  that,  and  do  the  other,  and  you  will  be  saved."  According  to  his 
theory,  to  pray  was  a  very  easy  thing  ;  to  make  yourself  a  new  heart,  was  a  thing  of 
a  few  instants,  and  could  be  done  at  almost  any  time  ;  and  I  really  thought  that  I 
could  turn  to  Christ  when  I  pleased,  and  that  therefore  I  could  put  it  off  to  the  last 
part  of  my  life,  when  it  might  be  conveniently  done  upon  a  sick  bed.  But  when  the 
Lord  gave  my  soul  its  first  shakings  in  conviction,  I  soon  knew  better.  I  went  to 
pray  ;  I  did  pray,  God  knoweth,  but  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  did  not.  What,  / 
approach  the  throne  ^  Such  a  wretch  as  /  lay  hold  on  the  promise  ?  /  venture  to 
hope  that  God  could  look  on  me?  It  seemed  impossible.  A  tear,  a  groan,  and 
sometimes  not  so  much  as  that,  an  "  Ah  !  "  a  "  Would  that !  "  a  "  But," — the  lip  could 
not  utter  more.  It  was  prayer,  but  it  did  not  seem  so  then.  Oh,  how  hard  is 
prevailing  prayer  to  a  poor  God-provoking  sinner  !  Where  was  the  power  to  lay 
hold  on  God's  strength,  or  wrestle  with  the  angel  }  Certainly  not  in  me,  for  I  was 
weak  as  water,  and  sometimes  hard  as  the  nether  millstone. 


74  .  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

Once,  under  a  powerful  sermon,  my  heart  shook  within  me,  and  was  dissolved 
in  the  midst  of  my  bowels  ;  I  thought  I  would  seek  the  Lord,  and  I  bowed  my  knee, 
and  wrestled,  and  poured  out  my  heart  before  Him.  Again  I  ventured  within  His 
sanctuary  to  hear  His  Word,  hoping  that  in  some  favoured  hour  He  would  send  a 
precious  promise  to  my  consolation  ;  but,  ah  !  that  wretched  afternoon,  1  heard  a 
sermon  wherein  Christ  was  not  ;  I  had  no  longer  any  hope.  I  would  have  sipped  at 
that  fountain,  but  I  was  driven  away  ;  I  felt  that  I  would  have  believed  in  Christ, 
and  I  longed  and  sighed  for  Him.  But,  ah  !  that  dreadful  sermon,  and  those 
terrible  things  that  were  uttered  ;  my  poor  soul  knew  not  what  was  truth,  or  what 
was  error;  but  I  thought  the  man  was  surely  preaching  the  truth,  and  I  was  driven 
back.  I  dared  not  go,  I  could  not  believe,  I  could  not  lay  hold  on  Christ  ;  I  was 
shut  out,  if  no  one  else  was. 


CHAPTER    X. 


**d)mtgi)  miulj  tribulation." 

My  heart  was  fallow,  and  covered  with  weeds;  but,  on  a  certain  day,  the  great  Husbandman 
came,  and  began  to  plough  my  soul.  Ten  black  horses  were  His  team,  and  it  was  a  sharp  ploughshare 
that  He  used,  and  the  ploughers  made  deep  furrows.  The  ten  commandments  were  those  black  horses, 
and  the  justice  of  God,  like  a  ploughshare,  tore  my  spirit.  I  was  condemned,  undone,  destroyed,— lost, 
helpless,  hopeless,— I  thought  hell  was  before  me.  Then  there  came  a  cross-ploughing,  for  when  I 
went  to  hear  the  gospel,  it  did  not  comfort  me;  it  made  me  wish  I  had  a  part  in  it,  but  I  feared  that 
such  a  boon  was  out  of  the  question.  The  choicest  promises  of  God  frowned  upon  me,  and  His 
threatcnings  thundered  at  me.  I  prayed,  but  found  no  answer  of  peace.  It  was  long  with  me  thus.— 
C.  H  S. 

HE  abundant  benefit  which  we  now  reap  from  the  deep  ploughing 
of  our  heart  is  enough  of  itself  to  reconcile  us  to  the  severity  of 
the  process.  Precious  is  that  wine  which  is  pressed  in  the  winefat 
of  conviction  ;  pure  is  that  gold  which  is  dug  from  the  mines  of 
repentance  ;  and  bright  are  those  pearls  which  are  found  in  the 
caverns  of  deep  distress.  We  might  never  have  known  such  deep 
humility  if  the  Lord  had  not  humbled  us.  We  had  never  been  so  separated  from 
fleshly  trusting  had  He  not,  by  His  rod,  revealed  the  corruption  and  disease  of  our 
heart.  We  had  never  learned  to  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  and  confirm  the  weak, 
had  He  not  made  us  ready  to  halt,  and  caused  our  sinew  to  shrink.  It  we  have  any 
power  to  console  the  weary,  it  is  the  result  of  our  remembrance  ot  what  we  once 
suffered, — for  here  lies  our  power  to  sympathize.  If  we  can  now  look  down  with 
scorn  upon  the  boastings  of  vain,  self-conceited  man,  it  is  because  our  own  vaunted 
strength  has  utterly  failed  us,  and  made  us  contemptible  in  our  own  eyes.  It  we  can 
now  plead  with  ardent  desire  for  the  souls  of  our  fellow-men,  and  especially  if  we 
feel  a  more  than  common  passion  for  the  salvation  of  sinners,  we  must  attribute  it 
in  no  small  degree  to  the  fact  that  we  have  been  smitten  for  sin,  and  therefore, 
knowing  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  are  constrained  to  persuade  men.  The  laborious 
pastor,  the  fervent  minister,  the  ardent  evangelist,  the  faithful  teacher,  the  powerful 
intercessor,  can  all  trace  the  birth  of  their  zeal  to  the  sufferings  they  endured  through 
sin,  and  the  knowledge  they  thereby  attained  of  its  evil  nature.  We  have  ever  drawn 
the  sharpest  arrows  from  the  quiver  of  our  own  experience.  We  find  no  sword- 
blades  so  true  in  metal  as  those  which  have  been  forged  in  the  furnace  of 
soul-trouble. 


76  -   c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

A  spiritual  experience  whicli  is  thoroughly .  flavoured  with  a  deep  and  bitter 
sense  of  sin  is  of  great  value  to  him  that  hath  had  it.  It  is  terrible  in  the  drinking, 
but  it  is  most  wholesome  in  the  bowels,  and  in  the  whole  of  the  after-life.  Possibly, 
much  of  the  flimsy  piety  of  the  present  day  arises  from  the  ease  with  which  meni 
attain  to  peace  and  joy  in  these  evangelistic  days.  We  would  not  judge  modern 
converts,  but  we  certainly  prefer  that  form  of  spiritual  exercise  which  leads  the  soul 
by  the  way  of  Weeping-cross,  and  makes  it  see  its  blackness  before  assuring  it  that 
it  is  "clean  every  whit."  Too  many  think  lighdy  of  sin,  and  therefore  think  lighd)^ 
of  the  Saviour.  He  who  has  stood  before  his  God,  convicted  and  condemned,  with 
the  rope  about  his  neck,  is  the  man  to  weep  for  joy  when  he  is  pardoned,  to  hate  the 
evil  which  has  been  forgiven  him,  and  to  live  to  the  honour  of  the  Redeemer  hy 
whose  blood  he  has  been  cleansed. 

Our  own  experience  recalls  us  to  the  period  when  we  panted  for  the  Lord,  even 
for  Him,  our  only  want.  Vain  to  us  were  the  mere  ordinances, — vain  as  bottles- 
scorched  by  the  Simoom,  and  drained  of  their  waters.  Vain  were  ceremonies, — vain 
as  empty  wells  to  the  thirsty  Arab.  Vain  were  the  delights  of  the  flesh, — bitter  as- 
the  waters  of  Marah,  which  even  the  parched  lips  of  Israel  refused  to  drink.  Vaia 
were  the  directions  of  the  legal  preacher, — useless  as  the  howling  of  the  wind  to  the 
benighted  wanderer.  Vain,  v.orse  than  vain,  were  our  refuges  of  lies,  which  fell 
about  our  ears  like  Dagon's  temple  on  the  heads  of  the  worshippers.  One  only 
hope  we  had,  one  sole  refuge  for  our  misery.  Save  where  that  ark  floated, — North, 
South,  East,  and  West  was  one  broad  expanse  of  troubled  waters.  Save  where 
that  star  burned,  the  sky  was  one  vast  field  of  unmitigated  darkness.  Jesus, 
Jesus,  Jesus  !  He  alone.  He  without  another,  had  become  the  solitary  hiding- 
place  against  the  storm.  As  the  wounded  soldier,  lying  on  the  batde-field,  with 
wounds  which,  like  fires,  consume  his  moisture,  utters  only  one  monotonous  cry 
of  thrilling  importunity,  "  Water,  water,  water  I  "  so  did  we  perpetually  send  our 
prayer  to  Heaven,  "Jesus,  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me!  O  Jesus, 
come  to  me  !  " 

We  have,  we  hope,  many  a  time  enjoyed  nearness  to  the  throne  of  grace  in 
prayer  ;  but,  perhaps,  never  did  such  a  prayer  escape  our  lips  as  that  which  we 
offered  in  the  bitterness  of  our  spirit  when  seeking  the  Saviour.  We  have  often 
poured  out  our  hearts  with  greater  freedom,  with  more  delight,  with  stronger  faith, 
in  more  eloquent  language  ;  but  never,  never  have  we  cried  with  more  vehemence 
of  unquenchable  desire,  or  more  burning  heat  of  insatiable  longing.  There  was  then 
no  sleepiness  or  sluggishness  in  our  devotion  ;  we  did  not  then  need  the  whip  of 
command  to  drive  us  to  labours  of  prayer;  but  our  soul  could  not  be  content  unless 
with    sighs   and   lamentations,   with   strong  crying  and  tears,   it  gave   vent    to    our 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  T] 

burstine  heart.  Then  we  had  no  need  to  be  draaoed  to  our  closets  like  oxen  to 
the  slaug-hter,  but  we  flew  to  them  like  doves  to  their  windows  ;  and  when  there, 
Tve  needed  no  pumping  up  of  desires,  but  they  gushed  forth  like  a  fountain  of  waters, 
although  at  times  we  felt  we  could  scarcely  find  them  a  channel. 

I  remember  the  first  time  I  ever  sincerely  prayed  ;  but  I  do  not  recollect 
the  words  I  used  ;  surely,  there  were  few  enough  words  in  that  petition.  I  had 
often  repeated  a  form  ;  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of  continually  repeating  it.  At  last, 
I  came  really  to  pray  ;  and  then  I  saw  myself  standing  before  God,  in  the  immediate 
presence  of  the  heart-searching  Jehovah,  and  I  said  within  myself,  "  I  have  heard  of 
Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee  ;  wherefore  I  abhor 
myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes."  I  felt  like  Esther  when  she  stood  before  the 
king,  faint  and  overcome  with  dread.  I  was  full  of  penitence  of  heart,  because  of 
His  majesty  and  my  sinfulness.  I  think  the  only  words  I  could  utter  were  some- 
thing like  these,  "Oh! — Ah!"  And  the  only  complete  sentence  was,  "God  be 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner!"  The  overwhelming  splendour  of  His  majesty,  the 
greatness  of  His  power,  the  severity  of  His  justice,  the  immaculate  character  of 
His  holiness,  and  all  His  dreadful  grandeur, — these  things  overpowered  my  soul, 
and  I  fell  down  in  utter  prostration  of  spirit ;  but  there  was  in  that  prayer  a  true 
and  real  drawing  near  to  God. 

I  have  not  many  relations  in  Heaven,  but  I  have  one  whom  I  dearly  love, 
who,  I  doubt  not,  often  prayed  for  me,  for  she  nursed  me  when  I  was  a  child, 
and  brought  me  up  during  part  of  my  infancy,  and  now  she  sits  before  the 
throne  in  glory, — suddenly  called  home.  I  fancy  she  looked  upon  her  darling 
grandson,  and  as  she  saw  him  in  the  ways  of  sin,  waywardness,  and  folly,  she  could 
not  look  with  sorrow,  for  there  are  no  tears  in  the  eyes  of  glorified  ones  ;  she 
could  not  look  with  regret,  because  they  cannot  know  such  a  feeling  before  the 
throne  of  God  ;  but,  ah !  that  moment  when,  by  sovereign  grace,  I  was  con- 
strained to  pray,  when  all  alone  I  bent  my  knee  and  wresded,  methinks  I  see 
her  as  she  said,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth  ;  behold,  he  prayeth."  Oh  !  I  can  picture  her 
•countenance.  She  seemed  to  have  two  Heavens  for  a  moment — a  double  bliss,  a 
Heaven  in  me  as  well  as  in  herself. — when  she  could  say,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth." 

I  have  known  some  who  have  suspended  prayer  through  the  idea  that  the 
petitions  of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  and  that  therefore  it  was  but 
committing  sin  to  attempt  to  offer  their  supplications.  Well  can  I  remember,  when 
coming  to  Jesus  myself,  that  for  years  I  sought  pardon,  and  found  it  not.  Often, 
in  the  deep  anguish  of  my  spirit,  did  I  stay  my  petitions,  because  I  thought  them 
hopeless  ;  and  when  again  the  Holy  Spirit  drew  me  to  the  mercy-seat,  a  deep 
horror  rested    on    me  at    the    recollection   of  my   repeated,  but   unanswered  cries. 


jS  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiographv. 

I  knew  myself  to  be  unworthy,  and  therefore  I  conceived  that  Divine  justice  would 
not  allow  an  answer  to  come  to  me.  I  thought  that  the  heavens  were  brass  above 
me,  and  that  if  I  cried  never  so  earnestly,  the  Lord  would  shut  out  m\-  prayer.  I 
durst  not  pray,  1  was  too  guilty  ;  and  when  1  did  dare  to  pray,  'twas  hardly  prayer, 
for  I  had  no  hope  of  being  heard.  "  No,"  I  said,  "it  is  presumption  ;  I  must  not 
plead  with  Him  ;  "  and  when,  at  times,  I  would  have  prayed,  I  could  not  ;  something 
choked  all  utterance,  and  the  spirit  could  only  lament,  and  long,  and  pant,  and  sigh 
to  be  able  to  pray. 

Yet  I  recollect,  even  as  a  ohild,  God  hearing  my  prayer.  I  cannot  tell  what  it 
was  about,  it  may  have  been  concerning  a  mere  trifle  ;  but  to  me,  as  a  child,  it  was 
as  important  as  the  greatest  prayer  that  Solomon  ever  offered  for  himself,  and  God 
heard  that  prayer,  and  it  was  thus  early  established  in  my  mind  that  the  Lord  was 
God.  And  afterwards,  when  I  came  really  to  know  Him, — for,  like  the  child  Samuel 
I  did  not  then  know  the  Lord,  I  only  felt  after  Him  in  prayer, — afterwards,  when  1 
came  to  cry  to  Him  intelligently,  I  had  this  prayer  answered,  and  that  petition 
granted,  and  many  a  time  since  then — I  am  only  telling  what  any  who  know  the 
Lord  could  also  say, — many  a  time  since  then  He  has  answered  our  requests.  I 
cannot  tell  all  about  this  matter  ;  for  there  is  many  a  secret  between  us  and  our 
dear  Lord.  It  would  not  be  prudent,  proper,  or  even  possible,  to  mention  all  the 
answers  to  prayer  which  we  have  received,  for  there  are  love-passages  between 
Christ  and  the  soul,  which  never  must  be  told,  unless  it  be  in  choice  company,  and 
on  rare  occasions.  Some  of  our  communings  with  the  Lord  Jesus  are  too  sacred, 
too  spiritual,  too  heavenly,  ever  to  be  spoken  of  this  side  the  gates  of  pearl  ;  but 
the  bulk  of  the  Lord's  replies  to  our  petitions  are  such  as  might  be  written  athwart 
the  skies,  that  every  eye  might  read  them.  It  is  beginning  to  be  questioned,  in 
many  quarters,  whether  there  is  any  real  effect  produced  by  prayer,  e.xcept  that  "  it 
excites  certain  pious  emotions  in  the  breasts  of  those  who  pray."  This  is  a  pretty 
statement !  We  ought  to  be  extremely  obliged  to  those  superior  persons  who  allow 
that  even  so  much  may  result  from  our  visits  to  the  throne  of  grace  !  I  wonder 
they  did  not  assert  that  prayer  was  ridiculous,  or  hypocritical,  or  immoral  !  Their 
moderation  puts  us  under  obligations  !  And  yet  I  do  not  know  :  when  I  look  again 
at  their  admission,  I  thank  them  for  nothing,  for  they  as  good  as  call  us  fools.  Do 
they  think  that  we  perform  a  useless  exercise  merely  for  the  sake  of  exciting  pious 
emotions  ?  VYe  must  be  grievous  idiots  if  we  can  receive  benefit  from  a  senseless 
function.  We  are  not  willing  to  whisde  to  the  wind  for  the  sake  of  the  exercise.  We 
should  not  be  content  to  go  on  praying  to  a  god  who  could  be  proved  to  be  both 
deaf  and  dumb.  We  have  still  some  little  common  sense  left,  despite  what  our 
judicious  friends  consider  to  be  fanaticism.  We  are  sure  that  we  obtain  answers  to 
prayer.     Of  this  fact  I  am  as  certain  as  that  1  am  a  living  man,  and  that   I   preach  in 


C.     II.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  79 

the  Tabernacle.  I  solemnly  declare  that  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  that  which 
I  have  asked  at  His  hands,  and  I  am  not  alone  in  such  testimony,  for  I  am  associated 
with  multitudes  of  men  and  women  who  bear  witness  to  the  same  fact,  and  declare 
that  they  also  sought  the  Lord  by  prayer  and  supplication,  and  He  heard  them,  and 
delivered  them  out  of  their  distresses. 

Neither  in  the  Church  militant  nor  in  the  host  triumphant  is  there  one  who 
received  a  new  heart,  and  was  reclaimed  from  sin  without  a  wound  from  Jesus.  The 
pain  may  have  been  but  slight,  and  the  healing  may  have  been  speedy  ;  but  in  each 
case  there  has  been  a  real  bruise,  which  required  a  Heavenly  Physician  to  heal. 
With  some  of  us,  this  wounding  commenced  in  early  life  ;  for,  as  soon  as  infancy 
o-ave  place  to  childhood,  the  rod  was  exercised  upon  us.  We  can  nemember 
early  convictions  of  sin,  and  apprehensions  of  the  wrath  of  God  on  its  account.  An 
awakened  conscience  in  our  most  tender  years  drove  us  to  the  throne  of  mercy. 
Thoucrh  we  knew  not  the  hand  which  chastened  our  spirit,  yet  did  we  "bear  the 
yoke  in  our  youth."  How  many  were  "  the  tender  buds  of  hope  "  which  we  then  put 
forth,  alas  !  too  soon  to  be  withered  by  youthful  lusts  ;  how  often  were  we  scared 
with  visions  and  terrified  with  dreams,  while  the  reproof  of  a  parent,  the  death  of  a 
playfellow,  or  a  solemn  sermon  made  our  hearts  melt  within  us  !  Truly,  our  good- 
ness was  but  "  as  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew  ;  "  but  who  can  tell  how  much 
each  of  these  separate  woundings  contributed  toward  that  killing  by  the  law,  which 
proved  to  be  the  effectual  work  of  God  ?  In  each  of  these  arousings  we  discover  a 
gracious  purpose  ;  we  trace  every  one  of  these  awakenings  to  His  hand  who  watched 
over  our  path,  determined  to  deliver  us  from  our  sins.  The  small  end  of  that  wedge, 
which  has  since  been  driven  home,  was  inserted  during  these  youthful  hours  of 
inward  strife. 

Let  none  despise  the  strivings  of  the  Spirit  in  the  hearts  of  the  young  ;  let  not 
boyish  anxieties  and  juvenile  repentances  be  lightly  regarded.  He  incurs  a  fearful 
amount  of  guilt  who  in  the  least  promotes  the  aim  of  the  evil  one  by  trampling  upon 
a  tender  conscience  in  a  child.  No  one  can  guess  at  what  age  children  become 
capable  of  conversion.  I,  at  least,  can  bear  my  personal  testimony  to  the  fact  that 
grace  operates  on  some  minds  at  a  period  almost  too  early  for  recollection.  When 
but  young  in  years,  I  felt  with  much  sorrow  the  evil  of  sin.  My  bones  waxed  old 
with  my  roaring  all  the  day  long.  Day  and  night  God's  hand  was  heavy  upon  me. 
I  hungered  for  deliverance,  for  my  soul  fainted  within  me.  I  feared  lest  the  very 
skies  should  fall  upon  me,  and  crush  my  guilty  soul.  God's  law  had  laid  hold  upon 
me,  and  was  showing  me  my  sins.  If  I  slept  at  night,  I  dreamed  of  the  bottomless 
pit  ;  and  when  I  awoke,  I  seemed  to  feel  the  misery  I  had  dreamed.  Up  to  God's 
house  I   went  ;   my  song  was  but  a  sigh.     To  my  chamber  I  retired,  and  there,  with 


So  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

tears  and  groans,  I  offered  up  my  prayer,  without  a  hope  and  without  a  refuge,  for 
God's  law  was  flogging  me  with  its  ten-thonged  whip,  and  then  rubbing  me  with 
brine  afterwards,  so  that  I  did  shake  and  quiver  with  pain  and  anguish,  and  my 
soul  chose  strangling  rather  than  life,  for  I  was  exceeding  sorrowful. 

That  misery  was  sent  for  this  reason,  that  I  might  then  be  made  to  cry  to 
Jesus.  Our  Heavenly  Father  does  not  usually  cause  us  to  seek  the  Saviour 
till  He  has  whipped  us  clean  out  of  all  our  confidence ;  He  cannot  make  us 
in  earnest  after  Heaven  till  He  has  made  us  feel  something  of  the  intolerable 
tortures  of  an  aching  conscience,  which  is  a  foretaste  of  hell.  I  remember,  when 
I  used  to  awake  in  the  morning,  the  first  thing  I  took  up  was  Alleine's  Alarm,  or 
Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted.  Oh,  those  books,  those  books !  I  read  and 
devoured  them  when  under  a  sense  of  guilt,  but  it  was  like  sitting  at  the 
foot  of  Sinai.  For  five  years,  as  a  child,  there  was  nothing  before  my  eyes 
but  my  guilt  ;  and  though  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  those  who  observed  my 
life  would  not  have  seen  any  extraordinary  sin,  yet  as  I  looked  upon  myself  there 
was  not  a  day  in  which  I  did  not  commit  such  gross,  such  outrageous  sins  against 
God,  that  often  and  often  have  I  wished  I  had  never  been  born.  Sickness  is  a 
terrible  thing,  more  especially  when  it  is  accompanied  with  pain,  when  the  poor 
body  is  racked  to  an  extreme,  so  that  the  spirit  fails  within  us,  and  we  are  dried 
up  like  a  potsherd  ;  but  I  bear  witness  that  sickness,  however  agonizing,  is  nothing 
like  the  discovery  of  the  evil  of  sin.  I  had  rather  pass  through  seven  years  of  the 
most  wearisome  pain,  and  the  most  languishing  sickness,  than  I  would  ever  again 
pass  through  the  terrible  discovery  of  the  evil  of  sin.  It  was  my  sad  lot,  at  that 
time,  to  feel  the  greatness  of  my  sin,  without  a  discovery  of  the  greatness  of 
God's  mercy.  I  had  to  walk  through  this  world  with  more  than  a  world  upon 
my  shoulders,  and  sustain  a  grief  that  as  far  exceeds  all  other  griefs  as  a  moun- 
tain exceeds  a  mole-hill  ;  and  I  often  wonder,  to  this  day,  how  it  Was  that  my 
hand  was  kept  from  rending  my  own  body  in  pieces  through  the  awful  agony 
which  I  felt  when  I  discovered  the  greatness  of  my  transgression.  Yet,  I  had  not 
been,  openly  and  publicly,  a  greater  sinner  than  others  ;  but  heart  sins  v/ere  laid 
bare,  sins  of  lip  and  tongue  were  discovered,  and  then  I  knew — oh,  that  I  may 
never  have  to  learn  over  again  in  such  a  dreadful  school  this  terrible  lesson  ! — "  the 
iniquity  of  Judah  and  of  Israel  is  exceeding  great."  Before  I  thought  upon  my 
soul's  salvation,  I  dreamed  that  my  sins  were  very  few.  All  my  sins  were  dead, 
as  I  imagined,  and  buried  in  the  graveyard  of  forgetfulness.  But  that  trumpet  of 
conviction,  which  aroused  my  soul  to  think  of  eternal  things,  sounded  a  resurrection- 
note  to  all  my  sins  ;  and,  oh,  how  they  rose  up  in  multitudes  more  countless  than 
the  sands  of  the  sea  !  Now,  I  saw  that  my  very  thoughts  were  enough  to  damn 
me,  that  my  words  would  sink  .me  lower  than  the  lowest  hell  ;  and  as  for  my  acts  of 


♦  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  8 1 

sin,  they  now  began  to  be  a  stench  in  my  nostrils,  so  that  I  could  not  bear  them. 
1  thought  I  had  rather  have  been  a  frog  or  a  toad  than  have  been  made  a  man  ; 
I  reckoned  that  the  most  defiled  creature,  the  most  loathsome  and  contemptible, 
was  a  better  thing  than  myself,  for  I  had  so  grossly  and  grievously  sinned  against 
Almighty  God. 

Through  the  Lord's  restraining  grace,  and  the  holy  influence  of  my  early 
home-life,  both  at  my  father's  and  my  grandfather's,  I  was  kept  from  certain  outward 
forms  of  sin  in  which  others  indulged  ;  and,  sometimes,  when  I  began  to  take  stock 
of  myself,  I  really  thought  I  was  quite  a  respectable  lad,  and  might  have  been  half 
inclined  to  boast  that  I  was  not  like  other  boys, — untruthful,  dishonest,  disobedient, 
swearing.  Sabbath-breaking,  and  so  on.  But,  all  of  a  sudden,  I  met  Moses,  carrying 
in  his  hand  the  law  of  God  ;  and  as  he  looked  at  me,  he  seemed  to  search  me 
through  and  through  with  his  eyes  of  fire.  He  bade  me  read  "  God's  Ten  Words  " — 
the  ten  commandments, — and  as  I  read  them,  they  all  seemed  to  join  in  accusing 
and  condemning  me  in  the  sight  of  the  thrice-holy  Jehovah.  Then,  like  Daniel, 
"  my  comeliness  was  turned  in  me  into  corruption,  and  I  retained  no  strength  ; "  and 
I  understood  what  Paul  meant  when  he  wrote,  "  Now  we  know  that  what  things 
soever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  who  are  under  the  law  :  that  every  mouth  may 
be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God."  When  I  saw 
myself  in  this  condition,  I  could  say  nothing  in  self-defence,  or  by  way  of  e.xcuse  or 
extenuation.  I  confessed  mv  transcrression  in  solemn  silence  unto  the  Lord,  but 
I  could  speak  no  word  of  self-justification,  or  apology,  for  I  felt  that  I  was  verily 
guilty  of  grievous  sins  against  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  At  that  time,  a  dreadful 
silence  reigned  within  my  spirit ;  even  if  I  had  tried  to  say  a  word  in  my  own 
favour,  I  should  have  been  self-condemned  as  a  liar.  I  felt  that  Job's  words  might 
be  applied  to  me,  "  If  I  wash  myself  with  snow  water,  and  make  my  hands  never 
so  clean  ;  yet  shalt  Thou  plunge  me  in  the  ditch,  and  mine  own  clothes  shall  abhor 
me.      For  He  is  not  a  man,  as  I  am,  that  I  should  answer  Him." 

Then  there  came  into  my  startled  conscience  the  remembrance  of  the  univer- 
sality of  law.  I  thought  of  what  was  said  of  the  old  Roman  empire  that,  under  the 
rule  of  Ccesar,  if  a  man  once  broke  the  law  of  Rome,  the  whole  world  was  one  vast 
prison  to  him,  for  he  could  not  get  out  of  the  reach  of  the  imperial  power.  So  did  it 
come  to  be  in  my  aroused  conscience.  Wherever  I  went,  the  law  had  a  demand  upori 
my  thoughts,  upon  my  words,  upon  my  rising,  upon  my  resting.  What  I  did,  and  what 
I  did  not  do,  all  came  under  the  cognizance  of  the  law  ;  and  then  I  found  that  this 
law  so  surrounded  me  that  I  was  always  running  against  it,  I  was  always  breaking" if. 
I  seemed  as  if  I  was  a  sinner,  and  nothing  else  but  a  sinner.  If  I  opened  my  mouth, 
1  spoke  amiss.     If  I  sat  still,  there  was  sin  in  my  silence.      I  remember  that,  when 


82  c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography.  * 

the  Spirit  of  God  was  thus  dealing  with  me,  I  used  to  feel  myself  to  be  a  sinner  even 
when  I  was  in  the  house  of  God.  I  thought  that,  when  I  sang,  I  was  mockino-  the 
Lord  with  a  solemn  sound  upon  a  false  tongue  ;  and  if  I  praved,  I  feared  that  I  was 
sinning  in  my  prayers,  insulting  Him  by  uttering  confessions  which  1  did  not  feel,  and 
asking  for  mercies  with  a  faith  that  was  not  true  at  all,  bur  only  another  form  of 
unbelief  At  the  very  mention  of  that  word  conviction,  I  seem  to  hear  my  chains 
rattling  anew.  Was  there  ever  a  bond-slave  who  had  more  bitterness  of  sou!  than  I, 
five  years  a  captive  in  the  dungeons  of  the  law,  till  my  youth  seemed  as  if  it  would 
turn    into    premature    old  age,   and  all   the   buoyancy  of   my   spirit  had   vanished  .'' 

0  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  men,  most  of  all  ought  I  to  hate  sin,  for  surely  most 
of  all  have  I  smarted  beneath  the  lash  of  Thy  law  ! 

While  I  was  in  the  custody  of  the  law,  I  did  net  take  anv  pleasure  in  evil. 
Alas  !  I  did  sin  ;  but  my  sense  of  the  law  of  God  kept  me  back  from  many  forms 
of  iniquity.  I  have  thanked  God  a  thousand  times  in  my  life  that,  before  my  con- 
version, when  I  had  ill  desires,  I  had  no  opportunities  of  sinning  :  and,  on  the  other 
hand,  when  I  had  the  opportunities,  I  had  no  desires  towards  evil.  When  desires 
and  opportunities  come  together,  like  the  flint  and  the  steel,  they  make  the  spark 
that  kindles  the  fire  ;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  though  they  may  both  be 
dangerous,  can  bring  about  any  very  great  amount  of  evil  so  long  as  they  are 
kept  apart.  I  could  not,  as  others  did,  plunge  into  profligacy,  or  indulge  in  any 
of  the  grosser  vices,  for  that  law  had  me  well  in  hand.  I  sinned  enough  without 
acting  like  that.  Oh,  I  used  to  tremble  to  put  one  foot  before  another,  for  fear  I 
should  do  wrong  !  I  felt  that  my  old  sins  seemed  to  be  so  many,  that  it  were  well 
to  die  rather  than  commit  any  more.  I  could  not  rest  while  in  the  grip  of  the  law. 
If  I  wanted  to  sleep  a  while,  or  to  be  a  little  indifferent  and  careless,  some  one 
or  other  of  those  ten  commandments  roughly  aroused  me,  and  looking  on  me  with  a 
frowning  face,  said,  "You  have  broken  me."  I  thought  that  I  would  do  some  good 
works  ;  but,  somehow,  the  law  always  broke  my  good  works  in  the  making.  I 
fancied  that,  if  my  tears  flowed  freely,  I  might  make  some  recompense  for  my 
wrong-doing  ;  but  the  law  held  up  the  looking-glass,  and  I  soon  saw  my  face  all 
smeared  and  made  more  unhandsome  by  my  tears. 

The  law  seemed  also  to  blight  all  my  hopes  with  its  stern  sentence, 
"  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written  in 
the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  Only  too  well  did  I  know  that  I  had  not 
continued  in  all  those  things,  so  I  saw  myself  accursed,  turn  which  way  I  might.      If 

1  had  not  committed  one  sin,  that  made  no  difference  if  I  had  committed 
another  ;  I  was  under  the  curse.  What  if  I  had  never  blasphemed  God  with  my 
tongue  ?  Yet,  if  I  had  coveted,  I  had  broken  the  law.  He  who  breaks  a  chain 
might  say,  "  I  did  not  break  that  link,  and  the  other  link."     No   but  if  you  break  one 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  83 

link,  you  have  broken  the  chain.  Ah,  me  ;  how  I  seemed  shut  up  then  !  I  had 
offended  against  the  justice  of  God  ;  I  was  impure  and  polluted  ;  and  I  used  to  say, 
"  If  God  does  not  send  me  to  hell,  He  ought  to  do  it."  I  sat  in  judgment  upon 
myself,  and  pronounced  the  sentence  that  I  felt  would  be  just.  I  could  not  have 
gone  to  Heaven  with  my  sin  unpardoned,  even  if  I  had  had  the  offer  to  do  it, 
for  I  knew  that  it  would  not  be  right  that  I  should  do  so,  and  I  justified  God 
in  my  own  conscience  while  I  condemned  myself  The  law  would  not  even 
let  me  despair.  If  I  thought  I  would  give  up  all  desire  to  do  right,  and  just 
go  and  drown  my  conscience  in  sin,  the  law  said,  "  No,  you  cannot  do  that  ; 
there  is  no  rest  for  you  in  sinning.  You  know  the  law  too  well  to  be  able  to 
sin  in  the  blindness  of  a  seared  conscience."  So  the  law  worried  and  troubled  me 
at  all  points  ;  it  shut  me  up  as  in  an  iron  cage,  and  every  way  of  escape  was 
effectually  blocked  up. 

One  of  the  things  that  shut  me  up  dreadfully  was,  when  I  knew  the  spirituality 
of  the  law.  If  the  law  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,"  1  said  to  myself, 
"Well,  I  have  never  committed  adultery."  Then  the  law,  as  interpreted  by  Christ, 
said,  "  Whosoever  looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her  hath  committed  adultery  with 
her  already  in  his  heart."  The  law  said,  "Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  and  I  said,  "Well, 
I  never  stole  anything  ; "  but  then  I  found  that  even  the  desire  to  possess  what  was 
not  my  own,  was  guilt.  The  spirituality  of  the  law  astounded  me  ;  what  hope  could 
I  have  of  eluding  such  a  law  as  this  which  every  way  surrounded  me  with  an 
atmosphere  from  which  I  could  not  possibly  escape  ? 

Then  I  remembered  that,  even  if  I  kept  the  law  perfectly,  and  kept  it  for  ten, 
twenty,  or  thirty  years,  without  a  fault,  yet  if,  at  the  end  of  that  time,  I  should  break 
it,  I  must  suffer  its  dread  penalty.  Those  words  spoken  by  the  Lord  to  the  prophet 
Ezekiel  came  to  my  mind  :  "  If  he  trust  to  his  own  righteousness,  and  commit 
iniquity,  all  his  righteousnesses  shall  not  be  remembered  ;  but  for  his  iniquity  that  he 
hath  committed,  he  shall  die  for  it."  So  I  saw  that  I  was,  indeed,  "  kept  under  the 
law,  shut  up."  I  had  hoped  to  escape  this  way,  or  that  way,  or  some  other  way. 
Was  I  not  "  christened  "  when  I  was  a  child  .-•  Had  I  not  been  taken  to  a  place  of 
worship?  Had  I  not  been  brought  up  to  say  my  prayers  regularly?  Had  I  not 
been  an  honest,  upright,  moral  youth  ?  Was  all  this  nothing  ?  "  Nothing,"  said  the 
law,  as  it  drew  its  sword  of  fire  :  "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  So  there  was  no  rest  for  my 
spirit,  nay,  not  even  for  a  moment.  What  was  I  to  do  ?  I  was  in  the  hands  of  one 
who  showed  no  mercy  whatever,  for  Moses  never  said,  "  Mercy."  The  law  has 
nothing  to  do  with  mercy.  That  comes  from  another  mouth,  and  under  another 
dispensation.  But  before  faith  came,  I  was  "  kept  under  the  law,  shut  up  unto  the 
faith  which  should  afterwards  be  revealed." 


84  c.    H.    spurgeon's    autoriographv. 

I  am  bold  to  say  that,  if  a  man  be  destitute  of  the  grace  of  God,  his  works  are 
only  works  of  slavery  ;  he  feels  forced  to  do  them.  I  know,  before  I  came  into  the 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God,  if  I  went  to  God's  house,  I  went  because  I  thought  I 
must  do  it  ;  if  I  prayed,  it  was  because  I  feared  some  misfortune  would  happen  in  the 
day  if  I  did  not ;  if  I  ever  thanked  God  for  a  mercy,  it  was  because  I  thought  I 
should  not  get  another  if  I  were  not  thankful  ;  if  I  performed  a  righteous  deed,  it  was 
with  the  hope  that  very  likely  God  would  reward  me  at  last,  and  I  should  be  winning 
a  crown  in  Heaven.  I  was  a  poor  slave,  a  mere  Gibeonite,  hewing  wood  and  drawing 
water!  If  I  could  have  left  off  doing  it,  I  should  have  loved  to  do  so.  If  I  could 
have  had  my  will,  there  would  have  been  no  chapel-going  for  me,  no  religion  for 
me, — I  would  have  lived  in  the  world,  and  followed  the  ways  of  Satan,  if  I  could  have 
done  as  I  pleased.  As  for  righteousness,  it  was  slavery  ;  sin  would  have  been  my 
liberty.  Yet,  truth  to  tell,  of  all  bondage  and  slavery  in  this  world,  there  is  none 
more  horrible  than  the  bondage  of  sin.  Tell  me  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  unsupplied 
with  straw,  yet  preparing  the  full  tale  of  bricks  ;  tell  me  of  the  negro  beneath  the  lash 
of  his  cruel  task-master,  and  I  confess  it  is  a  bondage  fearful  to  be  borne  ;  but  there  is 
one  far  worse, — the  bondage  of  a  convinced  sinner  when  he  is  brought  to  feel  the 
burden  of  his  guilt  ;  the  bondage  of  a  man  when  once  his  sins  are  baying  him,  like 
hounds  about  a  weary  stag  ;  the  bondage  of  a  man  when  the  burden  of  sin  is  on  his 
shoulder, — a  burden  too  heavy  for  his  soul  to  bear, — a  burden  which  will  sink  him 
in  the  depths  of  everlasting  torment,  unless  he  doth  escape  from  it.  Methinks 
I  see  such  a  person.  He  hath  ne'er  a  smile  upon  his  face  ;  dark  clouds  have 
gathered  on  his  brow  ;  solemn  and  serious  he  stands  ;  his  very  words  are  sighs  ;  his 
songs  are  groans  ;  his  smiles  are  tears  ;  and  when  he  seems  most  happy,  hot  drops 
of  grief  roll  in  burning  showers,  scalding  furrows  on  his  cheek.  Ask  him  what 
he  is,  and  he  tells  you  he  is  "  a  wretch  undone."  Ask  him  how  he  is,  and  he 
confesses  that  he  is  "  misery  incarnate."  Ask  him  ivhat  he  shall  be,  and  he  says, 
"  I  shall  be  lost  in  hell  for  ever  ;  there  is  no  hope  for  me."  Such  is  the  poor 
convinced  sinner  under  bondage.  Such  have  I  been  in  my  days,  and  I  declare 
that,  of  all  bondage,  this  is  the  most  painful, — the  bondage  of  the  law,  the  bondage 
of  corruption. 

My  impression  is,  that  this  is  the  history  of  all  the  people  of  God,  more  or 
less.  We  are  not  all  alike  in  every  respect.  We  differ  greatly  in  certain  particulars  ;  yet 
the  main  features  of  all  the  children  of  God  will  be  found  to  be  the  same,  and  their 
Christian  experience  will  resemble  that  of  the  other  members  of  the  Lord's  family.  I 
do  not  say  that  all  have  felt  the  apprehension  of  coming  judgment  as  I  did  ;  but  this 
is  how  it  came  to  me.  I  knew  that  I  was  guilty,  I  knew  that  I  had  offended  God,  I 
knew  that  I  had  transgressed  against  light  and  knowledge,  and  I  did  not  know  when 
God  might  call  me  to  account  ;  but  I  did  know  this,  when  I  awoke  in  the  morning. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  85 

the  first  thought  I  had  was  that  I  had  to  deal  with  a  justly-angry  God,  who  might 
suddenly  require  my  soul  of  me.  Often,  during  the  day,  when  I  had  a  little  time  for 
quiet  meditation,  a  great  depression  of  spirit  would  come  upon  me  because  I  felt  that 
sin, — sin, — sin  had  outlawed  me  from  my  God.  I  wondered  that  the  earth  bore  up 
such  a  sinner  as  I  was,  and  that  the  heavens  did  not  fall  and  crush  me,  and  the  stars 
in  their  courses  did  not  fight  against  such  a  wretch  as  I  felt  myself  to  be.  Then, 
indeed,  did  I  seem  as  if  I  should  go  down  to  the  pit,  and  I  had  perpetually  to  endure 
the  tortures  of  the  never-dying  worm  of  conscience  that  was  gnawing  at  my  heart.  I 
went  to  the  house  of  God,  and  heard  what  I  supposed  was  the  gospel,  but  it  was  no 
gospel  to  me.  My  soul  abhorred  all  manner  of  meat  ;  I  could  not  lay  hold  upon  a 
promise,  or  indulge  a  well-grounded  hope  of  salvation.  If  anyone  had  asked  me 
what  would  become  of  me,  I  must  have  answered,  "  I  am  going  down  to  the  pit."  If 
anyone  had  entreated  me  to  hope  that  mercy  might  come  to  me,  I  should  have 
refused  to  entertain  such  a  hope.  I  used  to  feel  that  I  was  in  the  condemned 
cell.  In  that  dungeon,  the  man  writes  bitter  things  against  himself;  he  feels 
absolutely  sure  that  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him  ;  he  wonders  the  stones 
beneath  his  feet  do  not  open  a  grave  to  swallow  him  up  ;  he  is  astonished  that  the 
wails  of  the  prison  do  not  compress  and  crush  him  into  nothingness  ;  he  marvels 
that  he  has  his  breath,  or  that  the  blood  in  his  veins  does  not  turn  into  rivers  of 
flame.  His  spirit  is  in  a  dreadful  state  ;  he  not  only  feels  that  he  shall  be  lost,  but 
he  thinks  it  is  going  to  happen  now.  The  condemned  cell  in  Newgate,  I  am 
told,  is  just  in  such  a  corner  that  the  criminal  can  hear  the  putting-up  of  the 
scaffold.  Well  do  I  remember  hearing  my  scaffold  built,  and  the  sound  of  the 
hammer  of  the  law  as  piece  after  piece  was  put  together!  It  appeared  as  if  I 
heard  the  noise  of  the  crowd  of  men  and  devils  who  would  witness  my  eternal 
execution,  all  of'  them  howling  and  yelling  out  their  accursed  things  against  my 
spirit.  Then  there  was  a  big  bell  that  tolled  out  the  hours,  and  I  thought  that 
very  soon  the  last  moment  would  arrive,  and  I  must  mount  the  fatal  scafiold  to  be 
cast  away  for  ever.  Oh,  that  condemned  cell .'  Next  to  Tophet,  there  can  be  no 
state  more  wretched  than  that  of  a  man  who  is  brought  there  ! 

When  1  was  for  many  a  month  in  this  state,  I  used  to  read  the  Bible  through, 
and  the  threatenings  were  all  printed  in  capitals,  but  the  promises  were  in  such  small 
type  I  could  not  for  a  long  time  make  them  out ;  and  when  I  did  read  them,  I 
did  not  believe  they  were  mine  ;  but  the  threatenings  were  all  my  own.  "  There," 
said  I,  "when  it  says,  'He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,'  that  means  me!" 
But  when  it  said,  "  He  is  able  also  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God 
by  Him,"  then  I  thought  I  was  shut  out.  When  I  read,  "  He  found  no  place  of 
repentance,  though  he  sought  it  carefully  with  tears  ; "  I  thought,  "  Ah !  that  is 
myself  again."    And  when  I  read,  "  That  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers  is  rejected, 


86  c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiography. 

and  is  nigh  unto  cursing  ;  whose  end  is  to  be  burned  ;  "  "  Ah  !  "  I  said,  "that  describes 
me  to  the  very  letter."  And  when  I  heard  the  Master  say,  "  Cut  it  down  ;  why 
cumbereth  it  the  ground.''"  "Ah  !"  thought  I,  "that  is  my  text;  He  will  have  me 
down  before  long,  and  not  let  me  cumber  the  ground  any  more."  -But  when  I 
read,  "Ho  !  every  one  that  thirsteth  ;  come  ye  to  the  waters;"  I  said,  "That  does 
not  belong  to  me,  I  am  sure."  And  when  I  read,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest  ;  "  1  said,  "  That  belongs  to  my  brother, 
to  my  sister,"  or  those  I  knew  round  about  me;  for  they  were  all  "heavy  laden," 
I  thought,  but  I  was  not ;  and  though,  God  knoweth,  I  would  weep,  and  cry,  and 
lament  till  my  heart  was  breaking  within  me,  if  any  man  had  asked  me  whether 
I  sorrowed  for  sin,  I  should  have  told  him,  "  No,  I  never  had  any  true  sorrow  for 
sin."  "  Well,  do  you  not  feel  the  burden  of  sin  ?  "  "  No  !  "  "  But  you  really  are  a 
convinced  sinner  .-*"  "No,"  I  should  have  said,  "I  am  not."  Is  it  not  strange 
that  poor  sinners,  when  they  are  coming  to  Christ,  are  so  much  in  the  dark  that 
they  cannot  see  their  own  hands  .''  They  are  so  blind  that  they  cannot  see  them- 
selves ;  and  though  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been  pleased  to  work  in  them,  and  give 
them  godly  fear  and  a  tender  conscience,  they  will  stand  up,  and  declare  that  they 
have  not  those  blessings,  and  that  in  them  there  is  not  any  good  thing,  and  that 
God  has  not  looked  on  them  nor  loved  them. 

I  speak  what  I  do  know,  and  not  what  I  have  learned  by  report,  when  I  say 
that  there  is  a  chamber  in  the  experience  of  some  men  where  the  temptations  of  the 
devil  exceed  all  belief.  Read  John  Bunyan's  Grace  Aboimding,  if  you  would  under- 
stand what  I  mean.  The  devil  tempted  him,  he  says,  to  doubt  the  existence  of  God, 
the  truth  of  Scripture,  the  manhood  of  Christ,  then  His  Deity  ;  and  once,  he  says,  he 
tempted  him  to  say  things  which  he  will  never  write,  lest  he  should  pollute  others. 
Ah  !  I  recollect  a  dark  hour  with  myself  when  I,  who  do  not  remember  to  have  even 
heard  a  blasphemy  in  my  youth,  much  less  to  have  uttered  one,  found  rushing 
through  my  mind  an  almost  infinite  number  of  curses  and  blasphemies  against  the 
Most  High  God.  I  specially  recall  a  certain  narrow  and  crooked  lane,  in  a  country 
town,  along  which  I  was  walking,  one  day,  while  I  was  seeking  the  Saviour.  On  a 
sudden,  it  seemed  as  if  the  floodgates  of  hell  had  been  opened  ;  my  head  became  a 
very  pandemonium  ;  ten  thousand  evil  spirits  seemed  to  be  holding  carnival  within 
my  brain  ;  and  I  held  my  mouth  lest  I  should  give  utterance  to  the  words  of 
blasphemy  that  were  poured  into  my  ears.  Things  I  had  never  heard  or  thought  of 
before  came  rushing  impetuously  into  my  mind,  and  I  could  scarcely  withstand  their 
influence.  It  was  the  devil  throwing  me  down  and  tearing  me.  These  things  sorely 
beset  me  ;  for  half-an-hour  together,  the  most  fearful  imprecations  would  dash  through 
my  brain.      Oh,  how    I    groaned  and    cried  before   God  !     That  temptation   passed 


c.    ii.    sturgeon's   AUTOBioGRArnv.  87 

awav  ;  but  ere  many  days,  it  was  renewed  again  ;  and  when  I  was  in  prayer,  or  when 
I  was  reading  the  Bible,  these  blasphemous  thoughts  would  pour  in  upon  me  more 
than  at  any  other  time.  I  consulted  with  an  aged  godly  man  about  it.  He  said  to 
me,  "  Oh,  all  this  many  of  the  people  of  God  have  proved  before  you  !  But,"  he 
asked,  "do  you  hate  these  thoughts."*"  "  I  do,"  I  truly  answered.  "Then,"  said  he, 
"  they  are  not  yours  ;  serve  them  as  the  old  parish  officers  used  to  do  with  vagrants, 
whip  them,  and  send  them  on  to  their  own  parish.  So,"  said  he,  "  do  with  those 
evil  thoughts.  Groan  over  them,  repent  of  them,  and  send  them  on  to  the  devil,  the 
father  of  them,  to  whom  they  belong,  for  they  are  not  yours." 

I  have  never  been  thoroughly  an  unbeliever  but  once,  and  that  was  not  before  I 
knew  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  but  after  it.  It  was  just  when  I  wanted  Christ,  and 
panted  after  Him,  that,  on  a  sudden,  the  thought  crossed  my  mind — which  I 
abhorred  but  could  not  conquer, — that  there  was  no  God,  no  Christ,  no  Heaven,  no 
hell  ;  that  all  my  prayers  were  but  a  farce,  and  that  I  might  as  well  have  whistled  to 
the  winds  or  spoken  to  the  howling  waves.  Ah  !  I  remember  how  my  ship  drifted 
along-  throug-h  that  sea  of  fire,  loosened  from  the  anchor  of  my  faith  which  I  had 
received  from  my  fathers.  I  no  longer  moored  myself  hard  by  the  coasts  of 
Revelation  ;  I  said  to  reason,  "  Be  thou  my  captain  ; "  I  said  to  my  own  brain, 
"  Be  thou  my  rudder  ;  "  and  I  started  on  my  mad  voyage.  Thank  God,  it  is  all 
over  now  ;  but  I  will  tell  you  its  brief  history.  It  was  one  hurried  sailing  over 
the  tempestuous  ocean  of  free  thought.  I  went  on,  and  as  I  went,  the  skies 
began  to  darken  ;  but  to  make  up  for  that  deficiency,  the  waters  were  gleaming 
with  coruscations  of  brilliancv.  I  skw  sparks  flying  upwards  that  pleased  me, 
and  I  felt,  "  If  this  be  f.^ee  thought,  it  is  a  happy  thing."  My  thoughts  seemed 
gems,  and  I  scattered  stars  with  both  my  hands-  but  anon,  instead  of  these  corus- 
cations of  glory,  I  saw  grim  fiends,  fierce  and  horrible,  start  up  from  the  waters  ;  and 
as  I  dashed  on,  they  gnashed  their  teeth,  and  grinned  upon  me  ;  they  seized  the 
prow  of  my  ship,  and  dragged  me  on,  while  I,  in  part,  gloried  at  the  rapidity  of  my 
motion,  but  yet  shuddered  at  the  terrific  rate  with  which  I  passed  the  old  landmarks 
of  my  faith.  I  went  to  the  very  verge  of  the  dreary  realms  of  unbelief.  I  went  to 
the  very  bottom  of  the  sea  of  infidelity.  As  I  hurried  forward  at  an  awful  speed, 
I  began  to  doubt  if  there  were  a  world.  I  doubted  everything,  until  at  last  the 
devil  defeated  himself  by  making  me  doubt  my  own  existence.  I  thought  I  was  an 
idea  floating  in  the  nothingness  of  vacuity  ;  then,  startled  with  that  thought,  and 
feeling  that  I  was  substantial  flesh  and  blood  after  all,  I  saw  that  God  was,  and 
Christ  was,  and  Heaven  was,  and  hell  was,  and  that  all  these  things  were  absolute 
truths.  The  very  e.xtravagance  of  the  doubt  proved  its  absurdity,  and  there  came 
a  voice  which  said,  "And  can  this  doubt  be  true  ?"  Then  I  awoke  from  that  death- 
dream,  which,  God  knows,  might  have  damned  my  soul,  and  ruined  my  body,  if  I  had 


88  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

not  awoke.  When  I  arose,  faith  took  the  helm  ;  from  that  moment,  I  doubted  not. 
Faith  steered  me  back  ;  faith  cried,  "  Away,  away  !  "  I  cast  my  anchor  on  Calvary  ; 
I  lifted  my  eye  to  God  ;  and  here  I  am  alive,  and  out  of  hell.  Therefore,  I  speak 
what  I  do  know.  I  have  sailed  that  perilous  voyage  ;  I  have  come  safe  to  land. 
Ask  me  acjain  to  be  an  infidel  !  No  ;  I  have  tried  it  ;  it  was  sweet  at  first,  but  bitter 
afterwards.  Now,  lashed  to  God's  gospel  more  firmly  than  ever,  standing  as  on  a 
rock  of  adamant,  I  defy  the  arguments  of  hell  to  move  me,  for  "I  know  whom  I 
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  com- 
mitted unto  Him."  I  should  not  be  astonished  if  many  others,  who  now  believe, 
have  also  been  upon  the  very  borders  of  atheism,  and  have  doubted  almost  every- 
thing. It  is  when  Satan  finds  the  heart  tender  that  he  tries  to  stamp  his  own 
impress  of  infidelity  upon  the  soul  ;  but,  blessed  be  God,  he  never  accomplishes  it 
in  the  sinner  who  is  truly  coming  to  Christ  !  Now,  whenever  I  hear  the  sceptic's 
stale  attacks  upon  the  Word  of  God,  I  smile  within  myself,  and  think,  "  Why, 
you  simpleton  !  how  can  you  urge  such  trifling  objections  ?  I  have  felt,  in  the 
contentions  of  my  own  unbelief,  ten  times  greater  difficulties.'  We  who  have 
contended  with  horses  are  not  to  be  wearied  by  footmen.  Gordon  Gumming  and 
other  lion-killers  are  not  to  be  scared  by  wild  cats,  nor  will  those  who  have  stood 
foot  to  foot  with  Satan  resign  the  field  to  pretentious  sceptics,  or  any  other  of  the 
evil  one's  inferior  servants. 

I  do  think  it  often  proves  a  great  blessing  to  a  man  that  he  had  a  terrible 
conflict,  a  desperate  encounter,  a  hard-fought  engagement  in  passing  from  the  empire 
of  Satan  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.  Sooner  or  later,  each  saved  man  will 
have  his  hand-to-hand  fight  with  the  prince  of  darkness  ;  and,  as  a  general  rule,  it  is 
a  great  mercy  to  have  it  over  at  the  outset  of  one's  career,  and  to  be  able  afterwards 
to  feel,  "  Whatever  comes  upon  me,  I  never  can  suffer  as  I  suffered  when  I  was 
seeking  Christ.  Whatever  staggering  doubt,  or  hideous  blasphemy,  or  ghastly 
insinuations,  even  of  suicide  itself,  may  assail  my  feeble  heart,  they  cannot  outdo  the 
horror  of  great  darkness  through  which  my  spirit  passed  when  I  was  struggling  after 
a  Saviour."  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  desirable  that  we  should  have  this  painful  ordeal, 
much  less  that  we  should  seek  it  as  an  evidence  of  regeneration  ;  but  when  we  have 
passed  through  it  victoriously,  we  may  so  use  it  that  it  may  be  a  perpetual  armoury 
to  us.  If  we  can  now  defy  all  doubts  and  fears  that  come,  because  they  cannot  be  so 
potent  as  those  which  already,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  we  have 
overthrown,  shall  we  not  use  that  fact  for  ourselves,  and  can  we  not  equally  well  use 
it  for  others  ?  Full  often  have  I  found  it  good,  when  I  have  talked  with  a  young 
convert  in  deep  distress  about  his  sin,  to  tell  him  something  more  of  his  anxious  plight 
than  he  knew  how  to  express  ;  and  he  has  wondered  where  I  found  it,  though  he 
would  not  have  wondered  if  he  had  known  where  I  had  been,  and  how  much  deeper 


C.      H.      SPURGF.ONS     AUTulilOGRAPHY.  89 

in  the  mire  than  he.  When  he  has  talked  about  some  horrible  thought  tnat  he  has 
had,  with  regard  to  the  impossibility  of  his  own  salvation,  I  have  said,  "  Why,  I  have 
thought  that  a  thousand  times,  and  yet  have  overcome  it  through  the  help  of  God's 
Spirit !  "  I  know  that  a  man's  own  experience  is  one  of  the  very  best  weapons  he 
can  use  in  fighting  with  evil  in  other  men's  hearts.  Often,  their  misery  and 
despondency,  aggravated,  as  it  commonly  is,  by  a  feeling  of  solitariness,  will  be 
greatly  relieved  before  it  is  effectually  driven  out  when  they  find  that  a  brother  has 
suffered  the  same,  and  yet  has  been  able  to  overcome.  Do  I  show  him  how  precious 
the  Saviour  is  to  my  soul .''  He  glorifies  God  in  me.  Right  soon  will  he  look  into 
the  same  dear  face  and  be  lightened  ;  and  then  he  will  magnify  the  Lord  with  me, 
and  we  shall  exalt  His  name  together. 

Multitudes  of  persons  are  sailing  in  what  they  think  to  be  the  good  ship  of 
self-righteousness  :  they  are  expecting  that  they  shall  get  to  Heaven  in  her.  But 
she  never  did  carry  a  soul  safely  into  the  fair  Haven  yet,  and  she  never  will.  Self- 
righteousness  is  as  rapid  a  road  to  ruin  as  outward  sin  itself  We  may  as  certainly 
destroy  ourselves  by  opposing  the  righteousness  of  Christ  as  by  transgressing  the 
law  of  God.  Self-righteousness  is  as  much  an  insult  to  God  as  blasphemy  is,  and 
God  will  never  accept  it,  neither  shall  any  soul  enter  Heaven  by  it.  Yet  this  vessel 
manages  to  keep  on  her  way  against  all  the  opposition  of  Scripture  ,  for,  often, 
men  have  a  soft  .South  wind  blowing,  and  things  go  easily  with  them,  and  they 
believe  that  through  their  own  doings  they  shall  assuredly  find  the  Port  of  Peace.  I  am 
glad,  therefore,  when  some  terrible  tempest  overtakes  this  vessel ;  and  when  men's  hopes 
through  their  own  doings  and  their  own  feelings  are  utterly  wrecked.  I  rejoice  when 
the  old  ship  parts  timber  from  timber,  when  she  goes  aground  and  breaks  to  pieces, 
and  men  find  salety  in  some  other  way  ;  for  whatev'er  seeming  safety  they  may  have 
to-day  will  only  delude  them.  It  must  end  in  destruction,  and  it  is  therefore  a 
thousand  mercies  when  they  find  it  out  soon  enough  to  get  a  better  hope  of 
being  saved  than  this,  which  will  certainly  deceive  them.  I  recollect  very  well 
when  that  terrific  Euroclydon  blew  on  my  vessel.  It  was  as  good  a  ship  as 
any  others  have,  although  I  have  no  doubt  they  would  vindicate  their  own.  Her 
sails  needed  mending,  and  here  and  there  she  wanted  a  little  touch  of  paint ;  but,  for 
all  that,  she  was  sea-worthy,  and  fit  to  be  registered  "  Al  at  Lloyd's,"  and  entered 
in  the  first  class, — at  least,  so  I  thought.  The  storm  blew  over  her,  and  she  went 
to  pieces,  and  I  bless  God  that  she  did,  for  I  should  have  been  kept  on  board  to 
this  very  minute  if  I  had  not  been  washed  off.  I  tried  to  cling  to  the  old  hulk 
to  the  last  plank,  but  I  was  obliged  to  give  it  up,  and  look  somewhere  else  for  help 
and  safety. 

Before  I  came  to  Christ,  I  said  to  myself  "It  surely  cannot  be  that,  if  I  believe 


90  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

in  Jesus,  just  as  I  am,  I  shall  be  saved  ?  I  must  feel  something  ;  I  must  do  something." 
I  could  pour  scorn  upon  myself  to  think  of  some  of  the  good  resolutions  I  made  ! 
1  blew  them  up,  like  children  with  their  pipes  and  their  soap,  and  fine  bubbles  they 
were,  reflecting-  all  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  !  But  a  touch,  and  thev  dissolved. 
They  were  good  for  nothing, — poor  stuff  to  build  eternal  hopes  upon.  Oh,  that 
working  for  salvation  !  What  slavery  it  was,  but  what  small  results  it  produced  !  I 
was  a  spinner  and  weaver  of  the  poorest  sort,  yet  I  dreamed  that  I  should  be  able 
by  my  own  spinning  to  make  a  garment  to  cover  myself  withal.  This  was  the 
trade  of  father  Adam  and  mother  Eve  when  they  first  lost  their  innocence ; 
"they  sewed  fig  leaves  together,  and  made  themselves  aprons."  It  is  a  very 
laborious  business,  and  has  worn  out  the  lives  of  many  with  bitter  bondage,  but 
its  worst  feature  is  that  the  Lord  has  declared  concerning  all  who  follow  this  self- 
righteous  craft,  "  Their  webs  shall  not  become  garments,  neither  shall  they  cover 
themselves  with  their  works." 

Oh,  the  many  times  that  I  have  wished  the  preacher  would  tell  me  something 
to  do  that  I  might  be  saved  !  Gladly  would  I  have  done  it,  if  it  had  been  possible. 
If  he  had  said,  "  Take  off  your  shoes  and  stockings,  and  run  to  John  o'  Groat's,"  I 
would  not  even  have  gone  home  first,  but  would  have  started  off  that  very  night, 
that  I  might  win  salvation.  How  often  have  I  thought  that,  if  he  had  said,  "  Bare 
your  back  to  the  scourge,  and  take  fifty  lashes  ;  "  I  would  have  said,  "  Here  I  am  ! 
Come  along  with  your  whip,  and  beat  as  hard  as  you  please,  so  long  as  I  can  obtain 
peace  and  rest,  and  get  rid  of  my  sin."  Yet  that  simplest  of  all  matters — believing  in 
Christ  crucified,  accepting  His  finished  salvation,  being  nothing,  and  letting  Him  be 
everything,  doing  nothing  but  trusting  to  what  He  has  done, — I  could  not  get  a  hold 
of  it.  Once  I  thought  there  was  salvation  in  good  works,  and  I  laboured  hard,  and 
strove  diligently  to  preserve  a  character  for  integrity  and  uprightness  ;  but  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  came  into  my  heart,  "  sin  revived,  and  I  died."  That  which  I  thought 
had  been  good,  proved  to  be  evil  ;  wherein  I  fancied  I  had  been  holy,  I  found 
myself  to  be  unholy.  I  discovered  that  my  very  best  actions  were  sinful,  that  my 
tears  needed  to  be  wept  over,  and  that  my  very  prayers  needed  God's  forgiveness.  I 
discovered  that  I  was  seeking  after  salvation  by  the  works  of  the  law,  that  I  was 
doing  all  my  good  works  from  a  selfish  motive,  namely,  to  save  myself,  and  therefore 
they  could  not  be  acceptable  to  God.  I  found  out  that  I  could  not  be  saved  by  good 
works  for  two  very  good  reasons  ;  first,  I  had  not  got  any,  and  secondly,  if  I  had 
any,  they  could  not  save  me.  After  that,  I  thought,  surely  salvation  might  be 
obtained,  pardy  by  reformation,  and  partly  by  trusting  in  Christ  ;  so  I  laboured  hard 
again,  and  thought,  if  I  added  a  few  prayers  here  and  there,  a  few  tears  of  penitence, 
and  a  few  vows  of  improvement,  all  would  be  well.  But  after  fagging  on  for  many 
a  weary  day,  like  a  poor  blind  horse  toiling  round   the  mill,  I  found   I   had  gone  no 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  QI 

farther,  for  there  was  still  the  curse  of  God  hanging  over  me,  and  there  was  still 
an  aching  void  in  my  heart,  which  the  world  could  never  fill, — a  void  of  distress 
and  care,  for  I  was  sorely  troubled  because  I  could  not  attain  unto  the  rest  which 
my  soul  desired. 

What  a  struggle  that  was  which  my  young  heart  waged  against  sin  !  When 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  first  quickened  me,  little  did  I  know  of  the  precious  blood 
which  has  put  my  sins  away,  and  drowned  them  in  the  depths  for  ever.  But  I  did 
know  this,  that  I  could  not  remain  as  I  was  ;  that  I  could  not  rest  happy  unless 
I  became  something  better,  something  purer  than  I  was  ;  and,  oh,  how  my  spirit 
cried  to  God  with  groanings, — I  say  it  without  any  exaggeration, — groanings  that 
could  hot  be  uttered  !  and,  oh,  how  I  sought,  in  my  poor  dark  way,  to  overcome 
first  one  sin  and  then  another,  and  so  to  do  battle,  in  God's  strength,  against 
the  enemies  that  assailed  me,  and  not,  thank  God.  altogether  without  success,  though 
still  the  battle  had  been  lost  unless  He  had  come  who  is  the  Overcomer  of  sin  and 
the  Deliverer  of  His  people,  and  had  put  the  hosts  to  flight.  I  tried  a  long  time 
to  improve  myself  but  I  never  did  make  much  of  it  ;  I  found  I  had  a  devil  within 
me  when  I  began,  and  I  had  ten  devils  when  I  left  off.  Instead  of  becoming  better, 
I  became  worse  ;  I  had  now  grot  the  devil  of  self-riofhteousness,  of  self-trust,  and  self- 
conceit,  and  many  others  that  had  come  and  taken  up  their  lodging"  within  my  heart. 
While  I  was  busy  sweeping  my  house,  and  garnishing  it,  behold,  the  one  I  sought 
to  get  rid  of  who  had  only  gone  for  a  little  season,  returned,  and  brought  with 
him  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself  and  they  entered  in  and  dwelt 
there.  Then  I  laboured  to  believe.  It  is  a  strange  way  of  putting  it,  yet  so  it  was. 
When  I  wished  to  believe,  I  found  I  could  not.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  way  to 
Heaven  by  Christ's  righteousness  was  as  difficult  as  by  my  own,  and  that  I  could 
as  soon  get  to  Heaven  by  Sinai  as  by  Calvary.  I  could  do  nothing,  I  could  neither 
repent  nor  believe.  I  fainted  with  despair,  feeling  as  if  I  must  be  lost  despite  the 
gospel,  and  be  for  ever  driven  Irom  Jehovah's  presence,  even  though  Christ 
had  died. 

I  must  confess  that  I  never  would  have  been  saved  if  I  could  have  helped  it. 
As  long  as  ever  I  could,  1  rebelled,  and  revolted,  and  struggled  against  God.  When 
He  would  have  me  pray,  I  would  not  pray  :  when  He  would  have  me  listen  to  the 
sound  of  the  ministry,  I  would  not.  And  when  I  heard,  and  the  tear  rolled  down  my 
cheek,  I  wiped  it  away,  and  defied  Him  to  melt  my  heart.  There  came  an  election 
sermon  ;  but  that  did  not  please  me.  There  came  a  law  sermon,  showing  me  my 
powerlessness  ;  but  I  did  not  believe  it,  I  thought  it  was  the  whim  of  some  old 
experimental  Christian,  some  dogma  of  ancient  times  that  would  not  suit  men  now. 
Then  there  came  another  sermon,  concerning  death  and  sin  ;  but  I  did  not  believe 
I   was  dead,  lor  I  thought  I  was  alive  enough,  and  could  repent  and   make  myself 


92  C.     H.      SrURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

right  by-and-by.  Then  there  came  a  strong  exhortation  sermon  ;  but  I  felt  I  could 
set  my  house  in  order  when  I  liked,  as  well  as  I  could  do  it  at  once.  So  did  I 
continually  trust  in  my  self-sufficiency.  When  my  heart  was  a  little  touched,  I 
tried  to  divert  it  with  sinful  pleasures  ;  and  would  not  then  have  been  saved,  until 
God  gave  me  the  effectual  blow,  and  I  was  obliged  to  submit  to  that  irresistible 
effort  of  His  grace.  It  conquered  my  depraved  will,  and  made  me  bow  myself 
before  His  gracious  sceptre.  When  the  Lord  really  brought  me  to  myself,  He  sent 
one  great  shot  which  shivered  me  to  pieces  ;  and,  lo,  I  found  myself  utterly 
defenceless.  I  thought  I  was  more  mighty  than  the  angels,  and  could  accomplish 
all  things  ;  but  I  found  myself  less  than  nothing. 

Jesus  said  to  Zaccheus,  "  Make  haste,  and  cojue  down.''  Can  I  not  remember 
when  He  also  told  me  to  come  down  }  One  of  the  first  steps  I  had  to  take  was  to 
go  right  down  from  my  good  works  ;  and,  oh,  what  a  fall  was  that  '  Then  I  stood 
upon  my  own  self-sufficiency,  and  Christ  said,  "  Come  down  !  I  have  pulled  you 
down  from  your  good  works,  and  now  I  will  pull  you  down  from  your  self- 
sufficiency."  So  I  had  another  fall,  and  I  felt  sure  I  had  gained  the  bottom,  but  again 
Christ  said,  "Come  down!"  and  He  made  me  come  down  till  I  fell  on  some  point 
at  which  I  felt  I  was  yet  salvable.  But  still  the  command  was,  "  Down,  sir  !  come 
down  further  yet."  And  down  I  came  until,  in  despair,  I  had  to  let  go  every  bough 
of  the  tree  of  my  hopes,  and  then  I  said,  "  I  can  do  nothing  ;  I  am  ruined."  The 
waters  were  wrapped  round  my  head,  and  I  was  shut  out  from  the  light  of  day, 
and  thought  myself  a  stranger  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  But  Christ  said, 
"Come  down  lower  yet,  sir  !  thou  hast  too  much  pride  to  be  saved."  Then  I  was 
brought  down  to  see  my  corruption,  my  wickedness,  my  filthiness,  for  God  always 
humbles  the  sinner  whom  He  means  to  save.  While  I  was  in  this  state,  trying  to 
make  myself  believe,  a  voice  whispered,  "Vain  man,  vain  man,  if  thou  wouldst  believe, 
come  and  see  !  "  Then  the  Holy  Spirit  led  me  by  the  hand  to  a  solitary  place,  and 
while  I  stood  there,  suddenly  there  appeared  before  me  One  upon  His  cross.  I 
looked  up  ;  I  had  then  no  faith.  I  saw  His  eyes  suffused  with  tears,  and  the  blood 
still  flowinfj  ;  I  saw  His  enemies  about  Him,  huntini^  Him  to  His  crrave  ;  I  marked 
His  miseries  unutterable  ;  I  heard  the  groaning  which  cannot  be  described  ;  and  as  I 
looked  up.  He  opened  His  eyes,  and  said  to  me,  "The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Yet  I  needed  more  than  that  gracious  word. 
The  general  call  of  the  gospel  is  like  the  sheet  lightning  we  sometimes  see  on  a 
summer's  evening, — beautiful,  grand, — but  who  ever  heard  of  anything  being  struck 
by  it  ?  But  the  special  call  is  the  forked  Hash  from  heaven  ;  it  strikes  somewhere. 
It  is  the  arrow  shot  in  between  the  joints  of  the  harness.  The  call  which  saves  is 
like  that  of  Jesus,  when  He  said,  "  Mary,"  and  she  said  unto  Him,  "  Rabboni."  Can 
I  not  recollect  the  hour  when  He  whispered   my  name,  when   He  said  in  mine  ear, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOIUOGRAPHY.  93 

"  Come  unto  Me"  !  That  was  an  effectual  call  ;  there  was  no  resisting  it.  I  know 
I  laughed  at  religion  ;  I  despised,  I  abhorred  it  ;  butch,  that  call  !  I  would  not  come. 
But  Christ  said,  "  Thou  shalt  come.  '  All  that  the  Father  giveth  Me  shall  come  to 
Me.'"  "  Lord,  I  will  not."  "  But  thou  shalt,"  said  Jesus.  I  have  gone  up  to  God's 
house,  sometimes,  almost  with  a  resolution  that  I  would  not  listen,  but  listen  I  must. 
Oh,  how  the  Word  came  into  my  soul  !  Was  there  any  power  of  resistance 
remaining  in  me  ?  No  ;  I  was  thrown  down  ;  each  bone  seemed  to  be  broken. 
I  began  to  think  there  never  would  be  a  trace  of  anything  built  up  in  my  heart. 
What  a  trench  was  dug  in  my  soul  !  Out  went  my  supposed  merits  !  What  a  heap 
of  rubbish  !  Out  went  my  knowledge,  my  good  resolves,  and  my  self-sufficiency  ! 
By-and-by,  out  went  all  my  strength.  When  this  digging-out  was  completed,  the 
ditch  was  so  deep  that,  as  I  went  down  into  it,  it  seemed  like  my  grave.  Such  a 
grief  it  was  for  me  to  know  my  own  sinfulness,  that  it  did  not  seem  possible  that  this 
could  help  my  upbuilding  in  comfort  and  salvation.  Yet,  so  it  is,  that  if  the  Lord 
means  to  build  high.  He  always  digs  deep  ;  and  if  He  means  to  give  great  grace, 
He  gives  deep  consciousness  of  need  of  it.  Long  before  I  began  with  Christ,  He 
had  begun  with  me  ;  but  when  I  began  with  Him,  it  was,  as  the  law-writers  say, 
■" /k  forma  pauperis,"  after  the  style  of  a  wretched  mendicant, — a  pauper  who  had 
nothing  of  his  own,  and  looked  to  Christ  for  everything.  I  know,  when  I  first  cast 
my  eye  to  His  dear  cross,  and  rested  in  Him,  I  had  not  any  merit  of  my  own,  it  was 
all  demerit.  1  was  not  deserving,  e.xcept  that  I  felt  I  was  hell-deserving  :  I  had  not 
even  a  shade  of  virtue  that  1  could  confide  in.  It  was  all  over  with  me.  I  had  come 
to  an  extremity.  I  could  not  have  found  a  farthing's  worth  of  goodness  in  myself  if 
I  had  been  melted  down.  I  seemed  to  be  all  rottenness,  a  dunghill  of  corruption, 
nothing  better,  but  something  a  great  deal  worse.  I  could  truly  join  with  Paul  at 
that  time,  and  say  that  my  own  righteousnesses  were  dung  ;  he  used  a  strong 
expression,  but  I  do  not  suppose  he  felt  it  to  be  strong  enough  :  "  I  count  them  but 
dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  Him." 

I  do  not  know  what  may  be  the  peculiarity  of  my  constitution,  but  I  have 
always  loved  safe  things.  I  have  not,  that  I  know  of,  one  grain  of  speculation  in  my 
nature.  Safe  things — things  that  I  can  see  to  be  made  of  rock,  and  that  will  bear 
the  test  of  time,- -I  lay  hold  of  with  avidity.  I  was  reasoning  thus  in  my  boyish 
spirit  : — Scripture  tells  me  that  he  that  believeth  in  Christ  shall  never  perish.  Then, 
if  I  believe  in  Jesus,  I  shall  be  safe  for  time  and  for  eternity,  too.  There  will  be  no 
fear  of  my  ever  being  in  hell  ;  I  shall  run  no  risk  as  to  my  eternal  state,  that  will  be 
secure  for  ever.  I  shall  have  the  certainty  that,  when  my  eyes  are  closed  in  death,  I 
shall  see  the  face  of  Christ,  and  behold  Him  in  glory.  Whenever  I  heard  the 
■doctrine  of  the  final  preservation  of  the  saints  preached,  my  mouth  used  to  water  to 


94  C.     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

be  a  child  of  God.     When  I  used  to  hear  the  old  saints  sing  that  hymn  of  Toplady's, 


which  begins, — 


"  A  debtor  to  mercy  alone, 
Ot  covenant  mercy  I  sing; 
Nor  fear,  with  Thy  righteousness  on, 
My  person  and  offering  to  bring ; — " 

I  thought  I   should  never   be   able  to  sing  it  myself,   it  was  too  high   doctrine,   too 
sweet,  too  consoling  ;  but  when  they  came  to  the  climax,  in  the  last  verse, — 

"My  name  from  the  palms  of  His  hands 
Eternity  will  not  erase  ; 
Impressed  on  His  heart  it  remains 

In  marks  of  indelible  grace  : 
Yes,  I  to  the  end  shall  endure, 

As  sure  as  the  earnest  is  given; 
More  happy,  but  not  more  secure, 
The  glorified  spirits  in  Heaven;" — 

my  neart  was  as  if  it  would  leap  out  of  my  body,  and  I  would  cry  to  God,  "  Oh. 
that  I  had  a  part  and  lot  in  such  a  salvation  as  that  !  "  I  distinctly  remember 
having  a  meditation  something  like  this  : — "  Now  I  should  not  like  to  be  a  thief  or  a 
murderer,  or  an  unclean  person."  ,1  had  such  a  training  that  I  had  an  abhorrence  ot 
sin  of  every  sort.  "And  yet,"  I  thought  to  myself,  "  I  may  even  be  hanged  ;  there 
is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  turn  out  a  thief ; "  because  I  recollected  there  were 
some  of  my  schoolfellows,  older  than  I  was,  who  had  already  become  proficient  in 
dishonesty  ;  and  I  thought,  "Why  may  not  I  ?"  No  one  can  tell  the  rapture  of  my 
spirit,  when  I  thought  I  saw  in  my  Bible  the  doctrine  that,  if  I  gave  my  heart  to 
Christ,  He  would  keep  me  from  sin,  and  preserve  me  as  long  as  I  lived.  I  was  not 
quite  certain  whether  that  truth  w.as  revealed  in  the  Bible,  though  I  thought  so  ;  but 
I  remember,  when  I  heard  the  minister  of  some  small  "  Hyper "  chapel  utter  the 
same  doctrine,  my  heart  was  full  of  rapture  ;  I  panted  after  that  kind  of  gospel. 
"Oh  !  "  I  thought,  "if  God  would  but  love  me,  if  I  might  but  know  myself  to  be 
His  !  "  For  the  enchanting  part  of  it  was  that,  if  I  were  so  loved.  He  would  keep 
me  to  the  end.  That  made  me  so  in  love  with  the  gospel  that,  boy  as  I  was> 
knowing  nothing  savingly  about  the  truth,  I  was  all  the  more  earnest  in  desiring  to 
be  saved,  because,  if  saved,  God  would  never  turn  me  out  of  doors.  That  made  the 
gospel  very  precious  to  me  ;  so  that,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  showed  me  my  guilt,  and 
led  me  to  seek  the  Saviour,  that  doctrine  was  like  a  bright  star  to  my  spirit. 
The  Bible  seemed  to  me  to  be  full  of  this  truth,  "  If  you  trust  Christ,  He  will 
save  you  from  all  evil  ;  He  will  keep  you  in  a  life  of  integrity  and  holiness  while 
here,  and  He  will  bring  you  safe  to  Heaven  at  the  last."  I  felt  that  I  could  not 
trust  man,  for  I  had  seen  some  of  the  very  best  wandering  far  from  the  truth  ;  if  I 
trusted  Christ,  it  was  not  a  chance  as  to  whether  I  should  get  to  Heaven,  but  a 
certainty;  and  I  learned  that,  if  I  rested  all  my  weight  upon  Him,  He  would  keep 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  95 

me,  for  I  found  it  written,  "  The  righteous  shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that  hath 
clean  hands  shall  wax  stronger  and  stronger."  I  found  the  apostle  saying,  "  He 
which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it,"  and  such-like  expressions. 
"Why,"  I  reasoned,  "  I  have  found  an  Insurance  Office,  and  a  good  one,  too  ;  I  will 
insure  my  soul  in  it ;  I  will  go  to  Jesus  as  I  am,  for  He  bids  me  do  so  ;  I  will  trust 
myself  with  Him."  If  I  had  listened  to  the  Arminian  theory,  I  should  never  have 
been  converted,  for  it  never  had  any  charms  for  me.  A  Saviour  who  casts  away  His 
people,  a  God  who  leaves  His  children  to  perish,  is  not  worthy  of  my  worship  ; 
and  a  salvation  which  does  not  save  outright  is  neither  worth  preaching  nor  worth 
listening  to. 

I  recollect  the  time  when  I  was  afraid  that  Jesus  would  never  save  me,  but 
I  used  to  feel  in  my  heart  that,  even  if  He  did  not,  I  must  love  Him  for  what 
He  had  done  for  other  poor  sinners.  It  seemed  to  me,  as  I  read  the  wondrous 
story  of  His  life  and  death,  that  if  He  refused  me,  I  would  still  lie  at  His  feet,  and 
say,  "Thou  mayest  spurn  me,  but  Thou  art  a  blessed  Christ  for  all  that ;  and  if  Thou 
dost  curse  me,  yet  I  can  only  say  to  Thee  that  I  well  deserve  it  at  Thy  hands.  Do 
what  Thou  wilt  with  me  ;  but  Thou  didst  save  the  dying  thief,  and  Thou  didst  save 
her  out  of  whom  Thou  didst  cast  seven  devils,  and  if  Thou  dost  not  deign  to  save 
me,  yet  Thou  art  a  blessed  Christ,  and  I  cannot  rail  at  Thee,  or  find  fault  with 
Thee,  but  I  lie  down  at  Thy  feet,  and  worship  Thee."  I  could  not  help  saying, 
once,  that,  even  if  He  damned  me,  I  would  love  God  because  He  was  so  gracious  to 
others.  One  text  of  Scripture  especially  cheered  me  ;  I  lived  upon  it  for  months. 
I  felt  the  weight  of  sin,  and  I  did  not  know  the  Saviour  ;  I  feared  God  would  blast 
me  with  His  wrath,  and  smite  me  with  His  hot  displeasure!  From  chapel  to  chapel 
I  went  to  hear  the  Word  preached,  but  never  a  gospel  sentence  did  I  hear  ;  but  this 
one  text  preserved  me  from  what  I  believe  I  should  have  been  driven  to, — the  com- 
mission of  suicide  through  grief  and  sorrow.  It  was  this  sweet  word,  "  Whosoever 
shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  Well,  I  thought,  I  cannot 
believe  on  Christ  as  I  could  wish,  I  cannot  find  pardon  ;  but  I  know  I  call  upon  His 
name,  I  know  I  pray,  ay,  and  pray  with  groans,  and  tears,  and  sighs,  day  and  night  ; 
and  if  I  am  ever  lost,  I  will  plead  that  promise,  "  O  God,  Thou  saidst.  Whosoever 
shall  call  upon  My  name  shall  be  saved  !  I  did  call  ;  wilt  Thou  cast  me  away  .^  I 
did  plead  Thy  promise  ;  I  did  lift  up  my  heart  in  prayer  ;  canst  Thou  be  just,  and 
yet  condemn  the  sinner  who  did  really  call  upon  Thy  name  ?  " 

My  heart  was  greatly  impressed  by  something  which  I  heard  my  mother 
say.  I  had  been  some  years  .seeking  Christ,  and  I  could  not  believe  that  He  would 
save  me.  She  said  she  had  heard  many  people  swear  and  blaspheme  God,  but  one 
thing  she  had  never  known, — she  had  never  heard  a  man  say  he  had  sought  Christ, 
and   Christ   had   rejected   him.       "  And,"   she  added,    "  I    do    not  believe   that   God 


96  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

would  permit  any  man  to  live  to  say  that."  I  thought  that  I  could  say  it  ; 
I  thought  I  had  sought  Him,  and  He  had  cast  me  away,  and  I  determined 
that  I  would  say  it  ;  even  if  it  destroyed  my  soul,  I  would  speak  what  I  thought 
was  the  truth.  But  I  said  to  myself,  "  I  will  try  once  more  ;  "  and  I  went  to  the 
Master,  with  nothing  of  my  own,  casting  myself  simply  on  His  mercy  ;  and  I 
believed  that  He  died  for  me,  and  now,  blessed  be  His  holy  name,  I  never  shall 
be  able  to  say  that  He  has  cast  me  away  !  As  the  result  of  personal  experience, 
I  can  add  my  own  testimony  to  that  of  my  mother.  I  have  heard  many  wicked 
things  in  my  lifcj — I  also  have  heard  men  swear  and  blaspheme  God,  till  I  have 
trembled  ;  but  there  is  one  thing  I  never  did  hear  a  man  say  yet,  and  I  think  God 
would  scarcely  permit  any  man  to  utter  such  a  lie  ;  I  never  knew  even  a 
drunken  man  say,  "  I  sincerely  sought  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  yet  He 
has  not  heard  me,  and  will  not  answer  me,  but  has  cast  me  away."  I  scarcely 
think  it  possible,  although  I  know  that  men  can  be  almost  infinitely  wicked,  that  any 
man  could  utter  such  an  abomiurible  falsehood  as  that.  At  any  rate,  I  can  say  1 
have  never  heard  it. 


CHAPTER    XI. 


I  have  heard  men  tell  the  story  of  their  conversion,  and  of  their  spiritual  life,  in  such  a  way  that 
my  heart  hath  loathed  t/iem  and  their  story,  too,  for  they  have  told  of  their  sins  as  if  they  did  boast  in 
the  greatness  of  their  crime,  and  they  have  mentioned  the  love  of  God,  not  with  a  tear  of  gratitude,  not 
with  the  simple  thanksgiving  of  the  really  humble  heart,  but  as  if  they  as  much  exalted  themselves  as 
they  exalted  God.  Oh  !  when  we  tell  the  story  of  our  own  conversion,  I  would  have  it  done  with  great 
sorrow,  remembering  what  we  used  to  be,  and  with  great  joy  and  gratitude,  remembering  how  little  we 
deserve  these  things.  I  was  once  preaching  upon  conversion  and  salvation,  and  1  felt  within  myself,  as 
preachers  often  do,  that  it  was  but  dry  work  to  tell  this  story,  and  a  dull,  dull  tale  it  was  to  me ;  but,  on 
a  sudden,  the  thought  crossed  my  mind,  "Why,  you  are  a  poor,  lost,  ruined  sinner  yourself;  tell  it,  tell 
it  as  you  received  it ;  begin  to  tell  of  the  grace  of  God  as  you  trust  you  feel  it  yourself"  Why,  then, 
my  eyes  began  to  be  fountains  of  tears  ;  those  hearers  who  had  nodded  their  heads  began  to  brighten 
up,  and  they  listened,  because  they  were  hearing  something  which  the  speaker  himself  felt,  and  which  they 
recognized  as  being  true  to  him  if  it  was  not  true  to  them. 

Can  you  not  remember,  dearly-beloved,  that  day  of  days,  that  best  and  brightest  of  hours,  when 
first  you  saw  the  Lord,  lost  your  burden,  received  the  roll  of  promise,  rejoiced  in  full  salvation,  and 
went  on  your  way  in  peace?  My  soul  can  never  lorget  that  day.  Dying,  all  but  dead,  diseased,  pained, 
chained,  scourged,  bound  in  fetters  of  iron,  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  Jesus  appeared 
unto  me.  My  eyes  looked  to  Him;  the  disease  was  healed,  the  pains  removed,  chains  were  snapped, 
prison  doors  were  opened,  darkness  gave  place  to  light.  What  delight  filled  my  soul ! — what  mirth, 
what  ecstasy,  what  sound  of  music  and  dancing,  what  soarings  towards  Heaven,  what  heights  and 
depths  of  ineffable  delight !  Scarcely  ever  since  then  have  I  known  joys  which  surpassed  the  rapture  of 
that  first  hour. — C.  H.  S. 


ET  our  lips  crowd  sonnets  within  the  compass  of  a  word  ;  let  our 
voice  distil  hours  of  melody  into  a  single  syllable  ;  let  our  tongue 
utter  in  one  letter  the  essence  of  the  harmony  of  ages  ;  for  we  write 
of  an  hour  which  as  far  excelleth  all  other  days  of  our  life  as  gold 
exceedeth  dross.  As  the  night  of  Israel's  passover  was  a  night  to 
be  remembered,  a  theme  for  bards,  and  an  incessant  fountain  of 
grateful  song,  even  so  is  the  time  of  which  we  now  tell,  the  never-to-be-forgotten 
hour  of  our  emancipation  from  guilt,  and  our  justification  in  Jesus.  Other  days  have 
mingled  with  their  fellows  till,  like  coins  worn  in  circulation,  their  image  and  super- 
scription are  entirely  obliterated  ;  but  this  day  remaineth  new,  fresh,  bright,  as  dis- 
tinct in  all  its  parts  as  if  it  were  but  yesterday  struck  from  the  mint  of  time. 
Memory  shall  drop  from  the  palsied  hand  full  many  a  memento  which  now  she 
cherishes,  but  she  shall  never,  even  when  she  tottereth  to  the  grave,  unbind  from  her 
heart  the  token  of  the  thrice-happy  hour  of  the  redemption  of  our  spirit.  The 
emancipated  galley-slave  may  forget  the  day  which  heard  his  broken  fetters  rattle  on 
the  ground  ;  the  pardoned  traitor  may  fail  to  remember  the  moment  when  the  axe 


9^  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

of  the  headsman  was  averted  by  a  pardon  ;  and  the  long-despairing  mariner  may  not 
recollect  the  moment  when  a  friendly  hand  snatched  him  from  the  hungry  deep  ;  but 
O  hour  of  forgiven  sin,  moment  of  perfect  pardon,  our  soul  shall  nev^er  forget  thee 
while  within  her  life  and  being  find  an  immortality  !  Each  day  of  our  life  hath  had 
its  attendant  angel  ;  but  on  this  day,  like  Jacob  3.t  Mahanaim,  hosts  of  angels  met  us. 
The  sun  hath  risen  every  morning,  but  on  that  eventful  morn  he  had  the  light  of 
seven  days.  As  the  days  of  Heaven  upon  earth,  as  the  years  of  immortality,  as  the 
ages  of  glory,  as  the  bliss  of  Heaven,  so  were  the  hours  of  that  thrice-happy  day. 
Rapture  divine,  and  ecstasy  inexpressible,  filled  our  soul.  Fear,  distress,  and  grief, 
with  all  their  train  of  woes,  fied  hastily  away  ;  and  in  their  place  joys  came  without 
number. 

When  I  was  in  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  under  conviction  of  sin,  I  had  a 
clear  and  sharp  sense  of  the  justice  of  God.  Sin,  whatever  it  might  be  to  other 
people,  became  to  me  an  intolerable  burden.  It  was  not  so  much  that  I  feared  hell, 
as  that  I  feared  sin  ;  and  all  the  while,  I  had  upon  my  mind  a  deep  concern  for  the 
honour  of  God's  name,  and  the  integrity  of  His  moral  government.  I  felt  that  it 
would  not  satisfy  my  conscience  if  I  could  be  forgiven  unjustly.  But  then  there 
came  the  question, — "  How  could  God  be  just,  and  yet  justify  me  who  had  been 
so  guilty.''"  I  was  worried  and  wearied  with  this  question;  neither  could  I  see 
any  answer  to  it.  Certainly,  I  could  never  have  invented  an  answer  which  would 
have  satisfied  my  conscience.  The  doctrine  of  the  atonement  is  to  my  mind  one 
of  the  surest  proofs  of  the  Divine  inspiration  of  Holy  Scripture.  Who  would  or 
could  have  thought  of  the  just  Ruler  dying  for  the  unjust  rebel  ?  This  is  no  teaching 
of  human  mythology,  or  dream  of  poetical  imagination.  This  method  of  e.xpiation 
is  only  known  among  men  because  it  is  a  fact  :  fiction  could  not  have  devised  it. 
God  Himself  ordained  it  ;  it  is  not  a  matter  which  could  have  been  imagined. 

I  had  heard  ol  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  from  my  youth  up  ; 
but  I  did  not  know  any  more  about  it  in  my  innermost  soul  than  if  I  had  been  born 
and  bred  a  Hottentot.  The  light  was  there,  but  I  was  blind:  it  was  of  necessity 
that  the  Lord  Himself  should  make  the  matter  plain  to  me.  It  came  to  me  as  a  new 
revelation,  as  fresh  as  if  I  had  never  read  in  Scripture  that  Jesus  was  declared  to  be 
the  propitiation  for  sins  that  God  might  be  just.  I  believe  it  will  have  to  come  as  a 
revelation  to  every  new-born  child  of  God  whenever  he  sees  it  ;  I  mean  that  glorious 
doctrine  of  the  substitution  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  came  to  understand  that  salvation 
was  possible  through  vicarious  sacrifice  ;  and  that  provision  had  been  made  in  the 
first  constitution  and  arrangement  of  things  for  such  a  substitution.  I  was  made  to 
see  that  He  who  is  the  Son  of  God,  co-equal,  and  co-eternal  with  the  Father,  had  of 
old  been   made   the   covenant   Head  of  a  chosen   people,    that    He    might    in   that 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  99 

capacity  suffer  for  them  and  save  them.  Inasmuch  as  our  fall  was  not  at  the  first  a 
personal  one,  for  we  fell  in  our  federal  representative,  the  first  Adam,  it  became 
possible  for  us  to  be  recovered  by  a  second  Representative,  even  by  Him  who  has 
undertaken  to  be  the  covenant  Head  of  His  people,  so  as  to  be  their  second  Adam. 
I  saw  that,  ere  I  actually  sinned,  I  had  fallen  by  my  first  father's  sin  ;  and  I  rejoiced 
that,  therefore,  it  became  possible  in  point  of  law  for  me  to  rise  by  a  second  Head 
and  Representative.  The  fall  by  Adam  left  a  loophole  of  escape  ;  another  Adam 
could  undo  the  ruin  wrought  by  the  first. 

When  I  was  an.xious  about  the  possibility  of  a  just  God  pardoning  me,  I  under- 
stood and  saw  by  faith  that  He  who  is  the  Son  of  God  became  man,  and  in  His  own 
blessed  person  bore  my  sin  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  I  saw  that  the  chastise- 
ment of  my  peace  was  laid  on  Him,  and  that  with  His  stripes  I  was  healed.  It  was 
because  the  Son  of  God,  supremely  glorious  in  His  matchless  person,  undertook  to 
vindicate  the  law  by  bearing  the  sentence  due  to  me,  that  therefore  God  was  able  to 
pass  by  my  sin.  My  sole  hope  for  Heaven  lies  in  the  full  atonement  made  upon 
Calvary's  cross  for  the  ungodly.  On  that  I  firmly  rely.  I  have  not  the  shadow  of  a 
hope  anywhere  else.  Personally,  I  could  never  ha^'e  overcome  my  own  sinfulness. 
I  tried  and  failed.  My  evil  propensities  were  too  many  for  me,  till,  in  the  belief  that 
Christ  died  for  me,  I  cast  my  guilty  soul  on  Him,  and  then  I  received  a  conquering 
principle  by  which  I  overcame  my  sinful  self  The  doctrine  of  the  cross  can  be  used 
to  slay  sin,  even  as  the  old  warriors  used  their  huge  two-handed  swords,  and  mowed 
down  their  foes  at  every  stroke.  There  is  nothing  like  faith  in  the  sinners'  Friend  : 
it  overcomes  all  evil.  If  Christ  has  died  for  me,  ungodly  as  I  am,  without  strength 
as  I  am,  then  I  cannot  live  in  sin  any  longer,  but  must  arouse  myself  to  love  and 
serve  Him  who  hath  redeemed  me.  I  cannot  trifle  with  the  evil  which  slew  my  best 
Friend.  I  must  be  holy  for  His  sake.  How  can  I  live  in  sin  when  He  has  died  to 
save  me  from  it  ? 

There  was  a  day,  as  I  took  my  walks  abroad,  when  I  came  hard  by  a  spot  for 
ever  engraven  upon  my  memory,  for  there  I  saw  this  Friend,  my  best,  my  only 
Friend,  murdered.  I  stooped  down  in  sad  affright,  and  looked  at  Him.  I  saw  that 
His  hands  had  been  pierced  with  rough  iron  nails,  and  His  feet  had  been  rent  in 
the  same  way.  There  was  misery  in  His  dead  countenance  so  terrible  that  I  scarcely 
dared  to  look  upon  it.  His  body  was  emaciated  with  hunger,  His  back  was  red 
with  bloody  scourges,  and  His  brow  had  a  circle  of  wounds  about  it:  clearly  could 
one  see  that  these  had  been  pierced  by  thorns.  I  shuddered,  for  I  had  known  this 
Friend  full  well.  He  never  had  a  fault  ;  He  was  the  purest  of  the  pure,  the  holiest 
of  the  holy.  Who  could  have  injured  Him?  For  He  never  injured  any  man:  all 
His  life  long  He  "  went  about  doing  good  ;"  He  had  healed  the  sick.  He  had  fed 
the  hungry,  He  had  raised  the  dead  :  for  which  of  these  works  did  they  kill  Him? 


lOO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

He  had  never  breathed  out  anything  else  but  love  ;  and  as  I  looked  into  the  poor 
sorrowful  face,  so  full  of  agony,  and  yet  so  full  of  love,  I  wondered  who  could  have 
been  a  wretch  so  vile  as  to  pierce  hands  like  His.  I  said  within  myself,  "  Where  can 
these  traitors  live  .■*  Who  are  these  that  could  have  smitten  such  an  One  as  this  }  " 
Had  they  murdered  an  oppressor,  we  might  have  forgiven  them  ;  had  they  slain  one 
who  had  indulged  in  vice  or  villainy,  it  might  have  been  his  desert  ;  had  it  been 
a  murderer  and  a  rebel,  or  one  who  had  committed  sedition,  we  would  have  said, 
"  Bury  his  corpse  :  justice  has  at  last  given  him  his  due."  But  when  Thou  wast  slain, 
my  best,  my  only-beloved,  where  lodged  the  traitors  1  Let  me  seize  them,  and  they 
shall  be  put  to  death.  If  there  be  torments  that  I  can  devise,  surely  they  shall 
endure  them  all.  Oh  !  what  jealousy  ;  what  revenge  I  felt  !  If  I  might  but  find 
these  murderers,  what  would  I  not  do  with  them  !  And  as  I  looked  upon  that 
corpse,  I  heard  a  footstep,  and  wondered  where  it  was.  I  listened,  and  I  clearly 
perceived  that  the  murderer  was  close  at  hand.  It  was  dark,  and  I  groped  about  to 
find  him.  I  found  that,  somehow  or  other,  wherever  I  put  out  my  hand,  I  could  not 
meet  with  him,  for  he  was  nearer  to  me  than  my  hand  would  go.  At  last  I  put  my 
hand  upon  my  breast.  "  I  have  thee  now,"  said  I  ;  for  lo  !  he  was  in  my  own  heart  ; 
the  murderer  was  hiding  within  my  own  bosom,  dwelling  in  the  recesses  of  my 
inmost  soul.  Ah  !  then  I  wept  indeed,  that  I,  in  the  very  presence  of  my  murdered 
Master,  should  be  harbouring  the  murderer  ;  and  I  felt  myself  most  guilty  while  I 
bowed  over  His  corpse,  and  sang  that  plaintive  hymn, — 

"'Twas  you,  my  sins,  my  cruel  sins, 
His  chief  tormentors  were  ; 
Eacli  of  my  crimes  became  a  nail. 
And  unbelief  the  spear." 

Amid  the  rabble  rout  which  hounded  the  Redeemer  to  His  doom,  there  were 
some  gracious  souls  whose  bitter  anguish  sought  vent  in  wailing  and  lamentations, — 
fit  music  to  accompany  that  march  of  woe.  When  my  soul  can,  in  imagination,  see 
the  Saviour  bearing  His  cross  to  Calvary,  she  joins,  the  godly  women,  and  weeps 
with  them  ;  for,  indeed,  there  is  true  cause  for  grief, — cause  lying  deeper  than  those 
mourning  women  thought.  They  bewailed  innocence  maltreated,  goodness  perse- 
cuted, love  bleeding,  meekness  about  to  die  ;  but  my  heart  has  a  deeper  and  more 
bitter  cause  to  mourn.  My  sins  were  the  scourges  which  lacerated  those  blessed 
shoulders,  and  crowned  with  thorns  those  bleeding  brows  :  my  sins  cried,  "  Crucify 
Him  !  Crucify  Him  !  "  and  laid  the  cross  upon  His  gracious  shoulders.  His  being 
led  forth  to  die  is  sorrow  enough  for  one  eternity  ;  but  my  having  been  His 
murderer,  is  more,  infinitely  more  grief  than  one  poor  fountain  of  tears  can  express. 

Why  those  women  loved  and  wept,  it  were  not  hard  to  guess  ;  but  they  could 
not  have  had  greater  reasons  for  love  and  grief  than  my  heart  has.  Nain's  widow 
saw  her  son  restored  ;  but  I  myself  have  been  raised  to  newness  of  life.     Peter's 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  lOI 

wife's  mother  was  cured  of  the  fever  ;  but  I  of  the  greater  plague  of  sin.  Out  of 
Magdalene  seven  devils  were  cast  ;  but  a  whole  legion  out  of  me.  Mary  and  Martha 
were  favoured  with  visits  from  Him  ;  but  He  dwells  with  me.  His  mother  bare 
His  body  ;  but  He  is  formed  in  me,  "  the  hope  of  glory."  In  nothing  behind  the 
holy  women  in  debt,  let  me  not  be  behind  them  in  gratitude  or  sorrow. 

"  Love  and  grief  my  heart  dividing, 
With  my  tears  His  feet  I'll  lave  ; 
Constant  still  in  heart  abiding, 
Weep  for  Him  who  died  to  save." 

William  Huntingdon  says,  in  his  autobiography,  that  one  of  the  sharpest 
sensations  of  pain  that  he  felt,  after  he  had  been  quickened  by  Divine  grace,  was 
this,  "  He  felt  such  pity  for  God."  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  met  with  the 
expression  elsewhere,  but  it  is  a  very  striking  one  ;  although  I  might  prefer  to  say 
that  I  have  sympathy  with  God,  and  grief  that  He  should  be  treated  so  ill.  Ah,  there 
are  many  men  that  are  forgotten,  that  are  despised,  and  that  are  trampled  on  by  their 
fellows  ;  but  there  never  was  a  man  \rho  was  so  despised  as  the  everlasting  God  has 
been  !  Many  a  man  has  been  slandered  and  abused,  but  never  was  man  abused  as 
God  has  been.  Many  have  been  treated  cruelly  and  ungratefully,  but  never  was  one 
treated  as  our  God  has  been.  I,  too,  once  despised  Him.  He  knocked  at  the  door 
of  my  heart,  and  I  refused  to  open  it.  He  came  to  me,  times  without  number, 
morning  by  morning,  and  night  by  night;  He  checked  me  in  my  conscience,  and 
spoke  to  me  by  His  Spirit,  and  when,  at  last,  the  thunders  of  the  law  prevailed  in 
my  conscience,  I  thought  that  Christ  was  cruel  and  unkind.  Oh,  I  can  never  forgive 
myself  that  I  should  have  thought  so  ill  of  Him  !  But  what  a  loving  reception  did  I 
hav-e  when  I  went  to  Him  !  I  thought  He  would  smite  me,  but  His  hand  was  not 
clenched  in  anger,  but  opened  wide  in  mercy.  I  thought  full  sure  that  His  eyes 
would  dart  lightning-flashes  of  wrath  upon  me  ;  but,  instead  thereof,  they  were  full 
of  tears.  He  fell  upon  my  neck,  and  kissed  me;  He  took  off  my  rags,  and  did 
clothe  me  with  His  righteousness,  and  caused  my  soul  to  sing  aloud  for  joy;  while 
in  the  house  of  my  heart,  and  in  the  house  of  His  Church,  there  was  music  and 
dancing,  because  His  son  that  He  had  lost  was  found,  and  he  that  had  been  dead 
was  made  alive  again. 

There  is  a  power  in  God's  gospel  beyond  all  description.  Once  I,  like  Mazeppa, 
lashed  to  the  wild  horse  of  my  lust,  bound  hand  and  foot,  incapable  of  resistance,  was 
galloping  on  with  hell's  wolves  behind  me,  howling  for  my  body  and  my  soul  as 
their  just  and  lawful  prey.  There  came  a  mighty  hand  which  stopped  that  wild 
horse,  cut  my  bands,  set  me  down,  and  brought  me  into  liberty.  Is  there  power  in 
the  gospel  .'*  Ay,  there  is,  and  he  who  has  felt  it  must  acknowledge  it.  There  was 
a  time  when  I  lived  in  the  strong  old  castle  of  my  sins,  and  rested  in  my  own  work.s. 


I02  C.     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

There  came  a  trumpeter  to  the  door,  and  bade  me  open  it.  I  with  anger  chid 
him  from  the  porch,  and  said  he  ne'er  should  enter.  Then  there  came  a  goodly 
Personage,  with  loving  countenance  ;  His  hands  were  marked  with  scars  where  nails 
had  been  driven,  and  His  feet  had  nail-prints,  too.  He  lifted  up  His  cross,  using  it 
as  a  hammer  ;  at  the  first  blow,  the  gate  of  my  prejudice  shook  ;  at  the  second,  it 
trembled  more;  at  the  third,  down  it  fell,  and  in  He  came;  and  He  said,  "Arise, 
and  stand  upon  thy  feet,  for  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love."  The  gospel 
a  thing  of  power  !  Ah  !  that  it  is.  It  always  wears  the  dew  of  its  youth  ;  it  glitters 
with  morning's  freshness,  its  strength  and  its  glory  abide  for  ever.  I  have  felt  its 
power  in  my  own  heart ;  I  have  the  witness  of  the  Spirit  within  my  spirit,  and  I 
know  it  is  a  thing  of  might,  because  it  has  conquered  me,  and  bowed  me  down. 

"His  free  grace  alone,  from  the  first  to  the  last, 
Hath  won  my  affections,  and  bound  my  soul  fast." 

In  my  conversion,  the  very  point  lay  in  making  the  discovery  that  I  had 
nothing  to  do  but  to  look  to  Christ,  and  I  should  be  saved.  I  believe  that  I  had 
been  a  very  good,  attentive  hearer ;  my  own  impression  about  myself  was  that 
nobody  ever  listened  much  better  than  I  did.  For  years,  as  a  child,  1  tried  to  learn 
the  way  of  salvation  ;  and  either  I  did  not  hear  it  set  forth,  which  I  think  cannot 
quite  have  been  the  case,  or  else  I  was  spiritually  blind  and  deaf  and  could  not  see 
it  and  could  not  hear  it ;  but  the  good  news  that  I  was,  as  a  sinner,  to  look  away 
from  myself  to  Christ,  as  much  startled  me,  and  came  as  fresh  to  me,  as  any  news  1 
ever  heard  in  my  life.  Had  I  never  read  my  Bible  }  Yes,  and  read  it  earnestly. 
Had  I  never  been  taught  by  Christian  people  ?  Yes,  I  had,  by  mother,  and  father, 
and  others.  Had  I  not  heard  the  gospel  .•*  Yes,  I  think  I  had  ;  and  yet,  somehow, 
it  was  like  a  new  revelation  to  me  that  I  was  to  "  believe  and  live."  I  confess  to 
have  been  tutored  in  piety,  put  into  my  cradle  by  prayerful  hands,  and  lulled  to 
sleep  by  songs  concerning  Jesus  ;  but  after  having  heard  the  gospel  continually, 
with  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  here  much  and  there  much,  yet,  when  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me  with  power,  it  was  as  new  as  if  I  had  lived  among 
the  unvisited  tribes  of  Central  Africa,  and  had  never  heard  the  tidings  of  the 
cleansing  fountain  filled  with  blood,  drawn  from  the  Saviour's  veins. 

When,  for  the  first  time,  I  received  the  gospel  to  my  soul's  salvation,  I  thought 
that  I  had  never  really  heard  it  before,  and  I  began  to  think  that  the  preachers  to 
whom  I  had  listened  had  not  truly  preached  it.  But,  on  looking  back,  I  am  inclined 
to  believe  that  I  had  heard  the  gospel  fully  preached  many  hundreds  of  times  before, 
and  that  this  was  the  difterence, — that  I  then  heard  it  as  though  I  heard  it  not  ;  and 
when  I  did  hear  it,  the  message  may  not  have  been  any  more  clear  in  itself  than  it 
had  been  at  former  times,  but  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  present  to  open  my 
ear,  and  to  guide  the  message  to  my  heart.      I  have  no  doubt  that   I   heard,  scores 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  TO3 

of  times,  such  texts  as  these, — "  He  that  beHeveth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  ;  " 
"  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  ; "  "  As  Moses  lifted  up 
the  serpent  in  the  vi^ilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted  up  ;  that 
whosoever  believeth  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life  ; "  yet  I  had 
no  intelligent  idea  of  what  faith  meant.  When  I  first  discovered  what  faith  really 
was,  and  exercised  it, — for  with  me  these  two  things  came  together,  I  believed 
as  soon  as  ever  I  knew  what  believing  meant, — then  I  thought  I  had  never  before 
heard  that  truth  preached.  But,  now,  I  am  persuaded  that  the  light  often  shone  on 
my  eyes,  but  I  was  blind,  and  therefore  I  thought  that  the  light  had  never 
come  there.  The  light  was  shining  all  the  while,  but  there  was  no  power  to 
receive  it  ;    the   eyeball   of  the  soul   was   not   sensitive  to   the   Divine  beams. 

I  could  not  believe  that  it  was  possible  that  7ny  sins  could  be  forgiven.  I 
do  not  know  why,  but  I  seemed  to  be  the  odd  person  in  the  world.  When  the 
catalogue  was  made  out,  it  appeared  to  me  that,  for  some  reason,  I  must  have 
been  left  out.  If  God  had  saved  me,  and  not  the  world,  I  should  have  wondered 
indeed  ;  but  if  He  had  saved  all  the  world  except  me,  that  would  have  seemed 
to  me  to  be  but  right.  And  now,  being  saved  by  grace,  I  cannot  help  saying, 
"  1  am  indeed  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  ! '  1  believe  that  some  of  us  who 
were  kept  by  God  a  long  while  before  we  found  Him,  love  Him  better  perhaps 
than  we  should  have  done  if  we  had  received  Him  directly  ;  and  we  can  preach 
better  to  others,  we  can  speak  more  of  His  lovingkindness  and  tender  mercy. 
John  Bunyan  could  not  have  written  as  he  did  if  he  had  not  been  dragged  about 
by  the  devil  for  many  years.  I  love  that  picture  of  dear  old  Christian.  I  know, 
when  I  first  read  The  Pilgrinis  Progress,  and  saw  in  it  the  woodcut  of  Christian 
carrying  the  burden  on  his  back,  I  felt  so  interested  in  the  poor  fellow,  that  1 
thought  I  should  jump  with  joy  when,  after  he  had  carried  his  heavy  load  so  long, 
he  at  last  got  rid  of  it  ;  and  that  was  how  I  felt  when  the  burden  of  guilt,  which 
1  had  borne  so  long,  was  for  ever  rolled  away  from  my  shoulders  and  my  heart. 

I  can  recollect  when,  like  the  poor  dove  sent  out  by  Noah  from  his  hand,  I 
flew  over  the  wide  expanse  of  waters,  and  hoped  to  find  some  place  where  I  might 
rest  my  wearied  wing.  Up  towards  the  North  I  flew  ;  and  my  eye  looked  keenly 
through  the  mist  and  darkness,  if  perhaps  it  might  find  some  floating  substance 
on  which  my  soul  might  rest  its  foot,  but  it  found  nothing.  Again  it  turned 
its  wing,  and  flapped  it,  but  not  so  rapidly  as  before,  across  that  deep  water 
that  knew  no  shore  ;  but  still  there  was  no  rest.  The  raven  had  found  its 
resting-place  upon  a  floating  body,  and  was  feeding  itself  upon  the  carrion  of 
some  drowned  man's  carcass  ;  but  my  poor  soul  found  no  rest.  I  flew  on  ;  I 
fancied  I  saw  a  ship  sailing  out  at  sea  ;  it  was  the  ship  of  the  law  ;  and  I 
thought     I    would   put    my   feet   on   its   canvas,   or    rest   myself  on   its  cordage   for 


I04  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

a  time,  and  find  some  refuge.  But,  ah  !  it  was  an  airy  phantom,  on  which  I 
could  not  rest  ;  for  my  foot  had  no  right  to  rest  on  the  law  ;  1  had  not  kept  it, 
and  the  soul  that  keepeth  it  not,  must  die.  At  last  I  saw  the  barque  Christ  Jesus, — • 
that  happy  ark  ;  and  I  thought  I  would  fly  thither  ;  but  my  poor  wing  was  weary, 
I  could  fly  no  further,  and  down  I  sank  ;  but,  as  providence  would  have  it, 
when  my  wings  were  flagging,  and  I  was  falling  into  the  flood  to  be  drowned, 
just  below  m^e  was  the  roof  of  the  ark,  and  I  saw  a  hand  put  out  from  it,  and 
One  took  hold  of  me,  and  said,  "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,  therefore 
I  have  not  delivered  the  soul  of  My  turtle-dove  unto  the  multitude  of  the  wicked  ; 
come  in,  come  in  !  "  Then  I  found  that  I  had  in  my  mouth  an  olive  leaf  of  peace 
with  God,  and  peace  with  man,  plucked  off  by  Jesus'  mighty  power. 

Once,  God  preached  to  me  by  a  similitude  in  the  depth  of  winter.  The  earth 
had  been  black,  and  there  was  scarcely  a  green  thing  or  a  flower  to  be  seen. 
As  I  looked  across  the  fields,  there  was  nothing  but  barrenness, — bare  hedges 
and  leafless  trees,  and  black,  black  earth,  wherever  I  gazed.  On  a  sudden,  God 
spake,  and  unlocked  the  treasures  of  the  snow,  and  white  flakes  descended  until 
there  was  no  blackness  to  be  seen,  and  all  was  one  sheet  of  dazzling  whiteness. 
It  was  at  the  time  that  I  was  seeking  the  Saviour,  and  not  long  before  1  found 
Him  ;  and  I  remember  well  that  sermon  which  I  saw  before  me  in  the  snow  : 
"  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord  :  though  your  sins  be 
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they 
shall  be  as  wool." 

Personally,  I  have  to  bless  God  for  many  good  books ;  I  thank  Him  for 
Dr.  Doddridge's  Rise  and  Progress  of  Religion  tn  the  Soul :  for  Baxter's  Call 
to  the  Unconverted ;  for  Alleine's  Alarm  to  Sin^icrs ;  and  for  James's  Anxious 
Enquii'er ;  but  my  gratitude  most  of  all  is  due  to  God,  not  for  books,  but  for 
the  preached  Word, — and  that  too  addressed  to  me  by  a  poor,  uneducated  man. 
a  man  who  had  never  received  any  training  for  the  ministry,  and  probably  will  never 
be  heard  of  in  this  life,  a  man  engaged  in  business,  no  doubt  of  a  humble  kind, 
during  the  week,  but  who  had  just  enough  of  grace  to  say  on  the  Sabbath,  "  Look 
unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  The  books  were,  good, 
but  the  man  was  better.  The  revealed  Word  awakened  me  ;  but  it  was  the  preached 
Word  that  saved  me  ;  and  I  must  ever  attach  peculiar  value  to  the  hearing  of  the 
truth,  for  by  it  I  received  the  joy  and  peace  in  which  my  soul  delights.  While  under 
concern  of  soul,  I  resolved  that  I  would  attend  all  the  places  of  worship  in 
the  town  where  I  lived,  in  order  that  I  might  find  out  the  way  of  salvation. 
I  was  willing  to  do  anything,  and  be  anything,  if  God  would  only  forgive  my 
sin.       I    set   off,    determined    to   go    round    to    all    the  chapels,    and    I    did  go  to 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGR.A.rHY.  IO5 

every  place  of  worship  ;  but  for  a  long  time  I  went  in  vain.  I  do  not,  however, 
blame  the  ministers.  One  man  preached  Divine  Sovereignty ;  I  could  hear 
him  with  pleasure,  but  what  was  that  sublime  truth  to  a  poor  sinner  who 
wished  to  know  what  he  must  do  to  be  saved  ?  There  was  another  admirable 
man  who  always  preached  about  the  law  ;  but  what  was  the  use  of  ploughing 
up  ground  that  needed  to  be  sown?  Another  was  a  practical  preacher.  I 
heard  him,  but  it  was  very  much  like  a  commanding  officer  teaching  the 
manoeuvres  of  war  to  a  set  of  men  without  feet.  What  could  I  do.'*  All  his 
exhortations  were  lost  on  me.  I  knew  it  was  said,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved  ; "  but  I  did  not  know  what  it  was  to 
believe  on  Christ.  These  good  men  all  preached  truths  suited  to  many 
in  their  congregations  who  were  spiritually-minded  people  ;  but  what  I  wanted 
to  know  was, — "  How  can  I  get  my  sins  forgiven  ?  " — and  they  never  told  me  that. 
I  desired  to  hear  how  a  poor  sinner,  under  a  sense  of  sin,  might  find  peace 
with  God ;  and  when  I  went,  I  heard  a  sermon  on,  "  Be  not  deceived,  God 
is  not  mocked,"  which  cut  me  up  still  worse  ;  but  did  not  bring  me  into  rest. 
I  went  again,  another  day,  and  the  te.xt  was  something  about  the  glories  of 
the  righteous  ;  nothing  for  poor  me !  I  was  like  a  dog  under  the  table,  not 
allowed  to  eat  of  the  children's  food.  I  went  time  after  time,  and  I  can 
honestly  say  that  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  went  without  prayer  to  God,  and 
I  am  sure  there  was  not  a  more  attentive  hearer  than  myself  in  all  the  place, 
for  I   panted  and  longed  to  understand  how   I   might  be  saved. 

I  sometimes  think  I  might  have  been  in  darkness  and  despair  until  now 
had  it  not  been  for  the  goodness  of  God  in  sending  a  snowstorm,  one  Sunday 
morning,  while  I  was  going  to  a  certain  place  of  worship.  When  I  could  go 
no  further,  I  turned  down  a  side  street,  and  came  to  a  little  Primitive  Methodist 
Chapel.  In  that  chapel  there  may  have  been  a  dozen  or  fifteen  people.  I 
had  heard  of  the  Primitive  Methodists,  how  they  sang  so  loudly  that  they 
made  people's  heads  ache  ;  but  that  did  not  matter  to  me.  I  wanted  to 
know  how  I  might  be  saved,  and  if  they  could  tell  me  that,  I  did  not  care  how 
much  they  made  my  head  ache.  The  minister  did  not  come  that  morning  ;  he 
was  snowed  up,  I  suppose.  At  last,  a  very  thin-looking  man,*  a  shoemaker, 
or  tailor,  or  something  of  that  sort,  went  up  into  the  pulpit  to  preach.  Now, 
it  is  well  that  preachers  should  be  instructed  ;  but  this  man  was  really  -stupid. 
He  was  obliged  to  stick  to  his  text,  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  had  little  else 
to  say.        The  text  was, — 

"  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

*  It  is  remarkable  that  no  less  than  three  persons  claimed  to  have  been  the  preacher  on  this  occasion,  but  Mr.    Spurgeon 
did   not  recognize   any   one  of  them  as  the  man  to  whom  he  then  listened. 


I06  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

He  did  not  even  pronounce  the  words  rightly,  but  that  did  not  matter.  There 
was,  I  thought,  a  ghmpse  of  hope  for  me  in  that  text.  The  preacher  began 
thus: — "My  dear  friends,  this  is  a  very  simple  text  indeed.  It  says,  'Look.' 
Now  lookin'  don't  take  a  deal  of  pains.  It  ain't  liftin'  your  ioot  or  your 
finger;  it  is  just,  'Look.'  Well,  a  man  needn't  go  to  College  to  learn  to 
look.  You  may  be  the  biggest  fool,  and  yet  you  can  look.  A  man  needn't 
be  worth  a  thousand  a  year  to  be  able  to  look.  An)one  can  look ;  even  a 
child  can  look.  But  then  the  text  says,  '  Look  unto  Me.'  Ay !  "  said  he,  in 
broad  Essex,  "  many  on  ye  are  lookin'  to  yourselves,  but  it's  no  use  lookin' 
there.  You'll  never  find  any  comfort  in  yourselves.  Some  look  to  God  the 
Father.  No,  look  to  Him  by-and-by.  Jesus  Christ  says,  '  Look  unto  Mc' 
Some  on  ye  say,  'We  must  wait  for  the  Spirit's  workin'.'  You  have  no  business 
with  that  just  now.      Look  to  Christ.     The  text  says,  '  Look  unto  Mc.'" 

Then  the  good  man  followed  up  his  text  in  this  way  : — "  Look  unto  Me  ; 
I  am  sweatin'  great  drops  of  blood.  Look  unto  Me  ;  I  am  hangin'  on  the  cross. 
Look  unto  Me ;  I  am  dead  and  buried.  Look  unto  Me ;  I  rise  again.  Look 
unto  Me;  I  ascend  to  Heaven.  Look  unto  Me;  I  am  sittin'  at  the  Father's 
right  hand.       O  poor  sinner,   look  unto  Me  !    look  unto   Me  !  " 

When  he  had  gone  to  about  that  length,  and  managed  to  spin  out  ten 
minutes  or  so,  he  was  at  the  end  of  his  tether.  Then  he  looked  at  me  under 
the  gallery,  and  I  daresay,  with  so  few  present,  he  knew  m.e  to  be  a  stranger-. 
Just  fixing  his  eyes  on  me,  as  if  he  knew  all  my  heart,  he  said,  "Young 
man,  you  look  very  miserable."  Well,  I  did  ;  but  I  had  not  been  accustomed 
to  have  remarks  made  from  the  pulpit  on  my  personal  appearance  before. 
However,  it  was  a  good  blow,  struck  right  home.  He  continued,  "and  you 
always  will  be  miserable — miserable  in  life,  and  miserable  in  death, — if  you  don't 
obey  my  text  ;  but  if  you  obey  now,  this  moment,  you  will  be  saved." 
Then,  lifting  up  his  hands,  he  shouted,  as  only  a  Primitive  Methodist  could 
do,  "Young  man,  look  to  Jesus  Christ.  Look!  Look!  Look!  You  have 
nothin'  to  do  but  to  look  and  live."  I  saw  at  once  the  way  of  salvation.  I  know 
not  what  else  he  said, — I  did  not  take  much  notice  of  it, — I  was  so  possessed 
with  that  one  thought.  Like  as  when  the  brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up,  the  people 
only  looked  and  were  healed,  so  it  was  with  me.  I  had  been  waiting  to  do  fifty 
things,  but  when  I  heard  that  word,  "  Look  !  "  what  a  charminsf  word  it  seemed 
to  me  !  Oh  !  I  looked  until  I  could  almost  have  looked  my  eyes  away.  There 
and  then  the  cloud  was  gone,  the  darkness  had  rolled  away,  and  that  moment  I 
saw  the  sun  ;  and  I  could  have  risen  that  instant,  and  sung  with  the  most 
enthusiastic  of  them,  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  simple  faith  which 
looks    alone    to    Him.        Oh,     that    somebody    had    told    me    this    before,    "Trust 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


107 


~7i 


ARTlLLe;5>.<f5^C 


Januai^ 


6*\^^° 


I08  C.     11.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Christ,    and  you  shall  be  saved."        Yet  it  was,  no  doubt,   all  wisely  ordered,  and 
now   I   can  say, — 

"E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream 
Thy  flowing  wounds  supply, 
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 
And  shall  be  till  I  die." 

I  do  from  my  soul  confess  that  I  never  was  satisfied  till  I  came  to  Christ  ;  when 
I  was  yet  a  child,  I  had  far  more  wretchedness  than  ever  I  have  now  ;  I  will  even 
add,  more  weariness,  more  care,  more  heart-ache,  than  I  know  at  this  day.  I  may 
be  singular  in  this  confession,  but  I  make  it,  and  know  it  to  be  the  truth.  Since 
that  dear  hour  when  my  soul  cast  itself  on  Jesus,  I  have  found  solid  joy  and  peace  ; 
but  before  that,  all  those  supposed  gaieties  of  early  youth,  all  the  imagined  ease  and 
joy  of  boyhood,  were  but  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit  to  me.  That  happy  day, 
when  I  found  the  Saviour,  and  learned  to  cling  to  His  dear  feet,  was  a  day  never 
to  be  forgotten  by  me.  An  obscure  child,  unknown,  unheard  of,  I  listened  to  the 
Word  of  God  ;  and  that  precious  text  led  me  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  I  can  testify  that 
the  joy  of  that  day  was  utterly  indescribable.  I  could  have  leaped,  I  could  have 
danced  ;  there  was  no  expression,  however  fanatical,  which  would  have  been  out  of 
keeping  with  the  joy  of  my  spirit  at  that  hour.  Many  days  of  Christian  experience 
have  passed  since  then,  but  there  has  never  been  one  which  has  had  the  full 
exhilaration,  the  sparkling  delight  which  that  first  day  had.  I  thought  I  could  have 
sprung  from  the  seat  on  which  I  sat,  and  have  called  out  with  the  wildest  of  those 
Methodist  brethren  who  were  present,  "  I  am  forgiven !  I  am  forgiven  !  A 
monument  of  grace  !  A  sinner  saved  by  blood  !  "  My  spirit  saw  its  chains  broken  to 
pieces,  I  felt  that  I  was  an  emancipated  soul,  an  heir  of  Heaven,  a  forgiven  one, 
accepted  in  Christ  Jesus,  plucked  out  of  the  miry  clay  and  out  of  the  horrible  pit, 
with  my  feet  set  upon  a  rock,  and  my  goings  established.  I  thought  I  could  dance 
all  the  way  home.  I  could  understand  what  John  Bunyan  meant,  when  he  declared 
he  wanted  to  tell  the  crows  on  the  ploughed  land  all  about  his  conversion.  He  was 
too  full  to  hold,  he  felt  he  must  tell  somebody. 

It  is  not  everyone  who  can  remember  the  very  day  and  hour  of  his  deliverance  ; 
but,  as  Richard  Knill  said,  "  At  such  a  time  of  the  day,  clang  went  every  harp  in 
Heaven,  for  Richard  Knill  was  born  again,"  it  was  e'en  so  with  me.*  The  clock  of 
mercy  struck  in  Heaven  the  hour  and  moment  of  my  emancipation,  for  the  time  had 
come.  Between  half-past  ten  o'clock,  when  I  entered  that  chapel,  and  half-past  twelve 
o'clock,  when  I  was  back  again  at  home,  what  a  change  had  taken  place  in  me  !  I 
had  passed  from  darkness  into  marvellous  light,  from  death  to  life.  Simply  by 
looking  to  Jesus,  1  had  been  delivered  from  despair,  and  I  was  brought  into  such  a 

*  It  is  definitely  known  that  the  date  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  conversion  was  January  6th,  1850,  for  preaching  at  New  Park  Street 
Chapel,  on  Lord's-day  morning,  January  6th,  1856,  from  Isaiah  xlv.  22,  he  said  that,  six  years  before,  that  very  day,  and  at  that 
very  hour,  he  had  been  led  to  look  to  C-hrist,  by  a  sermon  from  that  text 


C.     11.      SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOORArilV.  IO9 

joyous  state  of  mind  that,  when  they  saw  me  at  home,  they  said  to  me,  "  Something 
wonderful  has  happened  to  you  ; "  and  I  was  eager  to  tell  them  all  about  it.  Oh  ! 
there  was  joy  in  the  household  that  day,  when  all  heard  that  the  eldest  son  had 
found  the  Saviour,  and  knew  himself  to  be  forgiven, — bliss  compared  with  which 
all  earth's  joys  are  less  than  nothing  and  vanity.  Yes,  I  had  looked  to  Jesus  as 
I  was,  and  found  in  Him  my  Saviour.  Thus  had  the  eternal  purpose  of  Jehovah 
decreed  it  ;  and  as,  the  moment  before,  there  was  none  more  wretched  than  I  was, 
so,  within  that  second,  there  was  none  more  joyous.  It  took  no  longer  time  than 
does  the  lightning-flash  ;  it  was  done,  and  never  has  it  been  undone.  I  looked, 
and  lived,  and  leaped  in  joyful  liberty  as  I  beheld  my  sin  punished  upon  the  great 
Substitute,  and  put  away  for  ever.  I  looked  unto  Kim,  as  He  bled  upon  that  tree  ; 
His  eyes  darted  a  glance  of  love  unutterable  into  my  spirit,  and  in  a  moment,  I 
was  saved.*  Looking  unto  Him,  the  bruises  that  my  soul  had  suffered  were 
healed,  the  gaping  wounds  were  cured,  the  broken  bones  rejoiced,  the  rags  that 
had  covered  me  were  all  removed,  my  spirit  was  white  as  the  spotless  snows  of 
the  far-off  North  ;  I  had  melody  within  my  spirit,  for  I  was  saved,  washed,  cleansed, 
forgiven,  through  Him  that  did  hang  upon  the  tree.  My  Master,  I  cannot  under- 
stand how  Thou  couldst  stoop  Thine  awful  head  to  such  a  death  as  the  death  of 
the  cross, — how  Thou  couldst  take  from  Thy  brow  the  coronet  of  stars  which 
from  old  eternity  had  shone  resplendent  there  ;  but  how  Thou  shouldst  permit  the 
thorn-crown  to  gird  Thy  temples,  astonishes  me  tar  more.  That  Thou  shouldst 
cast  away  the  mantle  of  Thy  glory,  the  azure  of  Thine  everlasting  empire,  I 
cannot  comprehend  :  but  how  Thou  shouldst  have  become  veiled  in  the  igno- 
minious purple  for  a  while,  and  then  be  mocked  by  impious  men,  who  bowed  to 
Thee  as  a  pretended  king  ;  and  how  Thou  shouldst  be  stripped  naked  to  Thy 
shame,  without  a  single  covering,  and  die  a  felon's  death  ; — this  is"  still  more 
incomprehensible.  But  the  marvel  is  that  Thou  shouldst  have  suffered  all  this  for 
me  !  Truly,  Thy  love  to  me  is  wonderful,  passing  the  love  of  women  !  Was  ever 
grief  like  Thine  .■*  Was  ever  love  like  Thine,  that  could  open  the  flood-gates  of 
such  grief?  Was  ever  love  so  mighty  as  to  become  the  fount  from  which  such  an 
ocean  of  grief  could  come  rolling  down  ? 

There  was  never  anything  so  true  to  me  as  those  bleeding  hands,  and  that 
thorn-crowned  head.  Home,  friends,  health,  wealth,  comforts — all  lost  their  lustre 
that  day  when  He  appeared,  just  as  stars  are  hidden  by  the  light  of  the  sun.      He 

•  On  one  of  the  foundation  stones  of  the  School-Chapel  erected  at  Bexhill-on-Sea  in  ever-loving  memory  of  Mr.  Spurgeon,  the 
following  inscription  has  been  cut,  in  the  hope  that  passers-by  may  find  salvation  through  reading  the  passage  of  Scripture  which 
was  blessed  to  his  conversion : — 

HOW   C.    H.    SPURGEON    FOUND  CHRIST. 
"  I  looked  to  Him  ; 
He  looked  on  me  ; 
And  we  were  one  for  ever." — C.  H.  S. 
^'  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  0/  the  earth  ;  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else." — Isaiah  xlv.  22. 


I  lO  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiogfl\phy. 

was  the  only  Lord  and  Giver  of  life's  best  bliss,  the  one  well  of  living  water 
springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.  As  I  saw  Jesus  on  His  cross  before  me,  and 
as  I  mused  upon  His  sufferings  and  death,  methought  I  saw  Him  cast  a  look  of 
love  upon  me  ;  and  then  I  looked  at  Him,  and  cried, — 

"  Jesu,  lover  of  my  soul, 
Let  me  to  Thy  bosom  fly." 

He  said,  "  Come,"  and  I  flew  to  Him,  and  clasped  Him  ;  and  when  He  let  me  go 
again,  I  wondered  where  my  burden  was.  It  was  gone  !  There,  in  the  sepulchre, 
it  lay,  and  I  felt  light  as  air  ;  like  a  winged  sylph,  I  could  fly  over  mountains  of 
trouble  and  despair ;  and  oh  !  what  liberty  and  joy  I  had  !  I  could  leap  with 
ecstasy,  for  I  had  much  forgiven,  and  I  was  freed  from  sin.  With  the  spouse  in  the 
Canticles,  I  could  say,  ''  I  found  Him  ;"  I,  a  lad,  found  the  Lord  of  glory;  I,  a 
slave  to  sin,  found  the  great  Deliverer;  I,  the  child  of  darkness,  found  the  Light  of 
life;  \,  the  uttermost  of  the  lost,  found  my  Saviour  and  my  God;  I,  widowed  and 
desolate,  found  my  Friend,  my  Beloved,  my  Husband.  Oh,  how  I  wondered  that 
/should  be  pardoned  !  It  was  not  the  pardon  that  I  wondered  at  so  much  ;  the 
wonder  was  that  it  should  come  to  7ne.  I  marvelled  that  He  should  be  able  to 
pardon  such  sins  as  mine,  such  crimes,  so  numerous  and  so  black  ;  and  that,  after 
such  an  accusing  conscience,  He  should  have  power  to  still  every  wave  within  my 
spirit,  and  make  my  soul  like  the  surface  of  a  river,  undisturbed,  quiet,  and  at  ease. 
It  mattered  not  to  me  whether  the  day  itself  was  gloomy  or  bright,  I  had  found 
Christ  ;  that  was  enough  for  me.  He  was  my  Saviour,  He  was  my  all  ;  and 
I  can  heartily  say,  that  one  day  of  pardoned  sin  was  a  sufficient  recompense 
for  the  whole  five  years  of  conviction.  I  have  to  bless  God  for  every  terror  that 
ever  scared  me  by  night,  and  for  every  foreboding  that  alarmed  me  by  day.  It  has 
made  me  happier  ever  since  ;  for  now,  if  there  be  a  trouble  weighing  upon  my  soul, 
I  thank  God  it  is  not  such  a  burden  as  that  which  bowed  me  to  the  very  earth,  and 
made  me  creep  upon  the  ground,  like  a  beast,  by  reason  of  heavy  distress  and 
affliction.  I  know  I  never  can  again  suffer  what  I  have  suff^ered  ;  I  never  can,  except 
I  be  sent  to  hell,  know  more  of  agony  than  I  have  known  ;  and  now,  that  ease,  that 
joy  and  peace  in  believing,  that  "  no  condemnation  "  which  belongs  to  me  as  a  child 
of  God,  is  made  doubly  sweet  and  ine.xpressibly  precious,  by  the  recollection  of 
my  past  days  of  sorrow  and  grief  Blessed  be  Thou,  O  God,  for  ever,  who  by 
those  black  days,  like  a  dreary  winter,  hast  made  these  summer  days  all  the  fairer 
and  the  sweeter  !  I  need  not  walk  through  the  earth  fearful  of  every  shadow,  and 
afraid  of  every  man  I  meet,  for  sin  is  washed  away  ;  my  spirit  is  no  more  guilty  ;  it 
is  pure,  it  is  holy.  The  frown  of  God  no  longer  resteth  upon  me  ;  but  my  Father 
smiles,  I  see  His  eyes, — they  are  glancing  love  ;  I  hear  His  voice, — it  is  full  oi 
sweetness.      I  am  forgiven,  I  am  forgiven,  I  am  forgiven  ! 


c.    H.    spurgeon's    autobiography.  I  I  I 

When  I  look  back  upon  it,  I  can  see  one  reason  why  the  Word  was  blessed  to 
me  as  I  heard  it  preached  in  that  Primitive  Methodist  Chapel  at  Colchester  ;  I  had 
been  up  betimes  crying  to  God  for  the  blessing.  As  a  lad,  when  I  was  seeking  the 
Saviour,  I  used  to  rise  with  the  sun,  that  I  might  get  time  to  read  gracious  books, 
and  to  seek  the  Lord.  I  can  recall  the  kind  of  pleas  I  used  when  I  took  my 
arguments,  and  came  before  the  throne  of  grace  :  "  Lord,  save  me  ;  it  will  glorify 
Thy  grace  to  save  such  a  sinner  as  I  am  !  Lord,  save  me,  else  I  am  lost  to  all 
eternity  ;  do  not  let  me  perish.  Lord  !  Save  me,  O  Lord,  for  Jesus  died!  By  His 
agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by  His  cross  and  passion,  save  me  !  "  I  often  proved  that 
the  early  morning  was  the  best  part  of  the  day  ;  I  liked  those  prayers  of  which  the 
psalmist  said,  "  In  the  morning  shall  my  prayer  prevent  Thee." 

The  Holy  Spirit,  who  enabled  me  to  believe,  gave  me  peace  through  believing. 
I  felt  as  sure  that  I  was-  forgiven  as  before  I  felt  sure  of  condemnation.  I  had 
been  certain  of  my  condemnation  because  the  Word  of  God  declared  it,  and  my 
conscience  bore  witness  to  it  ;  but  when  the  Lord  justified  me,  I  was  made  equally 
certain  by  the  same  witnesses.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  in  the  Scripture  saith, 
"  He  that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  condemned,"  and  my  conscience  bore  witness 
that  I  believed,  and  that  God  in  pardoning  me  was  just.  Thus  I  had  the  witness 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  also  of  my  own  conscience,  and  these  two  agreed  in 
one.  That  great  and  excellent  man,  Dr.  Johnson,  used  to  hold  the  opinion  that 
no  man  ever  could  know  that  he  was  pardoned,— that  there  was  no  such  thing 
as  assurance  of  faith.  Perhaps,  if  Dr.  Johnson  had  studied  his  Bible  a  little  more, 
and  had  had  a  litde  more  of  the  enlightenment  of  the  Spirit,  he,  too,  might  have 
come  to  know  his  own  pardon.  Certainly,  he  was  no  very  reliable  judge  of 
theology,  any  more  than  he  was  of  porcelain,  which  he  once  attempted  to  make, 
and  never  succeeded.      I  think  both  in  theology  and  porcelain  his  opinion  is  ot  very 

little  value. 

How  can  a  man  know  that  he  is  pardoned  ?  There  is  a  text  which  says, 
"  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  I  believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  is  it  irrational  to  believe  that  I  am  saved  ?  "  He  that  believeth 
on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,"  saith  Christ,  in  John's  Gospel.  I  believe  on 
Christ  ;  am  I  absurd  in  believing  that  I  have  eternal  life  ?  I  find  the  aposde 
Paul  speaking  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  saying,  "There  is  therefore  now  no 
condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus.  Being  justified  by  faith,  we 
have  peace  with  God."  If  I  know  that  my  trust  is  fixed  on  Jesus  only,  and 
that  I  have  faith  in  Him,  were  it  not  ten  thousand  times  more  absurd  for  me 
not  to  be  at  peace,  than  for  me  to  be  filled  with  joy  unspeakable  ?  It  is  out 
taking  God   at    His  Word,   when  the  soul   knows,   as   a   necessary  consequence  of 


112  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

its  faith,  that  it  is  saved.  I  took  Jesus  as  my  Saviour,  and  I  was  saved  ;  and  I  can 
tell  the  reason  why  I  took  Him  for  my  Saviour.  To  my  own  humiliation,  I  must 
confess  that  I  did  it  because  I  could  not  help  it  ;  I  was  shut  up  to  it.  That 
stern  law-work  had  hammered  me  into  such  a  condition  that,  if  there  had  been 
fifty  other  saviours,  I  could  not  have  thought  of  them, — I  was  driven  to  this  One. 
I  wanted  a  Divine  Saviour,  I  wanted  One  who  was  made  a  curse  for  me,  to  expiate 
my  guilt.  I  wanted  One  who  had  died,  for  I  deserved  to  die.  I  wanted  One 
who  had  risen  again,  who  was  able  by  His  life  to  make  me  live.  I  wanted  the 
exact  Saviour  that  stood  before  me  in  the  Word,  revealed  to  my  heart  ;  and  I  could 
not  help  having  Him.  I  could  realize  then  the  language  of  Rutherford  when, 
being  full  of  love  to  Christ,  once  upon  a  time,  in  the  dungeon  of  Aberdeen,  he 
said,  "  O  my  Lord,  if  there  were  a  broad  hell  betwixt  me  and  Thee,  if  I  could 
not  get  at  Thee  except  by  wading  through  it,  I  would  not  think  twice,  but  I 
would  go  through  it  all,  if  I  might  but  embrace  Thee,  and  call  Thee  mine  !  "  Oh, 
how  I  loved  Him  !  '  Passing  all  loves  except  His  own,  was  that  love  which  I  felt 
for  Him  then.  If,  beside  the  door  of  the  place  in  which  I  met  with  Him,  there 
had  been  a  stake  of  blazing  faggots,  I  would  have  stood  upon  them  without  chains, 
glad  to  give  my  flesh,  and  blood,  and  bones,  to  be  ashes  that  should  testify  my 
love  to  Him.  Had  He  asked  me  then  to  give  all  my  substance  to  the  poor,  I 
would  have  given  all,  and  thought  myself  to  be  amazingly  rich  in  having  beggared 
myself  for  His  name's  sake.  Had  He  commanded  me  then  to  preach  in  the 
midst  of  all   His  foes,  I   could  have  said, — 

"  There's  not  a  lamb  in  all  Thy  flock 
I  would  disdain  to  feed, 
Tliere's  not  a  foe,  before  whose  face 
I'd  fear  Thy  cause  to  plead." 

Has  Jesus  saved  me  ?  I  dare  not  speak  with  any  hesitation  here  ;  I  knotv  He 
has.  His  Word  is  true,  therefore  I  am  saved.  My  evidence  that  I  am  saved  does 
not  liein  the  fact  that  I  preach,  or  that  I  do  this  or  that.  All  my  hope  lies  in  this, 
that  Jesus  Christ  came  to  save  sinners.  I  am  a  sinner,  I  trust  Him,  then  He  came 
to  save  me,  and  I  am  saved  ;  I  live  habitually  in  the  enjoyment  of  this  blessed  fact, 
and  it  is  long  since  I  have  doubted  the  truth  of  it,  for  I  have  His  own  Word 
to  sustain  my  faith.  It  is  a  very  surprising  thing, — a  thing  to  be  marvelled  at 
most  of  all  by  those  who  enjoy  it.  I  know  that  it  is  to  me  even  to  this  day  the 
greatest  wonder  that  I  ever  heard  of,  that  God  should  ever  justify  me.  I  feel 
myself  to  be  a  lump  of  unworthiness,  a  mass  of  corruption,  and  a  heap  of  sin, 
apart  from  His  almighty  love  ;  yet  I  know,  by  a  full  assurance,  that  I  am  justified 
by  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  treated  as  if  I  had  been  perfectly  just,  and 
made  an  heir  of  God  and  a  joint-heir  with  Christ  ;  though  by  nature  I  must 
iake  my  place  among    the  most  sinful.      1,   who   am  altogether   undeserving,   an' 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  II3 

treated  as  if  I  had  been  deserving.  I  am  loved  with  as  much  love  as  if  I  had 
always  been  godly,   whereas  aforetime   I   was  ungodly. 

I  have  always  considered,  with  Luther  and  Calvin,  that  the  sum  and  substance 
jf  the  gospel  lies  in  that  word  Substitution, — Christ  standing  in  the  stead  of  man. 
If  I  understand  the  gospel,  it  is  this  :  I  deserve  to  be  lost  for  ever;  the  only  reason 
why  I  should  not  be  damned  is,  that  Christ  was  punished  in  my  stead,  and  there  is 
no  need  to  execute  a  sentence  twice  for  sin.  On  the  other  hand,  I  know  I  cannot 
enter  Heaven  unless  I  have  a  perfect  righteousness  ;  I  am  absolutely  certain  I  shall 
never  have  one  of  my  own,  for  I  find  I  sin  every  day  ;  but  then  Christ  had  a  perfect 
righteousness,  and  He  said,  "There,  poor  sinner,  take  My  garment,  and  put  it  on; 
you  shall  stand  before  God  as  if  you  were  Christ,  and  I  will  stand  before  God  as  if 
I  had  been  the  sinner  ;  I  will  suffer  in  the  sinner's  stead,  and  you  shall  be  rewarded 
for  works  which  you  did  not  do,  but  which  I  did  for  you."  I  find  it  very  convenient 
every  day  to  come  to  Christ  as  a  sinner,  as  I  came  at  the  first.  "  You  are  no  saint," 
says  the  devil.  Well,  if  I  am  not,  I  am  a  sinner,  and  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.  Sink  or  swim,  I  go  to  Him  ;  other  hope  I  have  none.  By 
looking  to  Him,  I  received  all  the  faith  which  inspired  me  with  confidence  in  His 
grace  ;  and  the  word  that  first  drew  my  soul — "  Look  unto  Me," — still  rings  its 
clarion  note  in  my  ears.  There  I  once  found  conversion,  and  there  I  shall  ever 
find  refreshing  and  renewal. 

Let  me  bear  my  personal  testimony  of  what  I  have  seen,  what  my  own  ears 
have  heard,  and  my  own  heart  has  tasted.  First,  Christ  is  the  only-begotten  of  the 
Father.  He  is  Divine  to  me,  if  He  be  human  to  all  the  world  besides.  He  has 
done  that  for  me  which  none  but  a  God  could  do.  He  has  subdued  my  stubborn 
will,  melted  a  heart  of  adamant,  broken  a  chain  of  steel,  opened  the  gates  of  brass, 
and  snapped  the  bars  of  iron.  He  hath  turned  for  me  my  mourning  into  laughter, 
and  my  desolation  into  joy  ;  He  hath  led  my  captivity  captive,  and  made  my  heart 
rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory.  Let  others  think  as  they  will  oi 
Him,  to  me  He  must  ever  be  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father:  blessed  be  His 
holy  name  ! 

«  "  Oh,  that  I  could  now  adore  Him, 

Like  the  Heavenly  host  above, 
Who  for  ever  bow  before  Him, 
And  unceasing  sing  His  love! 
Happy  songsters  I 
When  shall  I  your  chorus  join  ?  " 

Again,  I  bear  my  testimony  that  He  is  full  of  grace.     Ah,  had  He  not  been,  I 

should   never  have    beheld    His    glory.      I    was  full   of  sin  to   overfiowing.      I    was 

condemned  already,  because  I  believed  not  upon  Him.      He  drew  me  when  I  wanted 

not  to  come,  and  though  I  struggled  hard.  He  continued  still  to  draw  ;  and  when  at 

last  I   came  to   His  mercy-seat,  all    trembling  like  a   condemned  culprit.    He  said, 

H 


114  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Thy  sins,  which  are  many,   are  all  forgiven  thee  :  be  of  good  cheer."     Let  others 
despise  Him  ;  but  I  bear  witness  that  He  is  full  of  grace. 

Finally,  I  bear  my  witness  that  He  is  full  of  truth.  True  have  His  promises 
been  ;  not  one  has  failed.  I  have  often  doubted  Him,  for  that  I  blush  ;  He  has 
never  failed  me,  in  this  I  must  rejoice.  His  promises  have  been  yea  and  amen. 
I  do  but  speak  the  testimony  of  every  believer  in  Christ,  though  I  put  it  thus 
personally  to  make  it  the  more  forcible.  I  bear  witness  that  never  servant  had  such 
a  Master  as  I  have  ;  never  brother  had  such  a  Kinsman  as  He  has  been  to  me  ; 
never  spouse  had  such  a  Husband  as  Christ  has  been  to  my  soul  ;  never  sinner  abetter 
Saviour  ;  never  soldier  a  better  Captain  ;  never  mourner  a  better  Comforter  than 
Christ  hath  been  to  my  spirit.  I  want  none  beside  Him.  In  life.  He  is  my  life  ;  and 
in  death.  He  shall  be  the  death  of  death  ;  in  poverty,  Christ  is  my  riches  ;  in 
sickness,  He  makes  my  bed  ;  in  darkness,  He  is  my  Star;  and  in  brightness,  He  is 
my  Sun.  By  faith  I  understand  that  the  blessed  Son  of  God  redeemed  my  soul 
with  His  own  heart's  blood  ;  and  by  sweet  experience  I  know  that  He  raised  me  up 
from  the  pit  of  dark  despair,  and  set  my  feet  on  the  rock.  He  died  for  me.  This 
is  the  root  of  every  satisfaction  I  have.  He  put  all  my  transgressions  away.  He 
cleansed  me  with  His  precious  blood  ;  He  covered  me  with  His  perfect  righteous- 
ness ;  He  wrapped  me  up  in  His  awn  virtues.  He  has  promised  to  keep  me,  while 
I  abide  in  this  world,  from  its  temptations  and  snares  ;  and  when  I  depart  from  this 
world,  He  has  already  prepared  for  me  a  mansion  in  the  Heaven  of  unfading  bliss, 
and  a  crown  of  everlasting  joy  that  shall  never,  never  fade  away.  To  me,  then,  the 
days  or  years  of  my  mortal  sojourn  on  this  earth  are  of  little  moment.  Nor  is  the 
manner  of  my  decease  of  much  consequence.  Should  foemen  sentence  me  to 
martyrdom,  or  physicians  declare  that  I  must  soon  depart  this  life,  it  is  all  alike, — 

"A  few  more  rolling  suns  at  most 
Shall  land  me  on  fair  Canaan's  coast." 

What  more  can  I  wish  than  that,  while  my  brief  term  on  earth  shall  last,  I  should 
be  the  servant  of  Him  who  became  the  Servant  of  servants  for  me?  I  can  say, 
concerning  Christ's  religion,  if  I  had  to  die  like  a  dog,  and  had  no  hope  whatever  of 
immortality,  if  I  wanted  to  lead  a  happy  life,  let  me  serve  my  God  with  all  my 
heart;  let  me  be  a  follower  of  Jesus,  and  walk  in  His  footsteps.  If  there  were  no 
hereafter,  I  would  still  prefer  to  be  a  Christian,  and  the  humblest  Christian  minister, 
to  being  a  king  or  an  emperor,  for  I  am  persuaded  there  are  more  delights  in  Christ, 
yea,  more  joy  in  one  glimpse  of  His  face  than  is  to  be  found  in  all  the  praises  of" 
this  harlot-world,  and  in  all  the  delights  which  it  can  yield  to  us  in  its  sunniest  and 
brightest  days.  And  I  am  persuaded  that  what  He  has  been  till  now,  He  will  be 
to  the  end;  and  where  He  hath  begun  a  good  work.  He  will  carry  it  on.  In  the 
religion  of  Jesus  Christ,  there  are  clusters  even  on  earth   too  heavy  for  one  man  to 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  II5 

carry  ;  there  are  fruits  that  have  been  found  so  rich  that  even  angel  lips  have  never 
been  sweetened  with  more  luscious  wine  ;  there  are  joys  to  be  had  here  so  fair  that 
even  cates  ambrosial  and  the  nectared  wine  of  Paradise  can  scarcely  excel  the  sweets 
of  satisfaction  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  earthly  banquets  of  the  Lord.  I  have 
seen  hundreds  and  thousands  who  have  given  their  hearts  to  Jesus,  but  I  never  did 
see  one  who  said  he  was  disappointed  with  Him,  I  never  met  with  one  who  said 
Jesus  Christ  was  less  than  He  was  declared  to  be.  When  first  my  eyes  beheld  Him, 
when  the  burden  slipped  from  off  my  heavy-laden  shoulders,  and  I  was  free  from 
condemnation,  1  thought  that  all  the  preachers  I  had  ever  heard  had  not  half  preached, 
they  had  not  told  half  the  beauty  of  my  Lord  and  Master.  So  good  !  so  generous  ! 
so  gracious  !  so  willing  to  forgive  !  It  seemed  to  me  as  if  they  had  almost  slandered 
Him  ;  they  painted  His  likeness,  doubtless,  as  well  as  they  could,  but  it  was  a  mere 
smudge  compared  with  the  matchless  beauties  of  His  face.  All  who  have  ever 
seen  Him  will  say  the  same.  I  go  back  to  my  home,  many  a  time,  mourning  that  I 
cannot  preach  my  Master  even  as  I  myself  know  Him,  and  what  I  know  of  Him  is 
very  little  compared  with  the  matchlessness  of  His  grace.  Would  that  I  knew  more 
of  Him,  and  that  I  could  tell  it  out  better  ! 


CHAPTER    XII. 


letters  to  Jfatljer  attb  Jlotljtr,  Sanuars  to  3imt,  1850. 

A  man's  private  letters  often  let  you  into  the  secrets  of  his  heart.  Read  Rutherford's  letters, 
and  you  see  the  man  at  once ;  or  those  of  Kirk  White,  or  Newton.  A  man's  writing-desk  should 
be  used  to  make  his  biography. — C.  H.  S. 

"  Newmarket, 

"January  30th,    1850. 
Y   Dear   Father, 

"  I  am  most  happy  and  comfortable,  I  could  not  be  more 
so  whilst  sojourning  on  earth,  '  like  a  pilgrim  or  a  stranger,  as 
all  my  fathers  were.'  There  are  but  four  boarders,  and  about 
twelve  day-boys.  I  have  a  nice  little  mathematical  class,  and 
have  quite  as  much  time  for  study  as  I  had  before.  1  can  get 
good  religious  conversations  with  Mr.  Swindell,  which  is  what  I  most  need.  Oh, 
how  unprofitable  has  my  past  life  been  !  Oh,  that  I  should  have  been  so  long  time 
blind  to  those  celestial  wonders,  which  now  I  can  in  a  measure  behold  !  Who  can 
refrain  from  speaking  of  the  marvellous  love  of  Jesus  which,  I  hope,  has  opened  mine 
eyes!  Now  1  see  Him,  I  can  firmly  trust  to  Him  for  my  eternal  salvation.  Yet 
soon  I  doubt  again  ;  then  I  am  sorrowful  ;  again  faith  appears,  and  I  become 
confident  of  my  interest  in  Him.  I  feel  now  as  if  I  could  do  everything,  and 
give  up  everything  for  Christ,  and  then  I  know  it  would  be  nothing  in  comparison 
with  His  love.  I  am  hopeless  of  ever  making  anything  like  a  return.  How  sweet 
is  prayer!  I  would  be  always  engaged  in  it.  How  beautiful  is  the  Bible.'  I 
never  loved  it  so  before  ;  it  seems  to  me  as  necessary  food.  I  feel  that  I  have 
not  one  particle  of  spiritual  life  in  me  but  what  the  Spirit  placed  there.  I  feel 
that  I  cannot  live  if  He  depart  ;  I  tremble  and  fear  lest  I  should  grieve  Him. 
I  dread  lest  sloth  or  pride  should  overcome  me,  and  I  should  dishonour  the 
gospel  by  neglect  of  prayer,  or  the  Scriptures,  or  by  sinning  against  God. 
Truly,  that  will  be  a  happy  place  where  we  shall  get  rid  of  sin  and  this  depraved, 
corrupt  nature.  When  I  look  at  the  horrible  pit  and  the  hole  from  which  I  have 
been  digged,  I  tremble  lest  I  should  fall  into  it,  and  yet  rejoice  that  I  am  on 
the  King's  highway.  I  hope  you  will  forgive  me  for  taking  up  so  much  space 
about  myself;  but  at  present  my  thoughts  are  most  about  it. 


Il8  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOCJRAPHY. 

"  From  the  Scriptures,  is  it  not  apparent  that,  immediately  upon  receiving  the 
Lord  Jesus,  it  is  a  part  of  duty  openly  to  profess  Him?  I  firmly  believe  and 
consider  that  baptism  is  the  command  of  Christ,  and  shall  not  feel  quite  comfortable 
if  I  do  not  receive  it.  I  am  unworthy  of  such  things,  but  so  am  I  unworthy  of 
Jesu's  love.  I  hope  I  have  received  the  blessing  of  the  one,  and  think  I  ought 
to  take  the  other  also. 

"  My  very  best  love  to  you  and  my  dear  Mother ;  I  seem  to  love  you  more  than 
ever,  because  you  love  my  Lord  Jesus.  I  hope  yourself,  dear  Mother,  Archer, 
Eliza,  Emily,  Louisa,  and  Lottie,  are  well  ;  love  to  all 

"  May  we  all,  after  this  fighting  life  is  over,  meet  in — 

"'That  Kingdom  of  immense  delight, 
Where  health,  and  peace,  and  joy  unite. 
Where  undeclining  pleasures  rise. 
And  every  wish  hath  full  supplies ; ' 

and  while  you  are  here,  may  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  abound  toward  you,  and 
may  we  as  a  family  be  all  devoted  to  the  Lord !  May  all  blessings  be  upon 
us,  and  may — 

"  I   ever  remain, 

"Your  dutiful  and  affectionate  son, 

"  CiiAs.    H.    Spukgeon." 

*  #  *  * 

"  Newmarket, 

"  Feb.    19th,    1850. 

"My    Dear    Mother, 

"  I  hope  the  long  space  between  my  letters  will  be  excused,  as  I 
assure  you  I  am  fully  occupied.  I  read  French  exercises  every  night  with 
Mr.  Swindell, — Monsr.  Perret  comes  once  every  week  for  an  hour.  I  have 
33  houses  at  present  where  I  leave  tracts, — I  happened  to  take  a  district  formerly 
supplied  by  Mrs.  Andrews,  who  last  lived  in  this  house,  and  Miss  Anna  Swindell. 
Next  Wednesday, — I  mean  to-morrow,^I  am  to  go  to  a  meeting  of  the  tract- 
distributors.  They  have  been  at  a  standstill,  and  hope  now  to  start  afresh.  On 
Thursday,  Mr.  Simpson  intends  coming  to  talk  with  me  upon  the  most  important 
of  all  subjects.  Oh,  how  I  wish  that  I  could  do  something  for  Christ !  Tract- 
distribution  is  so  pleasant  and  easy  that  it  is  a  nothing, — nothing  in  itself,  much 
less  when  it  is  compared  with   the  amazing  debt  of  gratitude   1   owe. 

"  I  have  written  to  grandfather,  and  have  received  a  very  nice  letter.  I  have 
been  in  the  miry  Slough  of  Despond  ;  he  sends  me  strong  consolation,  but  is 
that  what  I  want  ?  Ought  I  not  rather  to  be  reproved  for  my  deadness  and 
coldness  ?     I   pray  as  if  I   did  not  pray,   hear  as  if  I  did  not  hear,  and  read  as  il 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  II9 

I  did  not  read, — such  is  my  deadness  and  coldness.  I  had  a  glorious  revival 
on  Saturday  and  Sunday.  When  I  can  do  anything,  I  am  not  quite  so  dead. 
Oh,  what  a  horrid  state  !  It  seems  as  if  no  real  child  of  God  could  ever  look 
so  coldly  on,  and  think  so  little  of,  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  His  glorious  atonement. 
Why  is  not  my  heart  always  warm?  Is  it  not  because  of  my  own  sins?  I 
fear  lest  this  deadness  be  but  the  prelude  to  death, — spiritual  death.  I  have 
still  a  sense  of  my  own  weakness,  nothingness,  and  utter  inability  to  do  anything 
in  and  of  myself, — I  pray  God  that  I  may  never  lose  it, — I  am  sure  I  must 
if  left  to  myself,  and  then,  when  I  am  cut  off  from  Him,  in  whom  my  great 
strength  lieth,  I  shall  be  taken  by  the  Philistines  in  my  own  wicked  heart,  and 
have  mine  eyes  for  ever  closed  to  all  spiritual  good.  Pray  for  me,  O  my  deai 
Father  and  Mother!  Oh,  that  Jesus  would  pray  for  me  I  Then  I  shall  be 
delivered,  and  everlastingly  saved.  I  should  like  to  be  always  reading  my  Bible, 
and  be  daily  gaining  greater  insight  into  it  by  the  help  of  the  Spirit.  I  can  get 
but  very  little  time,   as  Air.   S.   pushes  me  on  in  Greek  and   French. 

"  I  have  come  to  a  resolution  that,  by  God's  help,  I  will  profess  the  name 
of  Jesus  as  soon  as  possible  if  I  may  be  admitted  into  His  Church  on  earth. 
It  is  an  honour, — no  difficulty, — grandfather  encourages  me  to  do  so,  and  I  hope 
to  do  so  both  as  a  duty  and  privilege.  I  trust  that  I  shall  then  feel  that  the 
bonds  of  the  Lord  are  upon  me,  and  have  a  more  powerful  sense  of  my  duty  to 
walk  circumspectly.  Conscience  has  convinced  me  that  it  is  a  duty  to  be  buried 
with  Christ  in  baptism,  although  1  am  sure  it  constitutes  no  part  of  salvation.  I  am 
very  glad  that  you  have  no  objection  to  my  doing  so.      Mr.  Swindell  is  a  Baptist. 

"  You  must  have  been  terribly  frightened  when  the  chimney  fell  down  , 
what  a  mercy  that  none  were  hurt  !  There  was  a  great  deal  of  damage  here 
from  the  wind.  My  cold  is  about  the  same  as  it  was  at  home,  it  has  been 
worse.  1  take  all  the  care  I  can,  I  suppose  it  will  go  away  soon.  How  are  all  the 
little  ones  ?  Give  my  love  to  them,  and  to  Archer  and  Eli^a.  How  does  Archer 
get  on  ?      Accept  my  best  love  for  yourself  and  Father.     1  hope  you  are  well, 

"  And  remain, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon." 


"  Newmarket, 

"  March  12th,  1850. 
'  My  Dear  Father, 

"  Many  thanks  to  you  for  your  kind,  instructive,  and  unexpected  letter. 

.   My  very  best  love  to  dear  Mother ;  I  hope  she  will  soon  be  better. 


T20  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  At  our  last  church-meeting,  I  was  proposed.  No  one  has  been  to  see  me  yet. 
I  hope  that  now  I  may  be  doubly  circumspect,  and  doubly  prayerful.  How  could  a 
Christian  live  happily,  or  live  at  all,  if  he  had  not  the  assurance  that  his  life  is  in 
Christ,  and  his  support,  the  Lord's  undertaking  ?  I  am  sure  I  would  not  have  dared 
to  take  this  great  decisive  step  were  it  not  that  I  am  assured  that  Omnipotence  will 
be  my  support,  and  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  my  constant  Protector.  Prayer  is  to  me 
now  what  the  sucking  of  the  milk  was  to  me  in  my  infancy.  Although  1  do  not 
always  feel  the  same  relish  for  it,  yet  I  am  sure  I  cannot  live  without  it. 

"'  When  by  sin  overwhelm'd,  shame  covers  my  lace, 
I  look  unto  Jesus,  who  saves  by  His  grace  ; 
I  call  on  His  name  from  the  gulf  of  despair, 
And  He  plucks  me  from  hell  in  answer  to  prayer. 

Prayer,  sweet  prayer! 
Be  it  ever  so  feeble,  there's  nothing  like  prayer.' 

"  Even  the  Slough  of  Despond  can  be  passed  by  the  supports  of  prayer  and 
faith.  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  despondency  has  vanished,  like  a  mist, 
before  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  who  has  shone  into  my  heart !  '  Truly,  God  is 
good  to  Israel.'  In  the  blackest  darkness,  I  resolved  that,  if  I  never  had  another 
ray  of  comfort,  and  even  if  I  was  everlastingly  lost,  yet  I  would  love  Jesus,  and 
endeavour  to  run  in  the  way  of  His  commandments  :  from  the  time  that  I  was 
enabled  thus  to  resolve,  all  these  clouds  have  fled.  If  they  return,  I  fear  not  to  meet 
them  in  the  strength  of  the  Beloved.  One  trial  to  me  is  that  I  have  nothing  to  give  up 
for  Christ,  nothing  wherein  to  show  my  love  to  Him.  What  I  can  do,  is  little  ;  and 
what  I  DO  do,  is  less.  The  tempter  says,  '  You  don't  leave  anything  for  Christ  ; 
you  only  follow  Him  to  be  saved  by  it.  Where  are  your  evidences.'''  Then  I 
tell  him  that  I  have  given  up  my  self-righteousness,  and  he  says,  '  Yes,  but  not 
till  you  saw  it  was  filthy  rags  I '  All  I  have  to  answer  is,  that  my  sufficiency  is  not 
of  myself. 

('"  Thursday  afternoon.) 

"  I  have  just  now  received  a  very  nice  note  from  my  dear  Mother.  Many 
thanks  to  you  for  the  P.O.  order.  I  do  not  know  what  money  obligations  are 
imposed  upon  members  ;   I  must  do  as  you  tell  me. 

(Here  a  piece  of  tlic  letter  has  been  ctit  out.) 

"  I  am  glad  brother  and  sister  are  better.     Again  my  best  love  to  you  all. 

"  I  am, 

"  Dear  Father, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 


C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  12  1 

"  Newmarket, 

"April  6th.  i«5o. 

"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  You  will  be  pleased  to  hear  that,  last  Thursday  night,  I  was  admitted 
as  a  member.  Oh,  that  I  may  henceforth  live  more  for  the  glory  of  Hmi,  by 
whom  I  feel  assured  that  I  shall  be  everlastingly  saved !  Owing  to  my  scruples 
on  account  of  baptism,  I  did  not  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  cannot  in 
conscience  do  so  until  I  am  baptized.  To  one  who  does  not  see  the  necessity  of 
baptism,  it  is  perfectly  right  and  proper  to  partake  of  this  blessed  privilege  ;  but 
were  /  to  do  so,  I  conceive  would  be  to  tumble  over  the  wall,  since  I  feel  persuaded 
it  is  Christ's  appointed  way  of  professing  Him.  I  am  sure  this  is  the  only  view 
which  I  have  of  baptism.  I  detest  the  idea  that  I  can  do  a  single  thing  towards 
my  own  salvation.  I  trust  that  I  feel  sufficiently  the  corruption  of  my  own  heart  to 
know  that,  instead  of  doing  one  iota  to  forward  my  own  salvation,  my  old  corrupt 
heart  would  impede  it,  were  it  not  that  my  Redeemer  is  mighty,  and  works  as  He 
pleases. 

"  Since  last  Thursday,  I  have  been  unwell  in  body,  but  I  may  say  that  my  soul 
has  been  almost  in  Heaven.  I  have  been  able  to  see  my  title  clear,  and  to  know 
and  believe  that,  sooner  than  one  of  God's  little  ones  shall  perish,  God  Himself  will 
cease  to  be,  Satan  will  conquer  the  King  of  kings,  and  Jesus  will  no  longer  be  the 
Saviour  of  the  elect.  Doubts  and  fears  may  soon  assail  me,  but  I  will  not  dread  to 
meet  them  if  my  Father  has  so  ordained  it  ;  He  knows  best.  \\'ere  I  never  to 
have  another  visit  of  grace,  and  be  always  doubting  trom  now  until  the  day  of  my 
death,  yet  '  the  foundation  of  the  Lord  standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  the  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  His.'  I  see  now  the  secret,  how  it  was  that  you  were 
enabled  to  bear  up  under  all  your  late  trials.  This  faith  is  far  more  than  any  of  us 
deserve  ;  all  beyond  hell  is  mercy,  but  this  is  a  mighty  one.  Were  it  not  all  of 
sovereign,  electing,  almighty  grace,  \,  for  one,  could  never  hope  to  be  saved. 
God  says,  '  You  shall,'  and  not  all  the  devils  in  hell,  let  loose  upon  a  real  Christian, 
can  stop  the  workings  of  God's  sovereign  grace,  for  in  due  time  the  Christian  cries, 
'  /  will.'  Oh,  how  little  love  have  I  for  One  who  has  thus  promised  to  save  me  by 
so  great  a  salvation,  and  who  will  certainly  perform  His  promise  ! 

"  I  trust  that  the  Lord  is  working  among  my  tract  people,  and  blessing  my 
little  effort.  I  have  had  most  interesting  and  encouraging  conversation  with  many 
of  them.  Oh,  that  I  could  see  but  one  sinner  constrained  to  come  to  Jesus  !  How 
I  long  for  the  time  when  it  may  please  God  to  make  me,  like  you,  my  Father,  a 
successful  preacher  of  the  gospel  !  I  almost  envy  you  your  exalted  privilege.  May 
the  dew  of  Hermon  and  the  increase  of  the  Spirit  rest  upon  your  labours!  Your 
unworthy  son  tries  to  pray  for  you  and  his  Mother,  that  grace  and  peace  may  be 


122  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

with  you.  Oh,  that  the  God  of  mercy  would  incline  Archer's  heart  to  Him,  and 
make  him  a  partaker  of  His  grace  !  Ask  him  if  he  will  believe  me  when  I  say  that 
one  drop  of  the  pleasure  of  religion  is  worth  ten  thousand  oceans  of  the  pleasures 
of  the   unconverted,  and    then   ask   him  if   he   is   not  willing  to  prove  the  fact  by 

experience.       Give  my  love  to  my  dear  Mother 

"  As  Mr.  Cantlow's  baptizing  season  will  come  round  this  month,  I  have 
humbly  to  beg  your  consent,  as  I  will  not  act  against  your  will,  and  should  very 
much  like  to  commune  next  month.  I  have  no  doubt  of  your  permission.  We 
are   all    one   in    Christ    Jesus  ;    forms   and    ceremonies,    I    trust,    will    not    make   us 

divided 

"  With  my  best  love  and  hopes  that  you  are  all  well, 
"  I   remain, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Not  only  as  to  the  flesh,  but  in  the  faith, 

"  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon." 

?p  TP  w  * 

"  Newmarket, 

"April  20th. 

"  My  Dear  Mother, 

"  I  have  every  morning  looked  for  a  letter  from  Father,  I  long  for  an 
answer  ;  it  is  now  a  month  since  I  have  had  one  from  him.  Do,  if  you  please,  send 
me  either  permission  or  refusal  to  be  baptized  ;  I  have  been  kept  in  painful  suspense. 
This  is  the  20th,  and  Mr.  Cantlow's  baptizing  day  is  to  be  the  latter  end  of  the 
month  ;  I  think,  next  week.  I  should  be  so  sorry  to  lose  another  Ordinance  Sunday  ; 
and  with  my  present  convictions,  I  hope  I  shall  never  so  violate  my  conscience  as  to 
sit  down  unbaptized.  When  requested,  I  assured  the  members  at  the  church-meeting 
that  I  would  never  do  so. 

"  1  often  think  of  you  poor  starving  creatures,  following  Mr. for  the  bony 

rhetoric  and  oratory  which  he  gives  you.  What  a  mercy  that  you  are  not  dependent 
upon  him  for  spiritual  comfort !  I  hope  you  will  soon  give  up  following  that  empty 
cloud  without  rain,  that  type-and-shadow  preacher,  for  I  don't  think  there  is  much 
substance.  But,  my  dear  Mother,  why  do  you  not  go  and  hear  my  friend,  Mr. 
Langford  ?  He  is  an  open-communion  Baptist,  and  I  have  no  doubt  will  receive  you 
without  baptism.  Perhaps  his  preaching  may  be  blest  to  Archer,  Eliza,  and  my 
sisters,  as  well  as  to  myself ;  would  it  not  be  worth  giving  up  a  little  difference  of 
persuasion  for?     God  can  save  whom   He  will,  when  He  will,  and  where  He  will, 

but  I  think  Mr. 's  Mount  Sinai  roarings  are  the  last  things  to  do  it,  to  all  human 

appearance. 


C.     II.     SPUKGEUNS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 23 

"  I  think  I  might  date  this  letter  from  a  place  in  the  Enchanted  Ground,  with 
the  warm  air  of  Beulah  blowing  upon  me.  One  drop  of  the  pleasures  I  have  felt  is 
worth  a  life  of  agony.      I  am  afraid  of  becoming  satisfied  with  this  world. 

"  My  very  best  love  to  yourself  dear  Father,  Eliza,  Archer,  Emily,  Louisa,  and 
Lottie.  I  hope  you  are  well.  I  am  very  much  better  ;  thanks  for  the  prescription  ; 
and  with  my  love  to  you  again, 

"  I  remain, 

"  Dear  Mother, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 

"P.S. — If  baptized,  it  will  be  in  an  open  river;  go  in  just  as  I  am,  with  some 

others I  trust  the  good  confession    before   many  witnesses  will    be   a 

bond  betwixt  me  and  my  Master,  my  Saviour,  and  my  King." 

#  *  #  # 

"  Newmarket, 

"  May  ist,  1850. 
"  My  Dear  Mother, 

"  Many  very  happy  returns  of  your  Birthday  !  In  this  instance,  my 
wish  will  certainly  be  realized,  for  in  Heaven  you  are  sure  to  have  an  eternity 
of  happy  days.  May  you,  in  your  coming  years,  live  beneath  the  sweet  smiles 
of  the  God  of  peace  ;  may  joy  and  singing  attend  your  footsteps  to  a  blissful 
haven  of  rest  and  tranquillity  !  Your  birthday  will  now  be  doubly  memorable,  for 
on  the  third  of  May,  the  boy  for  whom  you  have  so  often  prayed,  the  boy  of  hopes 
and  fears,  your  firstborn,  will  join  the  visible  Church  of  the  redeemed  on  earth, 
and  will  bind  himself  doubly  to  the  Lord  his  God,  by  open  profession.  You,  my 
Mother,  have  been  the  great  means  in  God's  hand  of  rendering  me  what  I  hope 
I  am.  Your  kind,  warning  Sabbath-evening  addresses  were  too  deeply  settled  on 
my  heart  to  be  forgotten.  You,  by  God's  blessing,  prepared  the  way  for  the 
preached  Word,  and  for  that  holy  book.  The  Rise  and  Progress.  If  I  have  any 
courage,  if  I  feel  prepared  to  follow  my  Saviour,  not  only  into  the  water,  but  should 
He  call  me,  even  into  the  fire,  I  love  you  as  the  preacher  to  my  heart  of  such 
courage,  as  my  praying,  watching  Mother.  Impossible,  I  think  it  is,  that  I  should 
ever  cease  to  love  you,  or  you  to  love  me,  yet  not  nearly  so  impossible  as  that  the 
Lord  our  Father  should  cease  to  love  either  of  us,  be  we  ever  so  doubtful  of  it, 
or  ever  so  disobedient.  I  hope  you  may  one  day  have  cause  to  rejoice,  should 
you  see  me,  the  unworthy  instrument  of  God,  preaching  to  others, — yet  have 
I  vowed  in  the  strength  of  my  only  Strength,  in  the  name  of  my  Beloved, 
to  devote   myself  for  ever  to   His   cause.       Do   you   not  think   it  would  be  a  bad 


124  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

beginning  were  I,  knowing  it  to  be  my  duty  to  be  baptized,  to  shrink  from  it? 
If  you  are  now  as  happy  as  I  am,  I  can  wish  no  more  than  that  you  may  continue 
so.      I  am  the  happiest  creature,  I  think,  upon  this  globe. 

"  I  hope  you  have  enjoyed  your  visit,  and, that  it  will  help  much  to  establish 
your  health.  I  dare  not  ask  you  to  write,  for  I  know  you  are  always  so  busy 
that  it  is  quite  a  task  to  you.  I  hope  my  letter  did  not  pain  you,  dear  Mother  ; 
my  best  love  to  you,  be  assured  that  I  would  not  do  anything  to  grieve  you,  and 
I   am  sure  that    I   remain, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles   Haddon." 

"  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Swindell's  respects  to  you  and  dear  Father." 


"  Newmarket  Academy, 

"June    iith,    1850. 

"My  Dear  Mother, 

"  Many  thanks  to  you  for  your  valuable  letter.  Your  notes  are  so  few 
and  far  between,  and  are  such  a  trouble  to  you,  that  one  now  and  then  is  quite 
a  treasure. 

"  Truly,  indeed,  I  have  much  for  which  to  bless  the  Lord,  when  I  contem- 
plate His  Divine  Sovereignty,  and  see  that  my  salvation  is  entirely  of  His  free 
electing  love.  He  has  chosen  me  to  be  one  of  His  vessels  of  mercy;  and, 
despite  all  opposition  from  without  and  from  within,  He  will  surely  accomplish 
His  own  work.  I  have  more  than  sufficient  to  induce  me  to  give  up  myself  entirely 
to  Him  who  has  bought  me  and  purchased  me  with  an  everlasting  redemption. 
I  am  now  enabled  to  rely  upon  His  precious  promises,  and  to  feel  that  I  am  as 
safe,   though  not  so  holy,   as  the  greatest  saint  in   Heaven. 

"  I  have  had  two  opportunities  of  addressing  the  Sunday-school  children,  and 
have  endeavoured  to  do  so  as  a  dying  being  to  dying  beings.  I  am  bound  to 
Newmarket  by  holy  bonds.  I  have  70  people  whom  I  regularly  visit  on  Saturday. 
I  do  not  give  a  tract,  and  go  away  ;  but  I  sit  down,  and  endeavour  to  draw  their 
attention  to  spiritual  realities.  I  have  great  reason  to  believe  the  Lord  is  working, 
— the  people  are  so  kind,  and  so  pleased  to  see  me.  I  cannot  bear  to  leave  them. 
We  are  so  feeble  here  that  the  weakest  cannot  be  spared.  We  have  a  pretty 
good  attendance  at  prayer-meetings  ;  but  so  few  praying  men,  that  I  am  constantly 
called  upon 

"  One  of  our  Deacons,  Mr.  ,  is  constantly  inviting  me    to    his    house 

he  is   rather    an  Arminian  ;    but    so    are   the    majority    of    Newmarket    Christians. 
Grandfather   has  written    to    me";    he    does    not    blame    me    for    being    a    Baptist, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 25 

but  hopes  I  shall  not  be  one  of  the  tight-laced,  strict-communion  sort.  In 
that,  we  are  agreed.  I  certainly  think  we  ought  to  forget  such  things  in  others 
when  we  come  to  the  Lord's  table.  I  can,  and  hope  I  shall  be,  charitable 
to  unbaptized  Christians,  though  I  think  they  are  mistaken.  It  is  not  a  great 
matter  ;  men  will  differ  ;  we  ought  both  to  follow  our  own  consciences,  and  let 
others  do  the  same.  I  think  the  time  would  be  better  spent  in  talking  upon 
vital  godliness  than  in  disputing  about  forms.  I  trust  the  Lord  is  weaning  me 
daily  from  all  self-dependence,  and  teaching  me  to  look  at  myself  as  less  than 
nothing.  I  know  that  I  am  perfectly  dead  without  Him  ;  it  is  His  work;  I  am 
confident  that  He  will  accomplish  it,  and  that  I  shall  see  the  face  of  my  Beloved  in 
His  own  house  in  glory. 

"  My  enemies  are  many,  and  they  hate  me  with  cruel  hatred,  yet  with 
Jehovah  Jesus  on  my  side,  why  should  I  fear?  I  will  march  on  in  His  almighty 
strength  to  certain  conquest  and  victory.  I  am  so  glad  that  Sarah,  too,  is  called, 
that  two  of  us  in  one  household  at  one  time  should  thus  openly  profess  the  Saviour's 
name.  We  are  brother  and  sister  in  the  Lord  ;  may  our  Father  often  give  each  of  us 
the  refreshing  visits  of  His  grace!  I  feel  as  if  I  could  say  with  Paul,  'Would 
that  I  were  even  accursed,  so  that  my  brethren  according  to  the  flesh  might  be 
saved  !  '  What  a  joy  if  God  should  prove  that  they  are  redeemed  ones  included 
in  the  covenant  of  grace  !  I  long  to  see  your  face,  and  let  my  heart  beat  with 
yours,  whilst  we  talk  of  the  glorious  things  pertaining  to  eternal  life.  My  best 
love  to  you  and  Father  ;  may  the  Angel  of  the  covenant  dwell  with  you,  and 
enchant  you  by  the  visions  of  His  grace  !  Love  to  Eliza,  Archer  (many  happy 
returns  to  him),  Emily,  Lottie,  and  Louisa  ;  may  they  become  members  of  the  church 
in  our  house  !  I  am  very  glad  you  are  so  well.  I  am  so,  but  hard  at  work  for 
the   Examination,   so  allow  me  to  remain, 

"  Your  most  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 

"  Master  H shall  be  attended  to  ;    be  ye  always  ready  tor  every  good 

work.      I   have  no  time,   but  it  shall   be  done." 


CHAPTER    XIII. 


Wim,  ^pril  to  Sunt,  185D. 

I  have  sometimes  said,  when  I  have  become  the  prey  of  doubting  thoughts,  "Well,  now,  I  dare 
not  doubt  whether  there  be  a  God,  for  I  can  look  back  in  my  Diary,  and  say,  'On  such  a  day,  in  the 
depths  of  trouble,  I  bent  my  knee  to  God,  and  or  ever  I  had  risen  from  my  knees,  the  answer  was  given 
me."'— C.  H.  S. 

Introduction,    by    Mrs.    C.    H.    Spurgeon. 


^OT  very  long  after  our  marriage,  my  husband  brought  to  me,  one 
day,  a  small  clasped  book,  and  putting  it  into  my  hand  with  a 
grave  and  serious  air,  he  said,  "  That  book  contains  a  record  of 
some  of  my  past  spiritual  experiences,  wifie  ;  take  care  of  it,  but  I 
never  want  to  see  it  again."  He  never  did,  and  to  me  also  it  was  a 
sealed  book,  for  I  did  not  dare  to  open  it  ;  and  it  has  lain, 
unrevealed,  for  certainly  forty  years  since  the  day  I  first  saw  it.  But  now,  with 
reverent  hands,  I  take  it  from  its  hiding-place,  and,  as  I  look  upon  the  boyish 
handwriting,  and  begin  to  read  the  thoughts  of  my  dear  one's  heart  in  the  bygone 
years,  I  wonder  whether  I  can  undertake  the  duty  of  transcription,  whether  my  eyes 
will  see  through  the  tears  which  must  come,  and  rtiy  fingers  will  hold  the  pen 
without  much  trembling,  and  my  heart,  which  loved  him  so  well,  will  be  able  to 
thank  God  that  the  past  is  past,  and  the  struggles  and  sorrows  of  earth  are  for  ever 
forgotten  in  the  ecstasies  of  eternal  glory.      Lord,  strengthen  and  help  me  ! 

The  contents  of  the  little  book  prove  to  be  a  continuous  Diary  of  nearly  three 
months'  duration,  commencing  April  6th,  1850,  and  ending  on  June  20th  in  the  same 
year.  As  its  pages  cover  the  season  of  baptism,  and  the  young  convert's  first  efforts 
in  service  for  the  Lord,  it  is  full  of  deep  interest  and  pathos  to  all  who  afterward 
knew  and  loved  the  great  preacher.  I  feel  that  I  am  justified  in  at  last  revealing  the 
long-kept  secret  of  the  book,  for  a  perusal  of  its  soul-confessions  and  holy  resolutions 
can  only  redound  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  show  how  He  was  leading  His  young 
servant  by  a  way  which  he  knew  not.      And  I  believe  God  would  have  me  do  this. 

The  words  of  the  dear  boy  of  sixteen  are  very  touching  when  read  in  the  light 
of  his  subsequent  marvellous  career.  As  the  trunk  and  branches  of  the  future  tree 
may,  in  some  cases,  be  seen  faintly  outlined  in  the  fruit  it  bears,  so  we  can  here 
discern  something  of  the  form  and  beauty  of  the  tair  character  which  the  Lord  was 
preparing  for  a  glorious  service. 


128 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


How  marked  is  his  humility,  even  though  he  must  have  felt  within  him  the 
stirrings  and  throes  of  the  wonderful  powers  which  were  afterwards  developed. 
"  Forgive  me,  Lord,"  he  says,  in  one  place,  "  if  I  have  ever  had  high  thoughts  of 
myself," — so  early  did  the  Master  implant  the  precious  seeds  of  that  rare  grace  of 
meekness,  which  adorned  his  after  life.  After  each  youthful  effort  at  public  exhorta- 
tion, whether  it  be  engaging  in  prayer,  or  addressing  Sunday-school  children,  he 
seems  to  be  surprised  at  his  own  success,  and  intensely  anxious  to  be  kept  from 
pride  and  self-glory,  again  and  again  confessing  his  own  utter  weakness,  and 
pleading  for  God-given  strength.  What  d(;ep  foundations  were  laid  in  this  chosen 
soul,  upon  what  massive  pillars  of  truth  and  doctrine  did  God  construct  the  spiritual 
consciousness  of  the  man  who  was  to  do  so  great  a  work  in  the  world  for  his 
Master!  He  was  truly  a  "building  fitly  framed  together,"  and  he  grew  into  "a 
holy  temple  in  the  Lord,"  "a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  So  young  in 
years,  when  he  wrote  these  thoughts,  yet  so  old  in  grace,  and  possessing  an 
experience  in  spiritual  matters  richer  and  broader  than  most  Christians  attain  to  at 
an  advanced  age  !  How  plainly  revealed  in  these  pages  are  the  workings  and 
teachings  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  and  how  equally  clear  are  the  docility,  and  earnestness, 
and  humility  of  the  pupil  !  Many  of  the  sentences  in  the  Diary  are  strangely 
prophetic  of  his  future  position  and  work, — notably  these  two, — "  Make  me  Thy 
faithful  servant,  O  my  God  ;  may  I  honour  Thee  in  my  day  and  generation,  and  be 
consecrated  for  ever  to  Thy  service  !  "  And  again,  "  Make  me  to  be  an  eminent 
servant  of  Thine,  and  to  be  blessed  with  the  power  to  serve  Thee,  like  Thy  great 
servant  Paul ! " 

In  these  breathings,  too,  we  see  where  the  secret  of  his  great  strength  lay.  He 
believed  and  trusted  God  absolutely,  and  his  faith  was  honoured  in  a  God-like 
fashion.  Deeply  realizing  his  own  weakness,  he  rested  with  child-like  and  complete 
dependence  on  his  Lord.  And  God  carried  him,  as  a  father  bears  his  litde  one  in  his 
arms  ;  and  God's  Spirit  dwelt  in  him,  to  teach  him  all  things.  His  luliole  heart  was 
given  to  God  and  His  service,  God's  promises  were  verities  to  him  ;  and  as  "  He 
abideth  faithful.  He  cannot  deny  Himself,"  it  was  with  both  hands  that  He  heaped 
gifts  and  grace  upon  His  dear  servant  until  the  time  came  to  receive  him  into  glory. 

Perhaps,  of  greatest  price  among  the  precious  things  which  this  little  book 
reveals,  is  the  beloved  author's  personal  and  intense  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  He 
lived  in  His  embrace  ;  like  the  aposde  John,  his  head  leaned  on  Jesu's  bosom.  The 
endearing  terms  used  in  the  Diary,  and  never  discontinued,  were  not  empty  words  ; 
they  were  the  overflowings  of  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  his  heart  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  One  of  the  last  things  he  said  to  me  at  Mentone,  before  unconsciousness 
had  sealed  his  dear  lips,  was  this,  "  O  wihe,  I  have  had  such  a  blessed  time  with  my 
Lord  !  "     And  it  was  always  so,  the  Saviour  was  as  real  to  him  as  ii  his  eyes  could 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  '  129 

look  upon  Him,  and  it  was  his  delight  to  dwell  in  the  very  presence  of  God,  in  his 
daily,  hourly  life. 

F"ull  of  a  sweet  pain  has  been  the  task  I  set  myself  to  write  out  these  details  of 
my  dear  one's  life  for  three  short  months  ;  but  if  anyone  shall  be  the  gainer  by  it, 
through  being  drawn  nearer  to  God,  and  having  clearer  views  of  Divine  truth,  I 
shall  deem  the  pain  a  pleasure,  and  the  sorrow  will  bring  me  joy. 

■Jf  ^  ^  -7P 

Saved  men  and  women  date  from  the  dawn  of  their  true  life ;  not  from  their  first  birthday,  but  from  the 
day  wlierein  they  were  born  again.  Their  calendar  has  been  altered  and  amended  by  a  deed  of  Divine 
grace.— C.  H.  S. 

The    Diary. 

1850. 

Born,  January  6,    1850. 

Admitted  to  Fellowship,  April  4. 

Baptized,  May  3. 

Communed  first.  May  5. 

Commenced  as  S.S.  Teacher,  ,, 

Joined  Church  at  Cambridge,   Oct.  2. 

Consecration. 

O  great  and  unsearchable  God,  who  knowest  my  heart,  and  t^'iest  all  my  ways  ; 
with  a  humble  dependence  upon  the  support  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  I  yield  up  myself  to 
Thee  ;  as  Thy  own  I'easonable  sacrifice,  I  return  to  Thee  Thine  own.  I  would  be  for 
ever,  unreservedly,  perpetually  Thine  ;  ivhilst  I  am  on  earth,  I  ivoitld  sei've  Thee  ; 
and  may  I  enjoy  Thee  and  praise  Thee  for  ever  !     Amen. 

Feb.   I,  1850.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon. 

1850, — A   Blessed  Year  of  Jubilee. 

April  6. — I  have  had  a  blessed  day  of  refreshing  from  the  Lord,  and  from  the 
glory  of  His  face.  Went  round  my  Station  District,  and  had  a  talk  with  several 
people.  I  trust  the  Lord  is  working  here.  Had  some  serious  thoughts  about 
baptism.     "  The  Lord  is  my  strength  and  my  song  ;  He  also  is  become  my  salvation." 

April  7. — Not  well  ;  the  body  bears  the  soul  down.  Heard  Mr.  S.  from 
Gen.  xxii.  8  ;  could  not  take  it  in  to  heart,  headache  would  not  let  me.  Arminianism 
does  not  suit  me  now.  If  I  were  long  to  be  so  heavy  as  I  now  am,  I  could 
scarcely  live.  Evening,  could  not  attend  to  the  sermon  ;  was  happier  without  it. 
I  feasted  all  the  time  on — 

"When  I  soar  to  worlds  unknown, 
See  Thee  on  Thy  judgment  throne, 
Rock  of  .Ages!  cleft  forme, 
I  shall  hide  myself  in  Thee."' 


H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHV. 


Cannot  think  how  Mr.  S.  could  say  that  Esau,  he  trusted,  was  converted,  when 
the  Lord  says,  "  Esau  have  I  hated." 

April  8. — Walked  out  after  breakfast,  never  saw  more  plaiuly  the  sovereignty 
of  God's  will.  He  has  called  me  ;  I  feel  sure  that  He  will  carry  me  to  glory.  Not 
well.  O  God  of  grace,  take  me  home  when  Thou  pleasest  !  It  is,  "  Mercy,  mercy, 
mercy,"  from  first  to  last. 

April  9. — Happy  again  to-day  ;  if  such  days  continue,  earth  and  Heaven  will 
be  but  one  ; — but  what  have  I  written .''  I  know  I  have  sinned  this  day  ;  in  Heaven, 
I  cannot.  Oh,  to  be  holy,  to  be  like  God  !  I  trust  I  shall  be  one  day.  O  glorious 
hour,  O  blest  abode,  when  I  am  near,  and  like  my  God.  Jesus,  how  can  I  e'er 
forget  Thee,  Thou  life  of  my  delights  ?  Hold  Thou  me  by  Thy  free  Spirit,  and 
pour  down  upon  me  more  love  to  Thee  !  Can  hardly  pray,  yet,  O  my  God, 
remember  A !     Oh,  that  I  could  do  more  for  God  !     "  By  grace  ye  are  saved." 

April  10. — Much  better  in  health.  All  more  than  hell,  is  mercy.  How  small 
is  my  sphere,  yet  what  a  great  Being  condescended  to  fix  my  state  before  I  had  a 
being!  All  things  are  ordered  by  God.  Blessed  be  His  name,  though  He  slay  me, 
yet  will  I  trust  in  Him.  Sin  is  all  cleansed  by  Jesu's  blood.  Doubts  and  fears  will 
soon  come.  "  Desire  of  my  soul,"  prepare  me  to  meet  them.  The  Lord's  presence 
has  not  departed  yet  ;  had  I  the  tongue  of  an  archangel,  I  could  not  praise  Him 
enough  for  this.  I  hope  all  is  well  at  home  with  my  dear  mother  ;  I  must  expect 
the  cross  soon.  "  He  that  taketh  not  his  cross,  and  followeth  after  Me,  is  not  worthy 
of  Me." 

April  II. — Have  had  sweet  thoughts  upon,  "I  am  the  good  Shepherd,  and 
know  My  sheep,  and  am  known  of  Mine."  How  can  one  of  His  sheep  be  lost  if  He 
knows  all  His  own  .'' 

I  have  read  to-day  of  the  iniquities  of  some  in  high  places.  Father,  forgive 
them,  and  grant  that  Thy  name  may  not  be  blasphemed  through  them  !  O  my 
Beloved,  sooner  may  I  perish  everlastingly  than  thus  dishonour  Thee,  Thou  sole 
desire  of  my  heart  !  Heard  Mr.  S.  from  Psalm  Ixviii.  18 — 20.  I  love  to  hear  him 
give  all  the  honour  of  our  salvation  to  God.  Shepherd  of  Israel,  guide  Thy  flock 
into  all  truth  !     Quicken  me,  and  make  me  love  Thee  more  and  more  : 

.April  12. — Earthly  things  have  engaged  too  much  of  my  thoughts  this  day.  I 
have  not  been  able  to  fix  my  attention  entirely  upon  my  Saviour.  Yet,  even  yet,  the 
Lord  has  not  hidden  His  face  from  me.  Though  tempted,  I  am  not  cast  down  ;  tried, 
but  not  overcome  ;  truly  it  is  of  the  Lord's  sovereign  mercy.  1  would  desire  again 
this  day  to  make  a  fresh  application  to  the  sin-atoning  blood  of  Jesus  to  cleanse 
away  my  sins.  O  God,  do  Thou  keep  me  down,  and  then  I  need  fear  no  fall  !  O 
visit  Zion,  and  preserve  Thy  Church  ;  let  her  yet  shine  forth  in  glory !  April 
showers  have  been  coming  down  to-day  ;  the   Lord  does   not   forget  His  promises. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I3I 

Jesus  took  m)  heart  :  "  or  ever  I  was  aware,  my  soul  made  me  like  the  chariots  of 
Ammi-nadib."  "Tell  me,  O  Thou  whom  my  soul  loveth,  where  Thou  feedest,  where 
Thou  makest  Thy  flock  to  rest  at  noou  ;  "  I  would  be  ever  with  Thee,  O  my  spot- 
less, fairest  Beloved  !  Daily  meet  me,  for  Thy  embrace  is  Heaven  ;  sanctify  me, 
prepare  me,  help  me  to  bring  forth  fruit,  and  to  be  Thine  for  ever  ! 

April  13. — Did  not  feel  so  tired  at  the  end  of  this  week;  one  reason  is,  that 
every  day  has  been  Sunday  with  me.  Blessed  be  the  Shepherd,  I  walk  now  beside 
the  still  waters.  What  events  are  transpiring  in  the  world  !  Things  are  quite  at  a 
crisis  in  the  Church  of  England.  I  love  my  little  work  ;  Lord,  be  with  me  !  "  O  the 
depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  !  "  Trust  in  Him,  my 
soul  ;  follow  hard  after  Him. 

April  14. — Heard  Mr.  S.,  this  morning,  from  3  John  4, — the  great  subject  ot 
justification  by  faith.  Who  could  dare  to  hope  of  going  to  Heaven,  if  works  are  the 
price  .'*  I  could  not  ;  it  would  be  like  offering  me  a  possession  in  the  sun,  if  I  could 
jump  up  to  it,  and  take  it  in  my  hand  !  Afternoon, — some  of  last  Sunday  over  again. 
Esau  does  not  give  us  a  very  interesting  sermon.  Evening  subject  was.  Decision. 
I  am  quite  encouraged.  Hope  I  shall  soon  have  an  answer  from  home  upon 
baptism. 

"Through  floods  and  flames,  if  Jesus  lead, 
I'll  follow  where  He  goes." 

I  would  not  desert  Him  in  any  one  point,  but  keep  close  to  Him. 

April  15. — Quite  well  to-day,  and  tolerably  happy.  First  day  of  the  races. 
O  God,  Thou  makest  me  to  differ  !  Had  a  nice  prayer-meeting.  "  Also  unto  Thee, 
O  Lord,  belongeth  mercy."  What  else  have  I  to  trust  to  ?  Mr.  P.  came  in  this 
evening,  and  talked  till  past  eleven,  so  that  I  lost  some  of  the  time  I  should  have 
spent  in  devotion. 

"  What  various  hindrances  we  meet 
In  coming  to  a  mercy-seat ! 
Yet  who  that  knows  the  worth  of  prayer, 
But  wishes  to  be  often  there?" 

April  16. — This  evening,  the  friends  at  the  Hythe  will  be  assembled. 
Grant  Thy  gracious  blessing  !  Read  of  the  land  Beulah.  1  have  been  there,  and 
that,  too,  before  coming  to  Giant  Despair.  Comfort  we  must  not  always  have, 
or  I  am  afraid  I  should  go  to  sleep.  I  am  now  getting  drowsy  in  spirit.  Strong 
Deliverer,  keep  my  eyes  open  !  My  soul  seems  to  long  after  the  flesh-pots  of 
Egypt,  and  that  after  eating  Heavenly  manna  ;  help  and  forgive  me,  O  my  Saviour  ! 

April  17. — Read  some  of  "Fuller  upon  Antinomianism."  My  God,  what  a 
gulf  is  near  me  !  I  think  I  can  say  that  I  hate  this  religion  ;  I  would  desire  to 
love  God,  and  to  be  as  holy  as  my  Father-God  Himself  There  is  a  little  cloud 
betwixt  me  and  my  Sun  of  righteousness,  but  I  doubt  not  that  He  strill  shines  upon 


132  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

me.  He  has  not  left  me.  I  am  a  living  miracle,  a  walking  wonder  of  grace  that 
I  am  alive  at  all' ;  much  more,  following  on.  May  I  from  this  time  live  nearer 
to  Him,  and  honour  His  name  more  ! 

April  18. — I  trust  the  cloud  has  burst.  I  have  seen  some  few  gleams  of 
sunshine  to-day.  I  will  walk  on  in  His  strength,  whether  it  be  through  clouds 
or  not.  Went  to  chapel,  very  few  there.  I  have  been  enabled  to  renew  my 
strength  ;  may  I  now  run  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  !  I  begin  to  wonder  why  father 
has  not  written  ;  he  has  good  reason,  no  doubt.  Lord,  strengthen  Thy  people, 
and  revive  Thy  Church  by  Thine  enlivening  grace  ! 

April  19. — I  do  not  live  near  enough  to  God.  I  have  to  lament  my  coldness 
and  indifference  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  O  God  of  restoring  grace,  visit  Thy 
servant  in  the  midst  of  the  days  !  I  will  trust  Him,  I  cannot  doubt  His  power  or 
His  love. 

"Yes,  I  love  Thee  and  adore, 
O  lor  grace  to  love  Thee  more  ! " 

I  shall  yet  have  another  visit,  and  see  again  His  smiling  face.  "  Whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  the  Father  in  My  name.  He  wll   give  it  you." 

April  20. — Went  round  with  my  tracts  ;  could  not  feel  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
upon  me.  I  seemed  to  have  a  clog  upon  my  feet  and  my  tongue.  I  have  richly 
deserved  this,  for  I  have  not  prayed,  or  studied  my  Bible  as  I  ought.  I  confess 
mine  iniquity,  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me.  Mercy  !  it  is  all  mercy  !  Wash  me 
anew,  O  Saviour,  in  Thy  sin-atoning  blood  ! 

"  Firm  as  the  earth  Thy  gospel  stands, 
My  Lord,  my  hope,  my  trust." 

I  cannot  perish  if  God  protects  me.     I  can  do  nothing.    Weak  and  sinful  worm  am  I. 

April  21. — This  morning,  Mr.  S.  preached  from  2  Thess.  iii.  3.  This  is  the 
great  hope  of  a  Christian,  the  main  comfort  of  my  life, — the  Lord  will  do  it. 
Afternoon,  Matt.  i.x.  22.  Here  again  it  is  the  Saviour's  working  ;  earthly  physicians 
could  not  do  it.  Blessed  art  Thou,  O  God,  for  this  great  salvation  !  Evening, 
3  John  4.  I  am  not  very  much  interested  with  these  twice-preached  sermons. 
On  the  whole,  I  have  enjoyed  much  this  day  ; — little  have  I  deserved  it,  nay, 
not  at  all.  No  merit  in  me,  I  am  sure  :  vilest  of  the  vile,  for  so  long  shutting 
mine  eyes  to  this  great  salvation  and  glorious  state  of  God's  people. 

April  22. — The  Lord  has  not  forsaken  me.  Went  this  evening  to  the  prayer- 
meeting  ;  engaged  in  prayer.  Why  should  I  fear  to  speak  of  my  only  Friend  }  I 
shall  not  be  timid  another  time,  I  hope  the  Lord  has  helped  me  in  this  ;  He  will 
in  other  things.  The  spirit  is  more  brisk  to-day,  more  soaring,  and  more  enchanted 
with  that  Saviour  who  is  the  life  of  all  my  joy.  Faith  is  the  precious  gift  of  God. 
and  love  is   His  oift  ;   it  is  all  of  God  from  first  to  last. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  133 

April  23. — My  prayer  is  in  some  measure  answered  ;  I  trust  the  work  has 
again  revived.  No  desert  is  there  in  me  ;  'tis  all  of  mercy,  I  must  acknowledge. 
I  feel  that  I  am  dependent  on  the  Lord  for  all,  for  growing  grace,  and  for  living 
grace.  I  have  my  daily  supply,  and  sure  enough,  I  do  not  have  two  days'  portion 
at  a  time.  'Tis  a  mercy  to  feel  one's  own  dependence,  and  to  be  able  to  trust 
the  Lord  for  all.  Sing,  O  my  soul,  sing,  for  the  Lord  has  redeemed  thee,  thou 
art  safe  ! 

April  24. — Letter  from  Mr.  Cantlow.  Baptism  on  Thursday  week.  God 
help  me  to  live  worthy  of  Him,  and  that  my  open  confession  of  Him  may  make 
me  more  diligent  !      Letter  from  Mr.   Leeding  better  than   I   had  thought.     Truly, 

0  Lord,  my  lot  is  in  pleasant  places,  and  I  have  a  goodly  heritage.      I   am  to  do  as 

1  please  about  baptism.  Never  do  I  lose  anything  by  zeal  for  the  truth,  and 
close  walk  with  my  Saviour  ;  rather,  I  gain  everything.  Lord,  Thou  art  my  life  ; 
guide  me,  and  allot  my  portion  on  this  earth  according  to  Thine  own  wisdom 
and  love  ! 

April  25. — Went  to  Burwell.  Heard  the  examination  of  the  children. 
Education  is  indeed  a  talent  from  the  Lord.  What  a  weight  of  responsibility  rests 
upon  me  !  I  trust  I  shall  one  day  employ  this  more  to  His  honour.  A  letter  from 
father  ;  in  truth,  he  is  rather  hard  upon  me.  When  I  followed  my  conscience, 
and  did  not  presumptuously  break  through  the  fences  of  the  Lord  about  His 
Church,  I  might  have  expected  this.  My  business  is  to  follow  my  Saviour,  and 
not  to  pick  out  smooth  paths  for  myself.  If  in  any  measure  I  have  walked 
worthily,  I  would  desire  to  give  all  the  glory  to  the  great  Author  of  ray  salvation. 
1  now  feel  so  bold  that,  if  the  devil  were  to  reproach  me,  I  could  answer  him. 
Lord,  I  would  ascribe  it  all  to  Thee,  that  I  have  not  yet  turned  back,  and  that 
no  enemies  have  yet  made  me  to  quail  with  terror  !  Onward  may  I  press,  with 
Heaven  itself  in  view,  trusting  my  salvation  entirely  in  the  hands  of  my  Jesus, 
my  life,   my  all   in  all  ! 

April  26. — How  my  father's  fears  lest  I  should  trust  to  baptism  stir  up  my 
soul  !  My  God,  Thou  knowest  that  I  hate  such  a  thought  !  No,  I  know  that, 
could  I  from  this  day  be  as  holy  as  God  Himsetf,  yet  I  could  not  atone  for 
past  sin.  I  have  had  a  pretty  good  day.  Fear,  Mistrust,  and  Timorous  are  yet 
at  sword's  length.  May  I  be  Valiant-for-Truth,  and  live  and  die  in  my  Master's 
glorious  war  ! 

April  27. — Fear,  begone  !  Doubts,  fall  back  !  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts  I  would  set  up  my  banner.  Come  on,  ye  demons  of  the  pit,  my  CaptJiin 
is  more  than  a  match  for  you  ;  in  His  name,  armed  with  His  weapons,  and  in 
His  strength,  I  dare  defy  you  all.  How.  glorious  'twould  be  to  die  by  the  side 
of  such   a    Leader  !      I    am   a   worm,    and   no   man,   a  vanity,  a   nothing  ;    yet  hath 


134  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

He  set  His  love  upon  me,  and  why  should  I  tremble  or  fear?  I  have  been 
round  with  my  tracts  ;  may  the  good  seed  prosper,  and  take  root  !  I  have  again 
to  lament  that  I  do  not  live  so  near  to  God  as  I  ought.  Blessed  be  the  name 
of  the  Lord  for  that  measure  of  grace  which  He  has  given  me  ;  I  can  trust 
Him  for  the  rest. 

April  28. — Mr.  S.  addressed  us  both  morning  and  evening  from  John  i.  5. 
I  could  not  fix  upon  the  subject,  so  as  to  see  the  train  of  his  thought.  Afternoon, 
how  I  did  rejoice  when  I  brought  a  man  to  chapel,  and  a  boy  to  the  Sunday-school  ! 
It  is  the  Lord  !  By  this  encouragement,  in  Thy  strength,  I  pledge  myself  to  live 
yet  more  for  Thee,  to  fight  more  constantly,  and  to  work  harder.  Hold  Thou 
me  up  !  Support  me,  for  I  can  do  nothing.  The  Lord  has  been  with  me  to-day, 
though  my  heart  has  not  been  in  such  transports  as  heretofore.  I  will  follow 
through  shade  as  well  as  sunshine.  Saviour,  dwell  with  me  ;  Thine  I  am,  help 
me  to  serve  Thee,   and   adore  Thee,   world  without  end  ! 

April  29. — Went  to  prayer-meeting.  Thought  upon  Matt.  viii.  20.  When 
I  have  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  nothing  is  a  hardship  to  me.  I  would  love 
to  lodge  with  my  Master,  and  to  endure  all  things  for  Him.  Let  not  my  first  love 
chill.  I  have  no  fire  within  to  keep  it  alight.  Thou  alone  canst  do  this,  my  Lord 
and  my  God.  I  would  anew  devote  myself  to  Thee,  and  glory  only  in  Thy  cross, 
and  in  Thy  shame. 

April  30. — Another  month  has  passed,  time  rolls  away,  I  am  nearer  home. 
This  month  has  brought  me  much  holy  enjoyment,  much  privilege  ;  how  litde  I 
have  done  when  compared  with  what  Jesus  has  done  for  me  !  What  a  slothful 
servant  am  I  of  so  good  a  Master  !  Roll  on,  ye  months  ;  bring  joy  or  sorrow 
as  ye  will,  if  God  be  with  me,  all  is  mine  !  How  much  like  Vanity  Fair  is  this 
place  (Newmarket)  !  It  is  crowded  with  visitors  ;  I  saw  two  engines  required  to 
take  them  to  London.  Lord,  give  me  strength,  like  the  engine,  to  go  straight 
on,   guided  by  Thee,   my  great  Conductor  ! 

May  I. — Another  month  now  dawns  upon  me.  I  have  lived  through  one,  I  will 
bless  the  Lord  for  it,  and  trust  Him  for  this  also.  Help  me  to  live  more  to  Thy 
glory,  and  to  honour  Thee  in  my  daily  walk  and  conversation.  The  time  of  my 
baptism  approaches.  May  I  die  to  the  world,  and  live  alone  for  Thee  !  I  would 
serve  Thee,  O  Lord  ;  but  I  feel  a  weight,  a  law  working  against  this  law,  and 
holding  me  in  partial  bondage  ;  let  Thy  grace  break  every  fetter  that  withholds 
my  heart  from  Thee  ! 

May  2. — Went  to  the  lecture,  very  few  there,  not  enough  for  a  church-meeting. 
Lord,  revive  Thy  Church  in  Newmarket  !  A  far  happier  day  than  I  deserve  , 
I   have   been   able   to   soar   a   little,    and   see   the  Canaan  which     I    desire, — though 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 35 

with  a  feeble  eye.  To-morrow  will  be  a  solemn  day.  I  have  been  enabled  more 
than  usual  to  pour  out  my  heart  in  prayer.  I  need  support  now,  and  .1  feel  that 
1  shall  have  it.  How  safe  are  all  God's  people  !  Not  one  of  the  least  of  them 
can  be  lost,  the  oath  and  promise  of  the  Lord  cannot  be  broken.  'Tis  a  sin  to 
think  that  God,  a  God  of  truth,  will  ever  desert  His  people  ;  it  is  a  shame,  a 
blasphemy.  "  Fear  thou  not,  for  I  am  with  thee  ;  be  not  dismayed,  for  I  am  thy 
God."     "  I   will  never  leave  thee,   nor  forsake  thee." 

May  3. — My  mother's  birthday.  May  the  sun  of  heaven  shine  upon  her,  and 
revive  her,  even  as  it  has  done  upon  the  natural  world  this  day  !  Started  with 
Mr.  Candow  at  eleven,  reached  Isleham  at  one  o'clock.  In  the  afternoon,  I  was 
privileged  to  follow  my  Lord,  and  to  be  buried  with  Him  in  baptism.  Blest  pool  ! 
Sweet  emblem  of  my  death  to  all  the  world  !  May  L  henceforward,  live  alone  for 
Jesus  !  Accept  my  body  and  soul  as  a  poor  sacrifice,  tie  me  unto  Thee  ;  in  Thy 
strength  I  now  devote  myself  to  Thy  service  for  ever  ;  never  may  I  shrink  from 
owning  Th)-  name  ! 

"Witness,  ye  men  and  angels  now, 
If  I  forsake  the  Lord  !  " 

I  VOW  to  glory  alone  in  Jesus  and  His  cross,  and  to  spend  my  life  in  the  extension 
of  His  cause,  in  whatsoever  way  He  pleases.  I  desire  to  be  sincere  in  this  solemn 
profession,  having  but  one  object  in  view,  and  that  to  glorify  God.  Blessing  upon 
Thy  name  that  Thou  hast  supported  me  through  the  day  ;  it  is  Thy  strength  alone 
that  could  do  this.  Thou  hast, — Thou  wilt.  Thou  hast  enabled  me  to  profess 
Thee,  help  me  now  to  honour  Thee,  and  carry  out  my  profession,  and  live  the  life  of 
Christ  on  earth  ! 

May  4. — Reached  Newmarket  at  9  ;  feel  high  in  spirit,  have  been  round  with 
n'ly  tracts  ;  help  me  to  serve  Thee,  O  my  Lord  !  There  is  a  report  in  the  church 
that  Mr.  S.  and  I  have  been  on  the  heath.  Mr.  A.  told  me  of  it  very  gruffly. 
Mr.  H.  will  not  commune  because  so  many  have  been  to  the  races.  My  Master 
knows,  I  have  no  need  to  tell  Him  I  am  innocent.  Though  I  be  cast  out  and 
rejected  of  the  disciples,  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off  one  of  His  chosen.  I  can,  in 
this  respect,  wash  my  hands  in  innocency. 

May  5. — A  third,  but  very  strong  sermon,  from  John  i.  5.  How  ought  the 
people  of  God  to  be  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  for  good  works  !  Lord,  help  me  to 
honour  Thee  !  This  afternoon,  partook  of  the  Lord's  supper  ;  a  royal  least  for  me, 
worthy  of  a  King's  son.  Mr.  S.  addressed  me  before  all  the  people.  Sunday-school 
for  the  first  time,  and  went  visiting  the  people  with  friend  M.  I  quite  like  my  new 
work.  Teachers'  prayer-meeting  after  evening  service,  from  8  to  9  ;  five  ot  us 
engaged  in  prayer.  Went  to  Mr.  B.'s  to  supper,  talked  with  young  C,  stopped  to 
family  prayer,  past   10  o'clock  !      I   have  been  too  excited  to-day,  amidst  the  busy 


136  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

whirl  of  constant  action,  to  feel  myself  so  solid  as  I  could  wish.  Rock  of  Ages, 
bind  me  to  Thyself!  I  can  feel  the  bad  law  working  yet.  All  is  of  God,  He  will 
perform  His  promise. 

"  His  honour  is  engaged  to  save 
The  meanest  of  His  sheep." 

May  6. — Went  to  prayer-meeting.  Missionary  meeting  in  the  afternoon,  upon 
the  glory  of  Christ's  kingdom.  "  He  must  reign."  Saviour,  come  and  extend 
Thy  kingdom  over  all  the  world,  sway  Thy  sceptre  over  all  hearts  1  Make  me 
Thy  temple,  and  honour  me  by  making  me  an  instrument  of  good  in  Thy  hands  ! 
Lord,  save  me  from  pride  and  from  sloth,  my  two  great  enemies  ;  keep  me,  oh, 
keep  and  preserve  me  !  I  am  an  erring  sheep.  It  is  in  Thy  power  that  I 
trust,  upon  Thy  strength  I  rely  ;  I  am  less  than  nothing,  hold  me  by  Thine  own 
right  hand  ! 

May  7. — I  have  again  to  confess  my  lukewarmness  ;  I  fear  I  am  losing  my  first 
love.  Coldness  and  deadness  seem  to  be  natural  to  me  ;  I  have  no  inward  warmth, 
it  all  comes  from  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  by  rich,  free,  and  sovereign  grace. 
What  a  mercy  that  I  have  not  been  altogether  frozen  to  death,  and  left  to  perish 
in  my  sinful  distance  from  God  !  Lord,  help  me  to  follow  Thee,  and  may  Thy 
'right  hand  uphold  me  !  Strength,  O  Lord,  I  need  !  I  would  not  fear,  but  trust 
in  Thine  omnipotence. 

May  8.— Teachers'  business  meeting.  Too  much  joking  and  levity  to  agree 
with  my  notions  of  what  a  Sunday-school  teacher  should  be.  Lord,  keep  me 
from  the  evil  of  the  world,  let  me  not  be  led  away  ;  but  if  these  are  Thy  people, 
help  me  to  serve  Thee  better  than  they,  and  to  be  more  like  my  Master  !  O  my 
God,  keep  me  ever  near  to  Thee,  help  me  to  live  more  to  Thy  glory,  and  to 
honour  Thee  more  than  I  have  hitherto  done,  to  live  alone  for  Thee,  and  to 
spend  and  be  spent  in  Thy  service  !      Preserve,  perfect,  keep,  and  bless  me  ! 

"  Keep  me,  oh,  keep  me,  King  of  kings, 
Beneatli  Thine  own  almighty  wings!" 

May  9. — Prayer-meeting.  Mr.  S.  has  resigned.  Well,  we  have  a  better 
Pastor,  who  cannot,  who  will  not  leave  us.  Truly,  I  have  sunk  very  low  ;  my 
lamp  seems  going  out  in  obscurity.  Lord,  fan  it,  keep  it  burning  yet  !  I  know 
that  I  can  never  perish  ;  yet  be  pleased,  my  God,  to  visit  me  again,  to  revive 
and  uphold  me,  so  that  I  may  honour  Thee  more  ;  make  me  to  be  an  eminent 
servant  of  Thine,  and  to  be  blessed  with  the  power  to  serve  Thee,  like  Thy  great 
servant  Paul ! 

AJay  10. — Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord,  He  has  not  left  His  servant,  or 
turned  away  from  His  chosen  !  Though  I  have  often  sinned,  and  neglected  the 
sweet  privilege  of  prayer,  yet  He  hath  not  deserted  me.      Had  a  letter  from  Mr.  L 


c.    ir.    sturgeon's   autobiography.  137 

I  hope  that  the  Lord  will  bless  him,  and  give  him  many  souls  as  seals  for  his 
hire.  I  wonder  how  they  are  at  home.  Time  flies  away.  Seasons  come  and  go. 
Lord,  grant  me  Thy  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  me  to  improve  each  moment  !  I  am 
"  bought  with  a  price." 

May  II. — Went  round  my  district.  I  trust  the  Lord  is  moving  upon  the 
face  of  this  people.  It  is  Thy  work,  O  Lord  ;  accomplish  it  !  I  feel  encouraged 
to  go  on  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  still  to  spend  my  spare  time  in  His  service. 
Prosper  Thou  the  work  of  my  hands  I  My  own  soul  is  encouraged,  my  life  is 
revived,  and  I  hope  soon  to  enjoy  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 

May  12. — One  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man, — happy  day  when  Sabbath 
shall  never  end  !  Went  to  Sunday-school  at  9,  stayed  till  service  at  10.30,  out  at 
12.15  ;  Sunday-school  at  1.45,  service  3  till  4,  visiting  till  5.  The  day  has  thus  been 
closely  occupied.  The  morning's  discourse  was  upon  i  Corinthians  iv.  7.  Truly,  I 
have  nothing  which  I  have  not  received  ;  I  can  boast  of  no  inherent  riohteousness. 
Had  the  Lord  not  chosen  me,  I  should  not  have  chosen  Him.  Grace  !  Grace  ! 
Grace  !  'Tis  all  of  grace.  I  can  do  nothing,  I  am  less  than  nothing  ;  yet  what 
a  difference, — once  a  slave  of  hell,  now  the  son  of  the  God  of  Heaven  !  Help 
me  to  walk  worthy  of  my  lofty  and  e.xalted  vocation  !  Afternoon,  Psalm  xlviii.  14, 
"  This  God  is  my  God  for  ever  and  ever  ;  He  will  be  my  Guide  even  unto  death.' 
I  can  wish  for  no  better  Guide,  or  more  lasting  Friend  ;  He  shall  lead  me  in 
His  own   way. 

Lord,  permit  me  not  to  choose  the  road,  allow  me  not  to  wander  into 
By-path  meadow  ;  rather  carry  me  straight  to  glory  !  Evening,  Acts  .wii.  1 1.  The 
Word  of  God  is  my  chart.  Lord,  give  me  more  of  Berean  nobility  ;  grant  me 
Thy  grace  to  search  the  Scriptures,  and  to  become  wise  unto  life  eternal  !  Thine 
is  the  gift,  I  cannot  do  it  without  Thee.  Again  would  I  give  myself  anew  to 
Thee  ;  bind  Thou  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  to  the  horns  of  Thine  altar !  Let 
me  not  go  away  from  Thee  ;  hold  me  firmly  in  Thy  gracious  arms  !  Let  Thine 
omnipotence  be  my  protection,  Thy  wisdom  my  direction.  Thy  grace  my  salvation. 
"  Lord,  I  believe  ;   help  Thou  mine  unbelief!  " 

May  13. — A  day  of  great,  unmerited  mercy.  Happiness  cannot  e.vist  here  with- 
out some  cloy.  How  sweet  the  joys  of  religion,  of  communion  with  God  !  Letter 
from  home.  All  well.  I  thank  Thee,  Father,  for  such  o-ood  tidino-s  ;  bless  me,  even 
me  also,  O  my  Father  !  I  would  devote  myself  to  Thee  ;  it  is  my  highest  privilege 
to  be  able  to  give  myself  to  Thee.  Thy  service  is  the  greatest  pleasure,  the  most 
untiring  delight ;  I  would,  more  than  ever,  wear  Thy  livery,  be  known  as  Thy 
servant,  and  become  one  of  Thy  peculiar  people. 

May  14. — In  the  evening,  enjoyed  an  ecstasy  of  delight.  I  seemed  transported, 
and  able  to  fly  beyond  the  bounds  of  this  poor  atom  of  an  earth.     Spiritual  realities 


13?  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

were  present  to  view,  while  the  flesh,  like  Abraham's  servant,  tarried  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountain.     How  much  do  I  owe  ;  how  little  good  do  I  deserve,  yea,  none  at  all ! 

"  Let  Thy  grace,  Lord,  like  a  fetter, 

Bind  my  wandering  heart  to  Thee.!'' 

Blessed  be  Thy  name  for  evermore  !  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul  ;  follow  hard  after 
Him,  love  and  serve  Him  ! 

May  15. — How  feeble  I  am  !  I  am  not  able  to  keep  myself  near  to  God.  I  am 
compelled  to  acknowledge  my  own  deadness.  I  confess  how  greatly  I  have  strayed 
from  Thee,  Thou  great  Fountain  of  living  waters  ;  but, — 

"Since  I've  not  forgot  Thy  law, 
Restore  Thy  wandering  sheep." 

Revive  me  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  and  make  Thy  face  to  shine  upon  me  !  How 
much  do  I  deserve  eternal  damnation  !  But  salvation  is  not  of  desert,  but  of  free 
grace.  This  is  the  plank  whereon  I  hope  to  float  to  glory,  when  this  world  shall  be 
a  wreck,  and  perish  in  the  vast  abyss. 

May  16. — Went  to  chapel.  Sermon  on  Psalm  x.xiii.  3.  How  much  do  I  need 
this  restoration  !  If  the  Lord  does  not  do  it,  1  cannot.  "  Turn  out  Thine  enemy  and 
mine."  I  would  be  passive,  submitting  to  Thy  sovereign  will  ;  Thou  wilt  do  what  is 
right.  Lord,  keep  me  ;  I  will  wait  Thy  time  of  revival  ;  teach  me  both  to  work  and 
wait,  expecting  and  hoping  that  Thou  wilt  soon  come,  and  restore  unto  me  the  joy 
of  Thy  salvation  !  I  am  in  a  low  condition,  yet  I  am  eternally  safe.  He  will 
lead  me. 

May  \-j. — It  is  now  a  fortnight  since  my  baptism.  How  solemnly  have  I 
devoted  myselt  to  Thee  !  I  would  now  repeat  my  vows,  and  again  solemnly  devote 
myself  to  Thee. 

"Witness,  ye  men  and  ansels  now, 
If  I  forsake  the  Lord. ' 

In  His  strength  I  can  do  all  things.  Thou  hast  sworn  to  save,  and  death  and  hell 
cannot  thwart  Thine  everlasting  purpose.  Hold  me  !  Thou  hasf  blessed  me, 
Thou  alone  canst  do  it.  If  Thou  dost  not  save,  I  must  perish.  Thou  wilt  not  leave 
me,  Thou  hast  showed  me  a  portion  of  the  glory  of  Thy  face. 

May  18. — Station  District.  When  I  first  set  out,  I  was  all  but  dumb  concern- 
ing spiritual  things.  Soon  I  felt  the  working  of  the  Lord  in  some  degree.  Blessed 
be  His  holy  name  for  ever  and  ever,  and  let  all  the  redeemed  say.  Amen  !  His  is 
the  power.  Beloved,  Thine  is  enduring  beauty  !  Thou  art  glorious  to  behold.  Give 
me  more  of  the  entrancing  visions  of  Thy  face,  the  looks  of  Thy  love,  and  more 
constant  communion  with  Thee  !  Lord,  move  Thou  upon  the  earth,  and  bring  in 
Thine  elect  from  among  the  condemned  sinners  of  the  world  ! 

May  19. — Went  to   the   Sunday-school.      Mr.   S.   preached,   this  morning,  from 


C.     11.     SPURGEOX'S     AUTODIOGRArilV.  1 39 

2  Cor.  iii.  6 — 8.  How  glorious  is  the  ministration  of  lift,  how  beautiful  the  tables 
of  stone,  when  enclosed  in  the  blessed  ark  of  the  covenant !  Afternoon,  Ezek. 
xxxvi.  2/.  Evening,  "What  is  truth?"  As  to  interest,  the  sermons  to-day  have 
been  a  failure.  Addressed  the  children  upon  Prayer.  Went  visiting  with  Mr.  M.,  six 
fresh  children.  Evening  at  Mr.  B.'s.  Engaged  in  prayer  at  his  family  altar.  To- 
day has  been  a  sunny  day  with  me.  The  Lord  has  visited  me  from  on  high. 
Rejoice,  O  my  soul,  leap  for  joy,  renew  thy  strength  ;  run,  run,  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  !  He  is  with  me.  He  has  been  with  me.  Weakness  He  has  made  strength  ! 
Mighty  to  save.  Thou  shalt  have  all  my  noblest  songs  !  Let  Thy  grace  constrain  me 
to  love  Thee,  and  live  for  Thee  !  I  am  buried  with  my  Lord  and  Saviour  ;  may  I 
be  crucified  to  the  world,  and  die  daily  !  How  sure  is  it  that  Thy  yoke  is  easy,  and 
Thy  burden  is  light  !      I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  Jesus. 

May  20. — Went  to  the  prayer-meeting,  and  engaged  in  prayer.  How 
inexhaustible  is  the  source  from  whence  my  life  proceeds  !  How  boundless  the 
store  from  whence  my  provision  comes  !  I  must  be  saved,  for  Omnipotence  has 
undertaken  it.  Another  glorious  day,  another  visit  of  His  reviving  grace,  blessed  be 
the  name  of  the  Lord  !  The  service  of  the  Lord  were  a  happy  service,  even  if  such 
enjoyment  as  this  was  the  only  reward.  How  sweet  are  the  visits  of  His  grace, 
sweeter  than  honey  and  the  honey-comb  I 

May  2  1. — Glorious  day,  happy  were  all  like  this  !  Oh,  the  safety  of  a  Christian, 
as  sure,  but  not  so  blest,  as  any  saint  in  Heaven  !  Lord,  how  can  I  leave  Thee  .■* 
To  whom,  or  whither  should  I  go  ?  Thou  centre  of  my  love,  all  glorious  names  in 
one.  Thou  brightest,  sweetest,  fairest  One,  that  eyes  have  seen  or  angels  known,  I 
trust  to  Thee  for  salvation  ;  without  Thee,  I  can  do  nothing.  I  am  utter  weakness, 
Thou  must  do  it  all,  or  I  shall  perish  !  Love  of  loves,  all  love  excelling,  fix  my 
wandering  heart  on  Thee  ! 

May  22. — My  weakness  is  my  greatest  strength,  for  then  I  trust  alone  on  Jesus, 
when  I  feel  my  own  dependence.  I  am  an  earthen  vessel,  I  have  been  among  the 
pots  of  the  unregenerate  ;  make  me  now  a  vessel  for  Thy  use  !  Thy  blood  is  my 
trust,  I  am  washed  ;  who  shall  now  blacken  me  so  as  not  to  leave  me  spotless  at  the 
last  ?  Joy,  joy  unspeakable,  rapture  divine,  I  fly  beyond  the  bounds  of  earth,  my 
Husband  folds  me  in  His  arms,  I  am  His,  and  He  is  mine,  my  glorious  Prince, 
Redeemer,  Love  ! 

May  23. — Went  to  chapel,  very  few  there.  "  He  restoreth  my  soul."  The 
same  subject  again  !  How  true  is  this,  how  has  He  revived  me  !  Short,  but 
glorious,  are  the  days  of  my  refreshing, — worthy  of  years  of  sorrow  and  distress.  O 
my  Beloved,  did  my  way  lie  over  the  embers  of  hell  all  my  life,  didst  Thou  but  show 
Thyself  I  would  rush  through  the  fire  to  meet  Thee  !  I  have  not  been  quite  sc 
ecstatic  as  for  some  days   past.      I   am  the   Lord's   for  ever,  how  much   do  I  owe  to 


140  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRArHY 

Him!  My  Advocate,  Brother,  Husband,  let  not  my  first  love  chill  and  grow  cold! 
Keep  me  and  preserve  in  Thy  hands  ! 

May  24. — A  day  of  undeserved  joy.  I  am  not  altogether  banished  from  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  Though  He  slay  me,  I  cannot  but  trust  Him,  since  I  have 
had  such  tokens  of  His  love.  Lord,  when  in  darkness  and  distress,  when  my  head 
is  bowed  down,  then  return  unto  Thy  servant  to  encourage  and  support  him  !  For 
ever,  oh,  for  ever,  lashed  to  the  Ark,  and  safe  from  the  Hoods,  I  shall  get  at  last 
upon  the  terra  firiua  of  glory  I  Oh,  let  me  not  dishonour  Thee  !  Never  may  I 
bring  a  disgrace  upon  the  cause  of  Christ !  Keep  me,  and  I  shall  be  infinitely  safe, 
and  rest  securely. 

Alay  25. — Free  grace,  sovereign  love,  eternal  security  are  my  safeguards  ;  what 
shall  keep  me  from  consecrating  all  to  Thee,  even  to  the  last  drop  of  my  blood  i* 
Went  to  my  district  with  tracts,  a  woman  gave  me  24  new  ones.  I  fear  IMr.  T.  is 
doing  much  harm  by  telling  the  people  that  the  Lord's  supper  will  save  them. 
Work,  Lord,  work  I  Thou  hast  encouraged  me  ;  may  I  not  be  disappointed ! 
"  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul."  The  Covenant  is  my  trust,  the  agreement  signed 
between  my  Elder  Brother  and  the  Almighty  standeth  sure.  "  None  shall  pluck 
them  out  of  My  hand." 

May  26. — Went  round  for  the  children.  Sunday-school  in  the  morning.  Mr. 
S.  preached  from,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me."  Stayed  in  the  chapel  the 
dinner-time,  had  a  sweet  season  of  prayer  and  communion  with  God.  Afternoon, 
Jacob's  consecration  of  himself  at  Bethel.  I  would  give  myself  in  the  same  manner 
to  Thee,  my  best-loved  King.  Evening  subject,  Paul's  great  labours.  Oh,  could  I 
emulate  such  a  man,  I  should  be  the  greatest  on  this  earth  ! 

May  27. — Life  of  my  soul,  forgive  me  when  I  am  so  blind  as  to  look  upon  an 
earthly  object,  and  forget  Thine  own  Divine  beauties  !  Oh,  for  a  love  as  strong  as 
death,  fierce  as  hell,  and  lasting  as  eternity  ! 

May  28. — Thou  hast  hedged  m^  about  with  thorns  so  that  I  cannot  get  out  ; 
this  is  my  comfort.  What  name  can  I  devise  for  Thee,  O  Beloved,  equal  to  Thy 
desert .-'  All  beauties  joined  in  one  perfection,  "  Thou  art  all  fair,  my  Love,  there  is 
no  spot  in  Thee."  Thou  didst  die  for  me,  and  shall  not  I  live  for  Thee?  What  a 
love  is  that  of  Jesus  to  me,  surpassing  knowledge  !  I  can  do  nothing  in  return,  but 
give  Thee  my  worthless  self  What  !  shall  I  dare  to  doubt  Thy  love  ?  Can  I  con- 
ceive that  Thou  wilt  leave  me  .'*  Yes,  I  may  sin  so  as  to  distrust  Thee  ;  but  Thou 
wilt  never  let  me  go.  No  thief  can  steal  away  Thy  precious  purchase  ;  never,  never, 
can  I  be  lost.  Redeemed  and  purchased  ;  then,  how  can  I  be  snatched  away  1 
How  is  my  soul  a  battlefield  between  the  corruptions  of  nature  and  the  principle  of 
grace  !  They  tear  up  the  earth  of  my  soul  with  the  trampling  of  their  armies  ;  but  I 
cannot  be  destroyed. 


C.      II.      SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAI'IIY.  I4I 

May  29. — To  the  Lord  belongeth  strength,  He  has  given  me  my  portion.  He 
putteth  His  treasure  in  earthen  vessels.  How  happy  am  I  to  be  one  of  His  chosen, 
His  elect,  in  whom  His  soul  delighteth  !  But  I  do  not  live  up  to  my  Heavenly 
calling  ;  I  could  not  at  all  without  the  Lord,  He  has  helped, — He  will  help, — this  is 
my  comfort.  His  everlasting  promises  are  my  rest,  my  bread,  my  support.  Make 
me  Thy  faithful  servant,  O  my  God  ;  may  I  honour  Thee  in  my  day  and  generation, 
and  be  consecrated  for  ever  to  Thy  service  ! 

May  30. — The  stormy  commotion  has  somewhat  passed  away  ;  the  sun  is  still 
shining,  though  a  cloud  may  pass  between.  I  desire  more  constant  communion  with 
God.  Went  to  church-meeting,  had  some  nice  cheering  conversation  with  old  Mrs.  A. 
Two  candidates  proposed  ;  we  shall  have  no  Ordinance  next  Sunday.  The  Lord 
can  and  will  feed  us  without  it.  He  has  kept  me,  and  He  will.  The  strife  in  my 
soul  is  now  hushed,  peace  returns  as  a  river  upon  the  dry  places. 

May  31. — Weakness  am  I  in  every  point,  I  cannot  keep  myself  in  the  least. 
Forgive  me  that  I  have  tried  it  !  1  would  now  come,  naked,  stript,  exhausted,  dead. 
I  would  cry,  "  Lash  me  tighter,  firmer,  to  Thy  free-grace  raft  of  life  !  "  Mercy  is  all  I 
ask  for, — continued  mercy.  Those  whom  He  once  loves.  He  loves  to  the  end  ;  He 
has  once  loved  me,  I  am  now  secure.  May  the  live  coal  within  be  shown  to  the 
world  by  the  burning  flames  of  love  to  Thee  I  May  that  love  burn  up  the  stubble 
and  sin  I 

June  I.— A  new  month  ;  time  soon  glides  away.  How  much  more  ought  I  to 
do  this  month  than  last !  Desire  of  my  heart,  keep  me  nearer  to  Thy  bosom 
this  month  !  Went  to  South  District.  Talked  with  a  woman  who  says  there  are 
contradictions  in  the  Bible.  Some  good  may  be  doing.  '  He  that  can  work,  will 
work  ;  and  who  shall  hinder  Him  ?  In  the  Lord's  time  it  shall  be  accomplished  ;  His 
time  is  best.  Arise,  O  Sun  of  righteousness,  why  should  this  people  lie  in 
darkness  ? 

June  2. — Heard  Mr.  J.  the  first  part  of  the  day.  Num.  xxi.  4.  Interesting, 
but  rather  too  weak.  Afternoon,  Rev.  xix.  12.  Many  crowns  indeed  does  my  Lord 
deserve  ;  crowns  of  glory  shall  be  around  His  sacred,  blessed  head.  Evening, 
I  John  V.  4.  Strong  meat  ;  the  Lord  has  sent  the  manna  down  this  evening. 
"  Overcometh  the  world  !  "  Glorious  victory,  amazing  conquest,  triumph  Divine  ; 
and  shall  I,  with  such  a  promise,  dare  to  doubt  the  power  of  God  to  keep,  and  guide, 
and  preserve  me .'' 

Had  a  large  class  at  Sunday-school,  gave  an  address  upon  Death.  —  the 
dreadful  sword  hanging  by  a  single  hair  above  the  head  of  the  ungodly.  Had  tea 
at  Mr.  Bs.',  and  combated  with  him  for  what  I  consider  "  the  form  of  sound 
words."      Prayer-meeting  after  evening  service.      Seven  present,  six  of  us  engaged  in 


142 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


prayer.  Bless  the  Sunday-school,  great  King  !  Honour  thy  Master,  O  my  soul  ; 
live  for  Him,  live  in  Him  !  I  am  a  prince  ;  ought  I  not  to  be  a  good  soldier,  and 
ficrht  for  my  Lord  ?  Give  mc,  lend  me  a  sword,  O  God,  and  strength  to  wield  it  ;  let 
my  foes  and  Thine  be  as  furious  as  lions,  Thy  sword  shall  destroy  them  ! 

June  3. — Prayer-meeting,  engaged  in  prayer.  Lord,  when  shall  Thy  set  time  to 
favour  Zion  come?  When  shall  Thine  elect  be  gathered  in?  "Who  shall  separate 
us  from  the  love  of  Christ  ?  "  For  ever,  yes,  for  ever,  safe.  Rejoice,  rejoice,  O  my 
soul,  and  let  thy  joy  constrain  thee  to  work  more  earnestly  and  more  zealously  for 
Him  I  Redeemed  and  purchased,  I  am  not  my  own.  Letter  from  grandfather. 
How  g-lad  I  am  he  does  not  differ  ! 

June  4. — I  have  had  evidence  this  day  of  the  changeableness  of  all  mortal 
things.  How  little  does  it  matter  to  me,  so  that  my  eternal  inheritance  is  secure  ! 
Lord,  help  me  now  to  mount  my  watch-tower  against  pride  and  sloth  !  Keep  me 
always  upon  the  look-out,  lest  an  enemy  should  come  unawares  ;  forgive  me,  if  I 
have  ever  had  high  thoughts  of  myself !  Thou  makest  me  to  feel  my  weakness  in 
every  part  ;  may  I  now  trust  and  rely  upon  the  arm  of  Omnipotence,  the  mercies  of 
the  Lord  !     Give  strength.  Lord,  strength  ! 

Jtme  5. — Awake,  my  soul,  record  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  ! 

"  He  justly  claims  a  song  from  me. 
His  lovingkindness,  O  how  free!" 

Mercy,  I  breathe  Another's  air,  I  am  a  tenant  of  this  earth  at  my  Master's  will  ; 
sovereign  grace  has  kept  me  hitherto,  upon  sovereign  grace  I  now  rely.  What 
sweet  moments  have  I  had  in  answer  to  prayer  ;  blessed  be  the  Lord  for  His  rich 
mercy  thus  bestowed  upon  me  !  I  would  now  live  in  close  communion  with  my 
King,  and  feast  upon  the  riches  of  His  love. 

June  6. — Prayer-meeting.  Mr.  S.  spoke  to  us  upon  the  Babylonian  Captivity. 
Teachers'  meeting  after  the  service.  What  a  want  of  spirituality  and  vital  godliness  ! 
O  Lord,  give  me  life ;  increase  the  vital  spark,  fan  it  to  a  flame  !  I  can  never 
perish,  yet  would  I  keep  upon  my  watch-tower,  for  my  enemies  are  many,  and  they 
hate  me  with  cruel  hatred.  Help  me  to  hate  sin,  and  pride  and  sloth  !  I  live 
only  as  Thou  givest  me  life.  I  have  not  one  atom  of  life  of  my  own,  I  must  perish 
if  Thou  desert  me  for  one  moment. 

June  7. — How  manifold  are  Thy  mercies  toward  me,  O  Lord  !  When  I  think 
of  the  orreat  salvation  v;hich  has  been  worked  out  for  me,  and  remember  that  Heaven 
is  secure,  it  seems  too  good  to  be  true.  Yet  do  I  now  believe  Thy  promise  ;  may  I 
now  be  entirely  Thine,  Thy  glory  my  only  aim  !  Could  I  but  be  like  Paul,  how 
honoured  should  I  be  !  Happy  is  the  man  whom  Thou  teachest,  O  Lord  !  I  am 
happy  ;  how  can  I  be  otherwise,  since  my  Beloved  has  looked  upon  me,  and  I  have 
seen  His  glorious  face? 


C.     II.     SrURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I43 

June  8. — Could  not  burn  with  zeal  as  oft  I  have  clone.  When,  Lord,  wilt  Thou 
arise,  and  let  Thy  power  be  known  and  felt?  How  sweet  to  flap  my  wings  to 
Heaven,  with  others  following  me  ;  then  lay  my  crown  beneath  His  feet,  and  call 
Him  Lord  of  all  !  He  is  deserving  of  all  honour  and  praise  ;  dominion  and  j)()wer 
are  His  due,  and  He  shall  have  them.  ]\Lany  honours  on  His  ever-blessed  head! 
Worthy  is  the  Lamb  who  has  died  for  me.     All  glorious  is  my  Beloved. 

Jimc  9. — Mr.  S.  preached.  Acts  xvi.  19.  Did  not  hear  to  profit.  Afternoon, 
"  Who  is  this  that  cometh  up  from  the  wilderness,  leaning  upon  her  Beloved  ?  "  Did 
not  hear  enough  about  the  Beloved.  Evening,  "  Prepare  to  meet  Thy  God."  Oh, 
what  a  mercy  to  be  prepared  ! 

"So  whene'er  the  signal's  given, 
Us  from  earth  to  call  away, 
Borne  on  angels'  wings  to  Heaven, 
Glad  the  snmmons  to  obey, 

We  shall  surely 
Reign  with  Christ  in  endless  day!" 

Felt  rather  hurt  by  Mr.  C,  he  does  not  act  quite  rightly  ;  but  I  hereby  forgive  him. 
I  desire  to  look  alone  to  Jesus,  and  regard  His  glory  only.  I  am  too  proud,  I  am 
weak  in  every  point ;  keep  me,  for  I  have  no  strength  !  I  would  look  up  to  Thee, — - 
the  Strong, — for  strength.      I  am  Thine,  keep  me  ! 

June  10. — Letter  from  dear  mother.  Mr.  S.  made  her  his  te.xt  at  the  prayer- 
meeting.  Engaged  in  prayer.  Have  not  been  able  to  be  much  in  private  prayer 
to-day.  The  joy  of  my  Lord,  however,  is  not  gone.  I  can  yet  trust  in  the  God  of 
my  salvation.  If  I  ever  forget  Thee,  let  my  right  hand  forget  her  fellow.  What! 
has  He  done  so  much  for  me,  and  shall  I  ever  leave  Him  .''     No, — 

"  While  a  breath,  a  pulse  remains, 
/  -loill  remember   Thee  !  "  t 

June  II. — Prayer  seems  like  labour  to  me,  the  chariot  wheels  drag  heavily  ;  yet 
they  are  not  taken  off.  I  will  still  rely  upon  almighty  strength  ;  and,  helpless,  throw 
myself  into  the  arms  of  my  Redeemer.  "  Leave,  ah,  leave  me  not  alone  I  "  "I  will 
never  leave  Thee."  I  shall  yet  walk  the  golden  street  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  I 
shall  yet  see  His  beauteous  face.  He  loved  me  before  the  foundations  of  the  earth, 
before  I  was  created  or  called  by  grace. 

J2tne  12. — The  Lord  is  my  Helper,  He  shall  plead  my  cause.  I  v/ould  desire 
to  record  the  gratitude  I  feel  for  the  sparing  mercies  of  the  Lord,  out  especially  tor 
His  great  grace  in  electing  me,  by  the  sovereign  councils  of  His  love,  to  be  one  of 
His  redeemed  ones.  What  !  shall  I  not  live  for  Him,  shall  I  keep  back  a  single 
particle  of  my  heart,  and  of  myself  from  my  charming  Redeemer,  my  King. 
Husband,  Brother,  Friend.'*  No;  oh,  give  me  strength  to  say,  "I  will  never 
dishonour  Thee  '  ,' 


144  ^-    ^-    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

/line  13. — Dangers  are  around  me,  Satan  stands  in  the  way;  I  have  no 
hope  but  in  the  Lord,  no  safety  but  in  keeping  straight  on  in  the  Heavenly 
road.  In  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength,  and  inexhaustible  mines  of 
eternal  love  are  mine  ;  the  Lord  reserves  them  for  His  chosen  people.  Went 
to  prayer-meeting.  Tried  to  address  my  Lord  in  prayer.  Come,  my  Beloved, 
Thou  art  ever  mine  ;  leave  me  not,  O  do  not  forsake  me,  my  King,  my  Saviour ! 
Saved  everlastingly  ! 

/tme  14. — Examination.  Mr.  M.  gave  me  los.  for  the  Missionary  Society.  I 
would  thank  the  Lord  for  thus  opening  his  hand  to  do  good.  Gave  a  Missionary- 
speech.  Lord,  keep  Thy  servant  low  and  humble  at  Thy  feet!  How  prone  am  I 
to  pride  and  vain-glory  !  Keep  me  always  mindful  that  I  have  nothing  which  I 
have  not  received  ;  'tis  grace,  free,  sovereign  grace  that  has  made  me  to  differ.  Why 
should  I  be  chosen  an  elect  vessel  ?  Not  that  I  deserve  it,  I  am  sure  ;  but  it  is 
rich  love. 

/uue  15. — Went  round  my  S.  District,  and  divided  my  stock  amongst  the 
people,  and  now.  Lord,  I  desire  to  commend  them  to  Thy  keeping  ;  look  upon  them 
with  pity,  let  them  not  be  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd  !  Let  Thy  work  go  on  and 
prosper  among  this  people  !  I  can  do  nothing  ;  how  is  it  that  I  have  lived  so  long 
in  my  spiritual  life  ?  It  is  by  sovereign  power  I  stand,  by  Omnipotence  I  shall  be 
supported.  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  I  trust  in  Him  ;  He  will  perfect  His 
own  work. 

June  16. — Old  Mr.  W.  preached  ;  could  not  hear  him,  he  spoke  so  low.  Was 
set  upon  by  him  and  Mr.  S.  Lord,  help  me  to  take  firm  hold  of  the  truth,  and 
never  yield  an  inch  !  Addressed  the  Sunday-school  children.  Oh,  may  I  be  kept 
humble  !  Pride  dwells  in  my  heart.  I  am  now  to  leave  Newmarket  ;  perhaps,  for 
ever.  What  a  scene  of  changes  is  this  world  !  How  blest  to  have  a  house  above 
the  skies,  eternal  in  the  Heavens  ! 

June  17. — Left  Newmarket  at  6.  Reached  Stambourne  about  12.  Grandfather 
quite  well.  I  have  had  journeying  mercies  to-day.  This  life  is  a  journey  ;  I  know 
that  I  shall  one  day  reach  the  blessed  end,  in  bliss,  unfading  bliss.  What  can  I 
write  equal  to  the  theme  of  sovereign  grace?  It  is  a  miracle,  a  perfect  miracle,  that 
God  should  so  love  man  as  to  die  for  him,  and  to  choose  him  before  the  foundation 

of  the  world. 

Jtme  19. — My  birthday.  Sixteen  years  have  I  lived  upon  this  earth,  and  yet  I 
am  only — scarcely  six  months  old  !  I  am  very  young  in  grace.  Yet  how  much 
time  have  I  wasted,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  without  life,  without  God,  in  the 
world  !  What  a  mercy  that  I  did  not  perish  in  my  sin  !  How  glorious  is  my 
calling,  how  exalted  my  election,  born  of  the  Lord, — regenerate  !  Help  me  more 
than  ever  to  walk  woithily,  as  becomes  a  saint ! 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  1 45 

June  20. — Truly  my  lot  is  cast  in  pleasant  places,  and  I  have  a  goodly  heritage. 

I    can    love    religion    now    in    the   sunshine  ;   may    I    love    it   and    prize    it   under   all 

circumstances  ! 

*  *  *  * 

(The  continuous  Diary  thus  abruptly  closes,  giving  only  the  brief  intimation 
that  the  dear  writer  goes  immediately  to  Cambridge,  as  usher  in  Mr.  Leeding's 
school.  There  remain  but  three  or  tour  fragmentary  entries  during  the  ensuing 
months, — or  years, — but  these  serve  to  show  the  young  soldier  still  busy  at  his  drill, 
loyal  to  his  Lord's  colours,  and  already  bravely  fighting  that  "  good  fight  of 
faith,"  which  ceased  not  till  his  Captain  called  him  from  the  battlefield,  to  receive  the 
victor's  reward  in  glory.  As  every  word  of  his  is  precious  in  these  days,  I  transcribe 
the  four  succeeding  paragraphs,  though  unable  to  ascertain  the  dates  when  they 
were  written. — S.  S.) 

Storms  have  raged  around  me  ;  yet,  blessed  be  my  Father's  name,  I  have  now 
some  peace  !  "  But  more  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread,  than  tempests  breaking 
overhead."  Let  me  not  be  left  even  here  ;  let  Thy  grace  still  flow  into  my  heart ! 
O  Lord,  my  King,  reign  in  me,  and  be  glorified  by  me  !  May  it  please  Thee  to 
dwell  in  such  a  bramble-bush  as  I  am,  so  that,  though  burning,  I  may  not  be 
consumed  !  Ordered  in  all  things  and  sure  is  the  everlasting  covenant  of  redeeming 
love.  For  ever  settled  and  eternally  complete  in  Him  is  my  salvation.  May  it  be 
completed  in  myself,  and  may  I  grow  up  to  be  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  a  perfect  man, 
prepared  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  !  Oh,  that  my  spirituality  may  be 
revived  !  My  matchless  Immanuel,  let  me  see  once  more  Thy  face  in  the  temple  of 
my  heart !  May  I  know  the  joy,  and  have  the  faith  of  God's  elect  ;  may  I  rejoice  in 
Iree  and  sovereign  grace,  saving  me  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin  !  Grace  is  a 
glorious  theme,  above  the  loftiest  flights  of  the  most  soaring  angel,  or  the  most 
exalted  conceptions  of  one  of  the  joint-heirs  with  Jesus.  All  power  is  God's,  and 
all  is  engaged  to  protect  and  preserve  me.  Let  me  have  my  daily  grace,  peace  and 
comfort,  zeal  and  love,  give  me  some  work,  and  give  me  strength  to  do  it  to  Thy 
glory  I 

Heard  Mr.  C,  of  Bumpstead.  Morning,  "What  doest  thou  here,  -Elijah  ? " 
Afternoon,  "  I  am  the  door."  Went  to  the  prayer-meeting  before  and  after  chapel, 
engaged  in  prayer,  read  the  hymns,  and  addressed  the  children.  What  an  honour  it 
is  to  be  but  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  !  Oh,  to  be  humble,  and  to  be 
always  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  !  Then  should  I  grow  more  in  grace,  and  mcrease  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord.  The  Lord  is  able  to  keep  me  from  falling,  and  He  will,  for 
He  has  promised  never  to  leave  one  of  His  called  children. 

Kr 


146  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Fair  Day. — Spoke  to  Mr.  R.  How  can  a  child  of  God  go  there  ?  "  Vanity  of 
vanities,  all  is  vanity."  Forgive  him,  Lord,  for  so  forgetting  his  high  calling  !  I, 
too,  should  be  there,  but  for  the  grace  of  God.  I  have  the  seeds  of  all  evil  in  my 
own  heart  ;  pride  is  yet  my  darling  sin,  I  cannot  shake  it  off.  Awake,  O  my  Lord, 
against  the  mighty,  for  I  shall  die  by  his  hand  if  Thou  do  not  help  me,  and  lead  me 
on  to  triumph  !  Leave  me,  ye  vain  thoughts  !  I  have  nothing  but  what  I  have 
received  ;  it  is  the  Lord's  goodness  that  I  even  have  my  reason. 

How  could  I  live  without  prayer  when  troubles  come  ?  How  blessed  to  carry 
them  to  the  throne  I  I  will  now  say  that  the  Lord  heareth  prayer,  for  He  hath 
removed  from  me  that  which  I  feared.  But,  oh  !  could  I  feel  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  as  in  days  gone  by,  how  joyful  !  Could  I  enjoy  His  face,  and  feast  upon  His 
love,  then  would  it  be  a  sort  of  Heaven  below  the  skies.  Yes,  Thou  art  mine,  my 
Saviour  and  my  King  ;  I  am  bound  to  Thee  by  love,  by  Thine  own  dying  love,  not 
mine  1     Fairest  of  beings,  best-beloved,  come,  let  me  yet  see  Thy  smiling  face  ! 


CHAPTER    XIV. 


^  (Boot  Confession.— Baptism. 


ISLEHAM    FERRY,    WHERE   I   WAS   BAPTIZED. 


REMEMBER  the  difficulty  that  I  had,  when  I  was  converted,  and 
wished  to  join  the  Christian  Church  in  the  place  where  I  lived 
(Newmarket).  I  called  upon  the  minister  four  successive  days 
before  I  could  see  him  ;  each  time  there  was  some  obstacle  in  the 
way  of  an  interview  ;  and  as  I  could  not  see  him,  I  wrote  and  told 
him  that  I  would  go  down  to  the  church-meeting,  and  propose 
myself  as  a  member.  He  looked  upon  me  as  a  strange  character,  but  I  meant  what 
I  said  ;  for  I  felt  that  I  could  not  be  happy  without  fellowship  with  the  people  of 
God.  I  wanted  to  be  wherever  they  were  ;  and  if  anybody  ridiculed  them,  I  wished 
to  be  ridiculed  with  them  ;  and  if  people  had  an  ugly  name  for  them,  I  wanted  to  be 


148  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 

called  by  that  ugly  name  ;  for  I  felt  that,  unless  I  suffered  with  Christ  in  His 
humiliation,  I  could  not  expect  to  reign  with  Him  in  His  glory. 

When  I  had  been  accepted  as  a  member  of  the  Congregational  Church  at 
Newmarket,  I  was  invited  to  the  communion  table,  although  I  had  not  been  baptized. 
I  refused,  because  it  did  not  appear  to  me  to  be  according  to  the  New  Testament 
order  :  "  Then  they  that  gladly  received  his  word  were  baptized  :  and  the  same  day 
there  were  added  unto  them  about  three  thousand  souls.  And  they  continued 
stedfastly  in  the  aposdes'  doctrine  and  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in 
prayers."  I  waited  until  I  could  go  to  the  Lord's  table  as  one  who  had  believed, 
and  who  had  been  baptized.  I  had  attended  the  house  of  God  with  my  father,  and 
my  grandfather  ;  but  I  thought,  when  I  read  the  Scriptures,  that  it  was  my  business 
to  judge  for  myself  I  knew  that  my  father  and  my  grandfather  took  little  children 
in  their  arms,  put  a  few  drops  of  water  on  their  faces,  and  said  they  were  baptized  ; 
but  I  could  not  see  anything  in  my  Bible  about  babes  being  baptized.  I 
learned  a  little  Greek;  but  I  could  not  discover  that  the  word  "baptize"  meant 
to  sprinkle  ;  so  I  said  to  myself,  "  They  are  good  men,  yet  they  may  be  wrong  ; 
and  though  I  love  and  revere  them,  that  is  no  reason  why  I  should  imitate  them." 
And  they  acknowledged,  when  they  knew  of  my  honest  conviction,  that  it  was  quite 
right  for  me  to  act  according  to  my  conscience.  I  consider  the  "  baptism  "  of  an 
unconscious  infant  is  just  as  foolish  as  the  "  baptism  "  of  a  ship  or  a  bell  ;  for  there 
is  as  much  Scripture  for  the  one  as  for  the  other.  Therefore  I  left  my  relations,  and 
became  what  I  am  to-day,  a  Baptist,  so-called,  but  I  hope  a  great  deal  more  a 
Christian  than  a  Baptist.  Many  a  man  will  go  to  chapel,  because  his  grandmother 
did.  Well,  she  was  a  good  old  soul  ;  but  I  do  not  see  that  she  ought  to  influence 
your  judgment.  "  That  does  not  signify,"  says  one,  "  I  do  not  like  to  leave  the 
church  of  my  fathers."  No  more  do  I  ;  for  I  would  rather  belong  to  the  same 
denomination  as  my  father,  I  would  not  wilfully  differ  from  any  of  my  friends,  or 
leave  their  sect  and  denomination  ;  but  I  must  let  God  be  above  my  parents.  Though 
our  parents  are  at  the  very  top  of  our  hearts,  and  we  love  them,  and  reverence  them, 
and  in  all  other  matters  render  them  strict  obedience,  yet,  with  regard  to  religion,  to 
our  own  Master  we  stand  or  fall,  and  we  claim  to  have  the  right  of  judging  for 
ourselves  as  men,  and  then  we  think  it  our  duty,  having  judged,  to  carry  out  our 
conscientious  convictions. 

I  once  met  a  man  who  had  been  forty  years  a  Christian,  and  believed  it  to  be  his 
duty  to  be  baptized  ;  but  when  I  spoke  to  him  about  it,  he  said,  "  He  that  believcth 
shall  not  make  haste."  After  forty  years'  delay,  he  talked  about  not  making  haste. 
I  quoted  to  him  another  passage,  "  I  made  haste,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  Thy 
commandments,"  and  showed  him  what  the  meaning  of  his  misapplied  passage  was. 
A    pe-rson  who   was    present    when    John    Gill  preached    his  very  fiist  sermon   at 


C.     II.     SrURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  I49 

KetterincT,  also  heard  him  deliver  his' /ast  in  London,  more  than  fifty  years  after. 
Afier  his  death,  she  joined  the  church  over  which  he  had  presided,  relating,  at  some 
lencrth,  a  truly  interesting  experience,  which  gave  universal  pleasure  to  all  who  heard 
it.  Her  name  was  Mary  Bailey,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  none  will  imitate  hor  by 
postponing  the  confession  of  their  faith  in  Jesus  for  so  long  a  time.  She  lived  half 
a  century  in  disobedience  to  her  Lord,  and  even  when  she  avowed  His  name  it  must 
have  caused  her  deep  regret  that  she  had  lingered  so  long  in  neglect  of  the 
Redeemer's  ordinance. 

When  I  was  a  boy  of  fifteen,  I  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  was  baptized,  and 
joined  the  Church  of  Christ ;  and  nothing  upon  earth  would  please  me  more  than  to 
hear  of  other  boys  having  been  led  to  do  the  same.  I  have  never  been  sorry  for 
what  I  did  then  ;  no,  not  even  once.  I  have  had  plenty  of  time  to  think  it  over,  and 
many  temptations  to  try  some  other  course  ;  and  if  I  had  found  out  that  1  had 
been  deceived,  or  that  I  had  blundered,  I  would  have  made  a  change  before  now, 
and  would  do  my  best  to  prevent  others  from  falling  into  the  same  delusion.  The 
day  I  gave  myself  up  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  be  His  servant,  was  the  very  best  day  of 
my  life  ;  then  I  began  to  be  safe  and  to  be  happy  ;  then  I  found  out  the  secret  of 
living,  and  had  a  worthy  object  for  my  life's  exertions,  and  an  unfailing  comfort  tor 
life's  troubles.  Because  I  would  wish  every  boy,  who  reads  these  lines,  to  have 
a  bright  eye,  a  light  tread,  a  joyful  heart,  and  overflowing  spirits,  I  therefore  plead 
with  him  to  consider  whether  he  will  not  follow  my  example,  for  I  speak  from 
experience,  and  know  what  I  say. 

Once,  as  I  stood  musing  at  a  window,  I  saw  a  fly  upon  It,  and  made  a  brush 
with  my  hand  to  catch  it.  When  I  opened  my  hand,  the  fly  was  not  inside,  but  still 
in  the  same  place  on  the  glass.  Scarcely  thinking  what  I  did,  I  made  another  rush 
with  my  hand,  and  thought  I  had  captured  the  insect,  but  with  the  same  result, — 
there  was  the  creature,  quietly  retaining  his  place  In  spite  of  me.  //  ivas  on  the  other 
side  of  the  glass  ;  and  when  I  saw  that  it  was  so,  I  smiled  at  my  own  folly.  Those 
who  attempt  to  find  pleasure  while  out  of  Christ,  will  experience  a  like  failure,  for 
they  are  seeking  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  glass.  When  we  are  on  the  side  of  Jesus, 
and,  having  believed  In  Him,  are  cleansed  and  forgiven,  then  our  pursuit  of  joy  will  be 
successful  ;   but  till  then  we  shall  labour  In  vain,  and  spend  our  strength  for  nought. 

Baptism  Is  the  mark  of  distinction  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  It  very 
beautifully  sets  forth  the  death  of  the  baptized  person  to  the  world.  Professedly,  he 
Is  no  longer  of  the  world  ;  he  is  burled  to  It,  and  he  rises  again  to  a  new  life.  No 
symbol  could  be  more  significant.  In  the  immersion  of  a  believer,  there  seems  to  me 
to  be  a  wondrous  setting  forth  of  the  burial  of  the  Christian  to  all  the  world  In  the  burial 
of  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  the  crossing  of  the  Rubicon.  If  Cssar  crosses  the  Rubicon, 
there  will    never   be    peace   between    him   and  the    Senate   again.      He    draws   his 


150  '  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

5word,  and  he  thr-ows  away  his  scabbard.  Such  is  the  act  of  baptism  to  the  believer. 
It  is  the  burning  of  the  boats  ;  it  is  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  cannot  come  back 
again  to  you  ;  I  am  dead  to  you  ;  and  to  prove  that  I  am,  I  am  absolutely  buried  to 
you  ;  I  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  world  ;  I  am  Christ's,  and  Christ's  for 
ever."  Then,  the  Lord's  supper  :  how  beautifully  that  ordinance  sets  forth  the  dis- 
tinction of  the  believer  from  the  world  in  his  life  and  that  by  which  his  life  is 
nourishod.  He  eats  the  flesh  of  Christ,  and  drinks  His  blood.  Both  these 
ordinances  bring  a  cross  with  them  to  seme  degree,  especially  the  first.  I  was  noting, 
when  reading  the  life  of  good  Andrew  Fuller,  that,  alter  he  had  been  baptized,  some 
of  the  young  men  in  the  village  were  wont  to  mock  him,  asking  him  how  he  liked 
being  dipped,  and  such  like  questions  which  are  cojnmon  enough  nowadays.  I  could 
but  notice  that  the  scoff  of  a  hundred  years  ago  is  just  the  scofi"  of  to-day. 

This  is  the  way  of  salvation, — worship,  prayer,  faith,  profession,— and  the 
profession,  if  men  would  be  obedient,  if  they  would  follow  the  Bible,  must  be 
done  in  Christ's  way,  by  a  baptism  in  water,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  God  requireth  this  ;  and  though  men  are  saved  without 
any  baptism,  and  multitudes  fly  to  Heaven  who  are  never  plunged  in  the  stream  ; 
though  baptism  is  not  saving,  yet,  if  men  would  be  saved,  they  must  not  be  dis- 
obedient. And  inasmuch  as  God  gives  the  command,  it  is  mine  to  enforce  it.  Jesus 
said  to  His  disciples,  "  Go  ye  therefore,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  :  he 
that  believeth,  and  is  immersed,  shall  be  saved  ,  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned."  The  Church  of  England  Prayer-book  approves  dipping.  It  only  says, 
if  children  be  weak,  they  are  to  be  sprinkled  ;  and  it  is  marvellous  hov/  many 
weakly  children  there  have  been  born  lately.  The  dear  litde  ones  are  so  tender, 
that  a  few  drops  suffice  instead  of  the  dipping  which  their  own  Church  endorses. 
I  would  that  all  churchmen  were  better  churchmen  ;  if  they  would  be  more  consistent 
with  their  own  articles  of  faith,  they  would  be  more  consistent  with  Scripture  ;  and 
if  they  were  a  little  more  consistent  with  some  of  the  rubrics  of  their  own  Church, 
they  would  be  a  little  more  consistent  with  themselves.  I  became  a  Baptist  through 
reading  the  New  Testament, — especially  in  the  Greek, — and  was  strengthened  in 
my  resolve  by  a  perusal  of  the  Church  of  England  Catechism,  which  declared 
as  necessary  to  baptism,  repentance  and  the  forsaking  of  sin. 

Mr.  Doddridge  has  recommended  a  solemn  covenant  between  the  soul  and  God, 
to  be  signed  and  sealed  with  due  deliberation  and  most  fervent  prayer.  Many  of 
the  most  eminent  of  the  saints  have  adopted  this  excellent  method  of  devoting 
themselves  in  very  deed  unto  the  Lord,  and  have  reaped  no  little  benefit  from  the 
re-perusal  of  that  solemn  document  when  they  have  afresh  renewed  the  act  of 
dedication.  I  conceive  that  burial  with  Christ  in  baptism  is  a  far  more  Scriptural 
and  expressive  sign  of  dedication  ;  but  I  am  not  inclined  to  deny  my  brethren  the 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  151 

liberty  of  confirming  that  act  by  the  other,  if  it  seem  good  unto  them,  as  I  myself 
did  soon  after  my  conversion.  According  to  my  reading  of  Holy  Scripture,  the 
believer  in  Christ  should  be  buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  and  so  enter  upon  his  open 
Christian  life.  I  therefore  cast  about  to  find  a  Baptist  minister,  and  I  failed  to 
discover  one  nearer  than  Isleham,  in  the  Fen  country,  where  resided  a  certain 
Mr.  W.  W.  Cantlow.  My  parents  wished  me  to  follow  my  own  convictions,  Mr. 
Cantlow  arranged  to  baptize  me,  and  my  employer  gave  me  a  day's  holiday  for  the 
purpose. 

I  can  never  forget  the  3rd  of  May,  1850;  it  was  my  mother's  birthday,  and  I 
myself  was  within  a  few  weeks  of  being  sixteen  years  of  age.  I  was  up  early, 
to  have  a  couple  of  hours  for  quiet  prayer  and  dedication  to  God.  Then  I  had 
some  eight  miles  to  walk,  to  reach  the  spot  where  I  was  to  be  immersed  into  the 
Triune  Name  according  to  the  sacred  command.  What  a  walk  it  was  !  What 
thoughts  and  prayers  thronged  my  soul  during  that  morning's  journey  !  It  was  by 
no  means  a  warm  day,  and  therefore  all  the  better  for  the  two  or  three  hours  of  quiet 
foot-travel  which  I  enjoyed.  The  sight  of  Mr  Cantlow's  smiling  face  was  a  full 
reward  for  that  country  tramp.  I  think  I  see  the  good  man  now,  and  the  white 
ashes  of  the  peat-fire  by  which  we  stood  and  talked  together  about  the  solemn 
exercise  which  lay  before  us.  We  went  together  to  the  Ferry,  for  the  Isleham 
friends  had  not  degenerated  to  indoor  immersion  in  a  bath  made  by  the  art  of  man, 
but  used  the  ampler  baptistery  of  the  flowing  river.  Isleham  Ferry,  on  the  River 
Lark,  is  a  very  quiet  spot,  half-a-mile  from  the  village,  and  rarely  disturbed  by  traffic 
at  any  time  of  the  year.  The  river  itself  is  a  beautiful  stream,  dividing  Cambridge- 
shire from  Suffolk,  and  is  dear  to  local  anglers.  The  navigation  of  this  little  River 
Lark  is  possible  between  Bury  .St.  Edmund's  and  the  sea  at  Lynn  ;  but  at  Isleham 
it  is  more  in  its  infancy. 

The  ferry-house,  hidden  in  the  picture  (on  page  147)  by  the  trees,  is  freely 
opened  for  the  convenience  of  minister  and  candidates  at  a  baptizing.  Where  the 
barge  is  hauled  up  for  repairs,  the  preacher  takes  his  stand,  when  the  baptizing  is  on 
a  week-day,  and  there  are  few  spectators  present.  But  on  Lord's-day,  when  great 
numbers  are  attracted,  the  preacher,  standing  in  a  barge  moored  mid-stream,  speaks 
the  Word  to  the  crowds  on  both  sides  of  the  river.  This  can  be  done  the  more 
easily,  as  the  river  is  not  very  wide.  Where  three  persons  can  be  seen  standing,  is  the 
usual  place  for  entering  the  water.  The  right  depth,  with  sure  footing,  may  soon  be 
found,  and  so  the  delightful  service  proceeds  in  the  gently-flowing  stream.  No 
accident  or  disorder  has  ever  marred  the  proceedings.  In  the  course  of  seven  or 
eight  miles,  the  Lark  serves  no  fewer  than  five  Baptist  churches,  and  they  would  on 
no  account  give  up  baptizing  out  of  doors. 

The    first  baptizing  at    Isleham    is    recorded  thus: — "Sept.    13,    1798.      John 


152  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Webber,    sen.,    John    Webber,    jun.,    William     Brown,    John    Wibrow,     and     Mary 
Gunstone  were  baptized  by  Mr.  Fuller,  of  Kettering,  at  Isleham  Ferry." 

To  me,  there  seemed  to  be  a  great  concourse  on  that  week-day.  Dressed,  I 
believe,  in  a  jacket,  with  a  boy's  turn-down  collar,  I  attended  the  service  previous  to 
the  ordinance  ;  but  all  remembrance  of  it  has  gone  from  me  :  my  thoughts  were  in 
the  water,  sometimes  with  my  Lord  in  joy,  and  sometimes  with  myself  in  trembling 
awe  at  making  so  public  a  confession.  There  were  first  to  be  baptized  two  women, 
— Diana  Wilkinson  and  Eunice  Fuller, — and  I  was  asked  to  conduct  them  through 
the  water  to  the  minister  ;  but  this  I  most  timidly  declined.  It  was  a  new  e.xperience 
to  me,  never  having  seen  a  baptism  before,  and  I  was  afraid  of  making  some 
mistake.  The  wind  blew  down  the  river  with  a  cutting  blast,  as  my  turn  came  to 
wade  into  the  flood  ;  but  after  I  had  walked  a  few  steps,  and  noted  the  people  on 
the  ferry-boat,  and  in  bi  ats,  and  on  either  shore,  I  felt  as  if  Heaven,  and  earth,  and 
hell,  might  all  gaze  upon  me  ;  for  I  was  not  ashamed,  there  and  then,  to  own  myself 
a  follower  of  the  Lamb.  My  timidity  was  washed  away  ;  it  floated  down  the  river 
into  the  sea,  and  must  have  been  devoured  by  the  fishes,  for  I  have  never  felt 
anything  of  the  kind  since.  Baptism  also  loosed  my  tongue,  and  from  that  day 
it  has  never  been  quiet.  I  lost  a  thousand  fears  in  that  River  Lark,  and  found  that 
"in  keeping  His  commandments  there  is  great  reward."  It  was  a  thrice-happy  day 
to  me.  God  be  praised  for  the  preserving  goodness  which  allows  me  to  write  of  it 
with  delight  so  loner  afterwards  ! 

"  Many  days  have  passed  since  then, 
Many  changes  I  have  seen  ; 
Yet  have  been  upheld  till  now ; 
Who  could  hold  me  up  but  Thou?" 

In  the  Isleham  Vestry,  in  the  extremely  gentle  and  cordial  companionship  ot 
the  pastor,  I  spent  a  very  happy  evening,  which  I  recollect  was  very  cold,  so  that  a 
peat-fire,  whose  white  appearance^I  still  remember,  was  needed  to  warm  the  room. 
Mr.  Cantlow  was  for  some  time  a  missionary  in  Jamaica,  and  is  mentioned  three 
times  in  Hinton's  Life  of  Knibb.  For  thirty-two  years,  this  excellent  man  resided 
at  Isleham,  and  was  pastor  of  the  church  till  age  enfeebled  him,  and  he  welcomed 
our  worthy  student,  Mr.  Wilson,  as  his  successor.  He  was  great  at  giving  the  "soft 
answer  which  turneth  away  wrath  ;  "  he  was  beloved  by  his  people,  and  universally 
respected  in  the  village.  His  death  serves  as  a  landmark  in  my  life,  reminding  me 
that  the  clays  are  long  past  since  I  was  generally  spoken  of  as  "  the  boy-preacher.' 
One  correspondent  kindly  trusts  that  I  shall  be  ''  strengthened  under  tlic  infiniiitics  oj 
viy  declining  years"  which  kindly  wish  I  gratefully  acknowledge. 

Mr.  Stevenson,  in  The  Rev.  C.  H.  Spitrgeon,  his  Life  and  Work,  makes  it  out 
that  I  joined  the  Baptist  Church  a  year  before  I  was  baptized  ;  but  it  was  not  so.  I 
never  dreamed  of  entering  the  Church  except  by  Christ's  own  way  ;    and  I  wish  that 


C.      11.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  I53 

all  other  believers  were  led  to  make  a  serious  point  of  commencing  their  visible  con- 
nection with  the  Church  by  the  ordinance  which  symbolizes  death  to  the  world,  burial 
with  Christ,  and  resurrection  to  newness  of  life.  That  open  stream,  the  crowded 
banks,  and  the  solemn  plunge,  have  never  faded  from  my  mind  ;  but  have  often 
operated  as  a  spur  to  duty,  and  a  seal  of  consecration.  F"rom  henceforth  let  no  man 
trouble  me,  for  He  who  first  saved  me,  afterwards  accepted  me, — spirit,  soul,  and 
body, — as  His  servant,  in  token  whereof  this  mortal  frame  was  immersed  beneath  the 
wave.  The  outward  sign  has  often  served  to  bring  vividly  before  mind  and  heart  the 
spiritual  meaning,  and  therefore  is  it  dearly  loved,  for  His  sake  who  both  ordained 
the  ordinance  and  Himself  submitted  to  it. 

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Wilson  for  the  following  note,  which  reminds  me  of  an 
excellent  companion  I  had  almost  forgotten  : — 

"Mr.  W.  H.  Cantlow,  a  worthy  Baptist  deacon  at  Ipswich,  well  remembers, 
when  a  boy  at  school,  walking  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  from  Newmarket  to  Isleham,  a 
distance  of  eight  miles,  to  be  at  the  baptism.  He  says  : — '  I  often  think  of  the 
earnest  talks  he  had  with  me,  and  always  remember  one  remark  he  made,  on  our  way 
to  the  week-night  service,  about  the  need  of  obtaining  spiritual  food  during  the  week, 
as  it  was  so  long  to  have  to  wait  from  one  Sunday  to  the  other.'  The  recollection  of 
the  service  at  the  river-side  is  fondly  cherished  by  several  still  living,  who  rejoice 
that  they  were  there.  But  the  most  precious  memory  of  that  day  is  the  prayer- 
meeting  in  the  vestry,  in  the  evening,  where  Mr.  Spurgeon  prayed,  and  people 
wondered,  and  wept  for  joy,  as  they  listened  to  the  lad.  One  may  be  excused  for 
envying  those  who  were  there.  In  front  of  the  new  school-room,  adjoining  the 
chapel,  is  the  following  inscription  : — 


Th 

IS 

Stone 

WAS 

Laid    on 

September 

19th,    1888, 

By 

Mr. 

G.      APTHORPE,      IN 

Memory    of   the 

late 

Rev. 

W.    W. 

Cantlow, 

w 

HO. 

WHILE      PaSTOF!     of    THE 

Church.    Baptized    the                        1 

Rev. 

C.    H.    Spurgeon, 

At 

SLEHAM 

Ferry,    on 

May    3rd.    1850 

"  Mr.  Cantlow's  grave  is  only  a  few  yards  off." 


154  C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Mr.  Wilson  also  explains  our  picture,  and  adds  an  amusing  story: — "In  the 
\^iew  of  the  Ferry,  the  chaise  and  cart  are  waiting  to  cross  the  river  by  the  ferry-boat. 
One  old  lighter  is  rotting  away  in  the  water,  and  another  lies  high  and  dry  under 
-•epair.  The  box  is  for  keeping  eels  until  they  can  Be  sent  to  market  ;  and  the  long 
pole  is  for  crossing  the  river  in  the  small  boat,  which  is  also  to  be  seen  if  you  look 
for  it.  The  late  vicar  of  Isleham,  a  very  solemn  ilian,  meeting  a  deacon  of  ready 
wit  at  the  Ferry,  began  to  find  fault  with  a  recent  baptizing  there.  Said  the  vicar, 
'  I  suppose  this  is  the  place  where  the  people  came  crowding,  the  other  Sunday, 
showing  the  little  respect  they  had  for  the  Sabbath-day.'  'There  was,  indeed,  a 
great  crowd,'  replied  the  deacon,  '  but  they  were  all  as  still  and  attentive  as  in  the 

house  of  God.'     '  Is  it  true  that  the  man,  J.  S ,  was  baptized  ? '  enquired  the  vicar. 

*  Yes,  quite  true,'  said  the  deacon,  '  and  he  seemed  to  be  full  of  joy  at  the  time.' 
'  What  !  '  exclaimed  the  vicar,  '  a  man  who  never  went  to  school,  and  cannot  read  a 
word!  How  much  can  he  know  about  the  religion  he  came  here  to  profess.'*' 
'  Well,'  answered  the  deacon,  with  a  smile,  '  very  likely  the  poor  man  knows  little  as 
yet  ;  still,  he  told  us  how  he  found  the  Saviour,  and  became  happy  in  His  love. 
But,'  added  the  deacon,  '  do  not  you,  sir,  christen  little  children,  declaring  that  you 
make  them  children  of  God,  while  you  are  perfectly  aware  that  the  children  know 
nothing  at  all .'' '  " 

If  any  ask, — Why  was  I  thus  baptized  ? — I  answer,  because  I  believed  it  to  be  an 
ordinance  of  Christ,  very  specially  joined  by  Him  with  faith  in  His  name.  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  I  had  no  superstitious  idea  that 
baptism  would  save  me,  for  I  was  saved.  I  did  not  seek  to  have  sin  washed  away 
by  water,  for  I  believed  that  my  sins  were  forgiven  me  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Yet  I  regarded  baptism  as  the  token  to  the  believer  of  cleansing,  the  emblem  of  his 
burial  with  his  Lord,  and  the  outward  avowal  of  his  new  birth.  I  did  not  trust  i< 
it ;  but,  because  I  trusted  in  Jesus  as  my  Saviour,  I  felt  bound  to  obey  Him  as  my 
Lord,  and  follow  the  example  which  He  set  us  in  Jordan,  in  His  own  baptism.  I 
did  not  fulfil  the  outward  ordinance  to  join  a  party,  and  to  become  a  Baptist,  but  to 
be  a  Christian  after  the  apostolic  fashion  ;  for  they,  when  they  believed,  were  baptized. 
It  is  now  questioned  whether  John  Bunyan  was  baptized  ;  but  the  same  question 
can  never  be  raised  concerning  uic.  I,  who  scarcely  belong  to  any  sect,  am, 
nevertheless,  by  no  means  willing  to  have  it  doubted  in  time  to  come  whether  or  no 
I  followed  the  conviction  of  my  heart.  I  read  the  New  Testament  for  myself,  and 
found  believers'  baptism  there  ;  and  I  had  no  mind  to  neglect  what  I  saw  to  be  the 
Lord's  order.  If  others  see  not  as  I  do,  to  their  own  Master  they  stand  or  fall  ;  but 
for  me,  the  perceptions  of  my  understanding  in  spiritual  things  were  the  law  of  my 
life,  and  I  hope  they  will  always  be  so. 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  1 55 

If  I  thought  it  wrong  to  be  a  Baptist,  I  should  give  it  up,  and  become  what  I 
believed  to  be  right.  The  particular  doctrine  adhered  to  by  Baptists  is  that  they 
acknowledge  no  authority  unless  it  comes  from  the  Word  of  God.  They  attach  no 
importance  to  the  authority  of  the  Fathers, — they  care  not  for  the  authority  of  the 
mothers, — if  what  they  say  does  not  agree  with  the  teaching  of  the  Evangelists, 
Apostles,  and  Prophets,  and,  most  of  all,  with  the  teaching  of  the  Lord  Himself.  If 
we  could  find  infant  baptism  in  the  Word  of  God,  we  should  adopt  it.  It  would 
help  us  out  of  a  great  difficulty,  for  it  would  take  away  from  us  that  reproach  which 
is  attached  to  us, — that  we  are  odd,  and  do  not  as  other  people  do.  But  we  have 
looked  well  through  the  Bible,  and  cannot  find  it,  and  do  not  believe  that  it  is  there  ; 
nor  do  we  believe  that  others  can  find  infant  baptism  in  the  Scriptures,  unless  they 
themselves  first  put  it  there. 

Our  forefathers  were  called  ^«a-baptists,  because  it  was  said  by  their  opponents 
that  they  re-baptized  those  who  had  been  already  baptized.  Of  course,  they  did 
nothing  of  the  kind  ;  but  they  immersed,  on  profession  of  their  faith,  those  who  had 
previously  been  sprinkled  as  unconscious  infants.  There  was  no  ana-baptism  01 
re-baptism  there,  the  two  things  were  altogether  distinct.  I  could  tell  a  good  many 
stories  of  that  kind  of  ana-baptism.  There  was  one  of  the  elders  of  the  Tabernacle 
Church  who  was — as  the  word  is  usually  understood — "  baptized  "  four  times.  The 
first  time  the  babe  was  sprinkled,  he  was  so  ill  that  he  was  only  half-done,  according 
to  the  ritual  provided  lor  that  purpose  in  the  Prayer-book.  When  he  got  better,  he 
was  taken  to  the  church  to  be  properly  finished  off,  but  the  parson  gave  the  child  a 
girl's  name  instead  of  the  one  which  had  been  selected  for  him.  His  father  and 
mother  did  not  like  their  boy  running  the  risk  of  being  called  by  the  name  that  had 
been  given  to  him,  so  they  took  him  for  the  third  time  ;  and  the  clergyman  then 
gave  him  his  right  name.  When  he  grew  up,  he  was  converted,  and  I  baptized  him 
after  the  Scriptural  order  ;  but  the  Church  of  England  had  made  three  attempts  to 
baptize  him,  and  had  failed  every  time ! 


CHAPTER   XV. 


([;):ptricncts  after  Coiibtvsion. 

Our  faith  at  times  has  to  fight  for  its  very  existence.  The  old  Adam  within  us  rages  mightily, 
and  the  new  spirit  within  us,  like  a  young  lion,  disdains  to  be  vanquished ;  and  so  these  two  strong 
ones  contend,  till  our  spirit  is  full  of  agony.  Some  of  us  know  what  it  is  to  be  tempted  with 
blasphemies  we  should  not  dare  to  repeat,  to  be  vexed  with  horrid  temptations  which  we  have 
grappled  with  and  overcome,  but  which  h~.ve  almost  cost  us  resistance  unto  blood.  In  such  inward 
conflicts,  saints  must  be  alone.  They  cannot  tell  their  feelings  to  others,  they  would  not  dare  ;  and 
if  they  did,  their  own  brethren  would  despise  or  upbraid  them,  for  the  most  of  professors  would  not 
even  know  what  they  meant.  Even  those  who  have  trodden  other  fiery  ways  would  not  be  able  to 
sympathize  in  all,  but  would  answer  the  poor  troubled  soul,  "These  are  points  in  which  we  cannot  go 
with  you."  Christ  alone  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  though  without  sin.  No  one  man  is 
tempted  in  all  points  exactly  like  another  man,  and  each  one  has  certain  trials  in  which  he  must  stand 
alone  amid  the  rage  of  war,  with  not  even  a  book  to  help  him,  or  a  biography  to  assist  him,  no  man 
ever  having  gone  that  way  before  except  that  one  Man  whose  trail  reveals  a  nail-pierced  foot.  He 
alone  knows  all  the  devious  paths  of  sorrow.  Yet,  even  in  such  byways,  the  Lord  is  with  us,  helping 
us,  sustainiiig  us,  and  giving  us  grace  to  conquer  at  the  close.— C.  H.  S. 


HEN  my  eyes  first  looked  to  Christ,  He  was  a  very  real  Christ  to  me ; 
and  when  my  burden  of  sin  rolled  from  off  my  back,  it  was  a  real 
pardon  and  a  real  release  from  sin  to  me  ;  and  when  that  day  I  said 
for  the  first  time,  "Jesus  Christ  is  mine,"  it  was  a  real  possession  of 
Christ  to  me.  When  I  went  up  to  the  sanctuary  in  that  early  dawn 
of  youthful  piety,  every  scng  was  really  a  psalm,  and  when  there 
was  a  prayer,  oh,  how  I  followed  every  word  !  It  was  prayer  indeed  !  And  so  was 
it,  too,  in  silent  quietude,  when  I  drew  near  to  God,  it  was  no  mockery,  no  routine, 
no  matter  of  mere  duty  ;  it  was  a  real  talking  with  my  Father  who  is  in  Heaven. 
And  oh,  how  I  loved  my  Saviour  Christ  then  !  I  would  have  given  all  I  had  for 
Him!  How  I  felt  towards  sinners  that  day!  Lad  that  I  was,  I  wanted  to  preach, 
and — 

"Tell  to  sinners  round, 
What  a  dear  Savio  ir  1  had  found." 

One  of  the  greatest  sorrows  I  had,  when  first  I  knew  the  Lord,  was  to  think  about 
certain  persons  with  whom  I  knew  right  well  that  I  had  held  ungodly  conversations, 
and  sundry  others  whom  I  had  tempted  to  sin  ;  and  one  of  the  prayers  that  I  always 
offered,  when  I  prayed  for  myself,  was  that  such  an  one  might  not  be  lost  through 
sins  to  which  I  had  tempted  him.  This  was  the  case  also  with  George  Whitefield, 
who  never  forgot  those  with  whom,  before  his  conversion,  he  used  to  play  cards,  and 
he  had  the  joy  of  leading  every  one  of  them  to  the  Saviour. 


I5S  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

I  think  about  five  days  after  I  first  found  Christ,  when  my  joy  had  been  such 
that  I  could  have  danced  for  very  mirth  at  the  thought  that  Christ  was  mine,  on  a 
sudden  I  fell  into  a  sad  fit  of  despondency.  I  can  tell  now  why  it  was  so  with  me. 
When  I  first  believed  in  Christ,  I  am  not  sure  that  I  thought  the  devil  was  dead, 
but  certainly  I  had  a  kind  of  notion  that  he  was  so  mortally  wounded  that  he  could 
not  disturb  me.  And  then  I  also  fancied  that  the  corruption  of  my  nature  had 
received  its  death-blow.      1  read  what  Cowper  said, — 

"  Since  tl;e  dear  hour  that  brought  me  to  Thy  foot. 
And  cut  up  all  my  follies  by  the  root;" 

and  I  really  thought  that  the  poet  knew  what  he  was  saying  ;  whereas,  never  did 
anyone  blunder  so  terribly  as  Cowper  did  when  he  said  that,  for  no  man,  I  think, 
has  all  his  follies  thus  cut  up  by  the  roots.  However,  I  fondly  dreamed  that  mine 
were,  I  felt  persuaded  they  would  never  sprout  again.  I  was  going  to  be  perfect, — 
I  fully  calculated  upon  it, — and  lo,  I  found  an  intruder  I  had  not  reckoned  upon,  an 
evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God.  So  I  went  to  that  same 
Primitive  Methodist  Chapel  where  I  first  received  peace  with  God,  through  the 
simple  preaching  of  the  Word.  The  te.xt  happened  to  be,  "  O  wretched  man  that  I 
am:  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  "There,"  I  thought, 
"  that's  the  te.xt  for  me."  I  had  just  got  as  far  as  that  in  the  week.  I  knew  that  I 
had  put  my  trust  in  Christ,  and  I  knew  that,  when  I  sat  in  that  house  of  prayer,  my 
faith  was  simply  and  solely  fixed  on  the  atonement  of  the  Redeemer.  But  I  had  a 
weight  on  my  mind,  because  I  could  not  be  as  holy  as  I  wanted  to  be.  I  could 
not  live  without  sin.  When  I  rose  in  the  morning,  I  thought  I  would  abstain  from 
every  hard  word,  from  every  evil  thought  and  look  ;  and  I  came  up  to  that  chapel 
groaning  because,  "when  I  would  do  good,  evil  was  present  with  me."  The 
minister  began  by  saying,  "  Paul  was  not  a  believer  when  he  said  this."  Well  now, 
I  knew  I  was  a  believer,  and  it  seemed  to  me  from  the  context  that  Paul  must  have 
been  a  believer,  too.  (Now,  I  am  sure  he  was.)  The  man  went  on  to  say  that  no 
child  of  God  ever  did  feel  any  conflict  within.  So  I  took  up  my  hat,  and  left  the 
chapel,  and  I  have  very  seldom  attended  such  places  since.  They  are  very  good 
for  people  who  are  unconverted  to  go  to,  but  of  very  little  use  for  children  of  God. 
That  is  my  notion  of  Methodism.  It  is  a  noble  thing  to  bring  in  strangers  ;  but  a 
terrible  thing  for  those  that  are  brought  in  to  sit  and  feed  there.  It  is  like  the 
parish  pound,  it  is  a  good  place  to  put  sheep  in  when  they  have  strayed,  but  there  is 
no  food  inside  ;  they  had  better  be  let  out  as  soon  as  possible  to  find  some  grass. 
I  .saw  that  that  minister  understood  nothing  of  experimental  divinity,  or  of  practical 
heart  theology,  or  else  he  would  not  have  talked  as  he  did.  A  good  man  he  was,  I 
do  not  doubt,  but  utterly  incompetent  to  the  task  of  dealing  with  a  case  like  mine. 
Oh,  what  a  horror  I  have  had  of  sin  ever  since  the  day  when   I   felt  its  power 


c.    11.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  159 

over  my  soul  !  O  sin,  sin,  I  have  had  enough  of  thee  !  Thou  didst  never  bring  me 
more  than  a  moment's  seeming  joy,  and  with  it  there  came  a  deep  and  awful  bitter- 
ness which  burns  within  me  to  this  day  !  Well  do  I  recollect  when  I  was  the  subject 
of  excessive  tenderness, — some  people  called  it  "morbid  sensibility."  How  I 
shuddered  and  shivered  at  the  very  thought  of  sin,  which  then  appeared  exceedingly 
sinful  !  The  first  week  after  I  was  converted  to  God,  I  felt  afraid  to  put  one  foot 
before  the  other  for  fear  I  should  do  wrong.  When  I  thought  over  the  day,  if  there  had 
been  a  failure  in  my  temper,  or  if  there  had  been  a  frothy  word  spoken,  or  something 
done  amiss,  I  did  chasten  myself  sorely.  Had  I,  at  that  time,  known  anything  to 
be  my  Lord's  will,  I  think  I  should  not  have  hesitated  to  do  it  ;  to  me  it  would  not 
have  mattered  whether  it  was  a  fashionable  thing  or  an  unfashionable  thing,  if  it  was 
according  to  His  Word.  Oh,  to  do  His  will  !  to  follow  Him  whithersoever  He  would 
have  me  go  !  It  seemed  then  as  though  I  should  never,  never,  never  be  slack  in 
keeping  His  commandments. 

I  do  not  know  whether  the  experience  of  others  agrees  with  mine  ;  but  I  can 
say  this,  that  the  worst  difficulty  I  ever  met  with,  or  I  think  I  can  ever  meet  with, 
happened  a  little  time  after  my  conversion  to  God.  When  I  first  knew  the  weight 
of  sin,  it  was  as  a  burden,  as  a  labour,  as  a  trouble  ;  but  when,  the  second  time, — 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow, 
In  faith,  and  love,  and  every  grace  ; 
Might  more  of  His  salvation  know, 
And  seek  more  earnestly  His  face  ;" 

and  when  He  answered  me  by  letting  all  my  sins  loose  upon  me,  they  appeared  more 
frightful  than  before.  I  thought  the  Egyptians  in  Egypt  were  not  half  so  bad  as  the 
Egyptians  out  of  Egypt ;  I  thought  the  sins  I  knew  before,  though  they  were  cruel 
task-masters,  were  not  half  so  much  to  be  dreaded  as  those  soldier-sins,  armed 
with  spears  and  axes,  riding  in  iron  chariots  with  scythes  upon  their  axles,  hastening 
to  assault  me.  It  is  true,  they  did  not  come  so  near  to  me  as  heretofore  ;  neverthe- 
less, they  occasioned  me  more  fright  even  than  when  I  was  their  slave.  The 
Israelites  went  up  harnessed,  marching  in  their  ranks,  and,  I  doubt  not,  singing 
as  they  went,  because  they  were  delivered  from  the  daily  task  and  from  the  cruel 
bondage  ;  but  suddenly  they  turned  their  heads  while  they  were  marching,  for  they 
heard  a  dreadful  noise  behind  them,  a  noise  of  chariots  and  of  men  shoutine  for 
battle  ;  and  at  last,  when  they  could  really  see  the  Egyptians,  and  the  thick  cloud 
of  dust  rising  behind  them,  then  they  said  that  they  should  be  destroyed,  they 
should  now  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  I  remember,  after  my  conversion  (it 
may  not  have  happened  to  all,  but  it  did  to  me),  there  came  a  time  when  the  enemy 
said,  "  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil  ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied 
upon  them  ;  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  destroy  them."  So  Satan,  loth  to 
leave  a  soul,  pursues  it  hot-foot.      He  will  have  it  back  if  he  can  ;  and  often,   soon 


l6o  C.     11.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOEIOGRAPHY. 

after  conversion,  there  comes  a  time  of  dreadful  conflict,  when  the  soul  seems  as  if 
it  could  not  live.  "  Was  it  because  there  were  no  graves  in  Egypt  that  the  Lord 
brought  us  into  this  condition  of  temporary  freedom,  that  we  might  be  all  the  more 
distressed  by  our  adversaries?"  So  said  unbelief;  but  God  brought  His  people 
right  out  by  one  final  stroke.  Miriam  knew  it  when  she  took  her  timbrel,  and  went 
forth  with  the  women,  and  answered  them  in  the  jubilant  song,  "  Sing  ye  to  the 
Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously  ;  the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  He  thrown  into 
the  sea."  I  love  best  of  all  that  note  in  the  song  of  Moses  where  he  says,  "The 
depths  have  covered  them."  "There  remained  not  so  much  as  one  of  them." 
What  gladness  must  have  been  in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  Israel  when  they 
knew  that  their  enemies  were  all  gone  !  I  am  sure  it  was  so  with  me  ;  for,  after  my 
conversion,  being  again  attacked  by  sin,  I  saw  the  mighty  stream  of  redeeming  love 
roll  over  all  my  sins,  and  this  was  my  song,  "The  depths  have  covered  them." 
"  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  .-■  It  is  God  that  justifieth. 
Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us." 

I  was  brought  up,  as  a  child,  with  such  care  that  I  knew  but  very  little  of 
foul  or  profane  language,  having  scarcely  ever  heard  a  man  swear.  Yet  do  I 
remember  times,  in  my  earliest  Christian  days,  when  there  came  into  my  mind 
thoughts  so  evil  that  I  clapped  my  hand  to  my  mouth  for  fear  I  should  be  led  to 
give  utterance  to  them.  This  is  one  way  in  which  Satan  tortures  those  whom  God 
has  delivered  out  of  his  hand.  Many  of  the  choicest  saints  have  been  thus 
molested.  Once,  when  I  had  been  grievously  assailed  by  the  tempter,  I  went  to  see 
my  dear  old  grandfather.  I  told  him  about  my  terrible  experience,  and  then  I 
wound  up  by  saying,  "  Grandfather,  I  am  sure  I  cannot  be  a  child  of  God,  or  else 
I  should  never  have  such  evil  thoughts  as  these."  "  Nonsense,  Charles,"  answered 
the  good  old  man  ;  "  it  is  just  because  you  are  a  Christian  that  you  are  thus 
tempted.  These  blasphemies  are  no  children  of  yours  ;  they  are  the  devil's  brats, 
which  he  delights  to  lay  at  the  door  of  a  Christian.  Don't  you  own  them  as  yours, 
give  them  neither  house-room  nor  heart-room."  I  felt  gready  comforted  by  what 
my  grandfather  said,  especially  as  it  confirmed  what  another  old  saint  had  told 
me  when  I  was  tempted  in  a  similar  manner  while  I  was  seeking  the  Saviour.  A 
great  many  people  make  fun  of  that  verse, — 

"  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know. 
Oft  it  causes  anxious  tliouglit, 
Do  I  love  the  Lord,  or  no  ? 
Am  I  His,  or  am  I  not  ?  " 

If  they  ever  find  themselves  where  some  of  us  have  been,  they  will  not  do 
so  any  more.  I  believe  it  is  a  shallow  e.xperience  that  makes  people  always 
confident  of   what   they   are,    and    where    they    are,    for  there  are  times   of  terrible 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  i6i 

trouble,  that  make  even  the  most  confident  child  of  God  hardly  know  whether  he 
is  on  his  head  or  on  his  heels.  It  is  the  mariner  who  has  done  business  on  great 
waters  who,  in  times  of  unusual  stress  and  storm,  reels  to  and  fro,  and  staggers 
like  a  drunken  man,  and  is  at  his  wits'  end.  At  such  a  time,  if  Jesus  whispers 
that  I  am  His,  then  the  question  is  answered  once  for  all,  and  my  soul  has  received 
a  token  which  it  waves  in  the  face  of  Satan,  so  that  he  disappears,  and  i  can  go  on 
my  way  rejoicing. 

I  have  found,  in  my  own  spiritual  life,  that  the  more  rules  I  lay  down  for  myself, 
the  more  sins  I  commit.  The  habit  of  regular  morning  and  evening  prayer  is  one 
which  is  indispensable  to  a  believer  s  life,  but  the  prescribing  of  the  length  of  prayer, 
and  the  constrained  remembrance  of  so  many  persons  and  subjects,  may  gender 
unto  bondage,  and  strangle  prayer  rather  than  assist  it.  To  say  I  will  humble 
myself  at  such  a  time,  and  rejoice  at  such  another  season,  is  nearly  as  much  an 
affectation  as  when  the  preacher  wrote  in  the  margin  of  his  sermon,  "  Cry  here," 
"  Smile  here."  Why,  if  the  man  preached  from  his  heart,  he  would  be  sure  to 
cry  in  the  right  place,  and  to  smile  at  a  suitable  moment  ;  and  when  the  spiritual 
life  is  sound,  it  produces  prayer  at  the  right  time,  and  humiliation  of  soul  and  sacred 
joy  spring  forth  spontaneously,  apart  from  rules  and  vows.  The  kind  of  religion 
which  makes  itself  to  order  by  the  Almanack,  and  turns  out  its  emotions  like  bricks 
from  a  machine,  weeping  on  Good  Friday,  and  rejoicing  two  days  afterwards, 
measuring  its  motions  by  the  moon,  is  too  artificial  to  be  worthy  of  my  imitation. 

Self-examination  is  a  very  great  blessing,  but  I  have  known  self-examination 
carried  on  in  a  most  unbelieving,  legal,  and  self-righteous  manner  ;  in  fact,  I  have  so 
carried  it  on  myself  Time  was  when  I  used  to  think  a  vast  deal  more  of  marks,  and 
signs,  and  evidences,  for  my  own  comfort,  than  I  do  now,  for  I  find  that  I  cannot  be 
a  match  for  the  devil  when  I  begin  dealing  in  these  things.  I  am  obliged  to  go 
day  by  day  with  this  cry, — 

"  I,  the  chief  of  sinners  am. 
But  Jesus  died  for  me." 

While  I  can  believe  the  promise  of  God,  because  it  is  His  promise,  and  because  He 
is  my  God,  and  while  I  can  trust  my  Saviour  because  He  is  God,  and  therefore 
mighty  to  save,  all  goes  well  with  me  ;  but  I  do  find,  when  I  begin  questioning 
myself  about  this  and  that  perplexity,  thus  taking  my  eye  off  Christ,  that  all  the 
virtue  of  my  life  seems  oozing  out  at  every  pore.  Any  practice  that  detracts  from 
faith  is  an  evil  practice,  but  especially  that  kind  of  self-examination  which  would 
take  us  away  from  the  cross-foot,  proceeds  in  a  wrong  direction. 

I  used,  when  I  first  knew  the  Saviour,  to  try  myself  in  a  certain  manner, 
and  often  did  I  throw  stumbling-blocks  in  my  path  through  it,  and  therefore  I 
can  warn  any  who  are  doing  the  same.      Sometimes  I  would  go  up  into  my  chamber. 


1 62  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

and  by  way  of  self-examination,  I  used  to  ask  myself  this  question,— "y4w  I  afraid 
to  die  ?  If  I  should  drop  down  dead  in  my  room,  can  I  say  that  I  should  joyfully 
close  my  eyes  ? "  Well,  it  often  happened  that  I  could  not  honestly  say  so.  I  used 
to  feel  that  death  would  be  a  very  solemn  thing.  "Ah,  then!"  I  said,  "1  have 
never  believed  in  Christ,  for  if  I  had  put  my  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  should  not  be 
afraid  to  die,  but  I  should  be  quite  confident."  I  do  not  doubt  that  many  a  person 
is  saying,  "  I  cannot  follow  Christ,  because  I  am  afraid  to  die  ;  I  cannot  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  will  save  me,  because  the  thought  of  death  makes  me  tremble."  Ah, 
poor  soul,  there  are  many  of  God's  blessed  ones,  who  through  fear  of  death  have 
been  much  of  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage  !  I  know  precious  children  of  God 
now  :  I  believe  that,  when  they  die,  they  will  die  triumphantly  ;  but  I  know  this, 
that  the  thought  of  death  is  never  pleasing  to  them.  And  this  is  accounted  for, 
because  God  has  stamped  on  nature  that  law,  the  love  of  life  and  self-preservation  ; 
and  it  is  natural  enough  that  the  man  who  has  kindred  and  friends  should  scarcely 
like  to  leave  behind  those  who  are  so  dear.  I  know  that,  when  he  eets  more  erace, 
he  will  rejoice  in  the  thought  of  death  ;  but  I  do  know  that  there  are  many  quite 
safe,  who  will  die  rejoicing  in  Christ,  who  now,  in  the  prospect  of  death,  feel  afraid 
of  it.  My  aged  grandfather  once  preached  a  sermon  which  I  have  not  yet  for- 
gotten. He  was  preaching  from  the  text,  "  The  God  of  all  grace,"  and  he 
somewhat  interested  the  assembly,  after  describing  the  different  kinds  of  grace  that 
God  gave,  by  saying  at  the  end  of  each  period,  "  But  there  is  one  kind  of  grace 
that  you  do  not  want."  After  each  part  of  his  theme,  there  came  the  like  sentence, 
"  But  there  is  one  kind  of  grace  you  do  not  want."  And  then  he  wound  up  by 
saying,  "  You  don't  want  dying  grace  in  living  moments,  but  you  shall  have  dying 
grace  when  you  need  it.  When  you  are  in  the  condition  to  require  it,  you  shall  have 
grace  enough  if  you  put  your  trust  in  Christ."  In  a  party  of  friends,  we  were 
discussing  the  question  whether,  if  the  days  of  martyrdom  should  come,  we  were 
prepared  to  be  burned.  I  said,  "  I  must  frankly  tell  you  that,  speaking  as  I  feel 
to-day,  I  am  not  prepared  to  be  burned  ;  but  I  do  believe  that,  if  there  were  a  stake 
at  Smithfield,  and  I  knew  that  I  was  to  be  burned  there  at  one  o'clock,  I  should 
have  srrace  enough  to  be  burned  there  when  one  o'clock  came." 

I  was  much  impressed,  in  my  younger  days,  by  hearing  a  minister,  blind  with 
age,  speak  at  the  communion  table,  and  bear  witness  to  us  who  had  just  joined  the 
church,  that  it  was  well  for  us  that  we  had  come  to  put  our  trust  in  a  faithful  God  ; 
and  as  the  good  man,  with  great  feebleness  and  yet  with  great  earnestness,  said  to 
us  that  he  had  never  regretted  having  given  himself  to  Christ  as  a  boy,  I  felt  my 
heart  leap  within  me  with  delight  that  I  had  such  a  God  to  be  my  God.  His 
testimony  was  such  as  a  younger  man  could  not  have  borne  :  he  might  have  spoken 
more  fluently,  but  the  weight  of  those   eighty  years  at  the  back  of  it  made  the  old 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  163 

man  eloquent  to  my  young  heart.  For  twenty  years  he  had  not  seen  the  light  of  the 
sun.  His  snow-white  locks  hung  from  his  brow,  and  floated  over  his  shoulders,  and 
he  stood  up  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  and  thus  addressed  us  : — "  Brethren  and  sisters, 
I  shall  soon  be  taken  from  you  ;  in  a  few  more  months,  I  shall  gather  up  my  feet 
in  my  bed,  and  sleep  with  my  fathers.  I  have  not  the  mind  of  the  learned,  nor 
the  tongue  of  the  eloquent  ;  but  I  desire,  before  I  go,  to  bear  one  public  testimony 
to  my  God.  Fifty  and  si.\  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  I  have  never  once  found 
Him  unfaithful.  I  can  say,  'Surely  goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all  the 
days  of  my  life,  and  not  one  good  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  Lord  God  has 
promised.'  "  There  stood  the  dear  old  man,  tottering  into  his  tomb,  deprived  of  the 
light  of  heaven  naturally,  and  yet  having  the  Light  of  Heaven  in  a  better  sense 
shining  into  his  soui  ;  and  though  he  could  not  look  upon  us,  yet  he  turned  towards 
us,  and  he  seemed  to  say,  "  Young  people,  trust  God  in  early  life,  for  I  have  not  to 
regret  that  I  sought  Him  too  soon.  I  have  only  to  mourn  that  so  many  of  my  years 
ran  to  waste."  There  is  nothing  that  more  tends  to  strengthen  the  faith  of  the  young 
believer  than  to  hear  the  veteran  Christian,  covered  with  scars  from  the  batde, 
testifying  that  the  service  of  his  Master  is  a  happy  service,  and  that,  if  he  could  have 
served  any  other  master,  he  would  not  have  done  so,  for  His  service  is  pleasant, 
and  His  reward  everlasting  joy. 

In  my  early  days,  I  knew  a  good  man,  who  has  now  gone  to  his  reward,  who 
was  the  means  of  producing,  under  God,  a  library  of  useful  lives.  I  do  not  mean 
books  in  paper,  but  books  in  boots  !  Many  young  men  were  decided  for  the  Lord 
by  his  means,  and  became  preachers,  teachers,  deacons,  and  other  workers  ;  and  no 
one  would  wonder  that  it  was  so,  if  he  knew  the  man  who  trained  them.  He  was 
ready  for  every  good  word  and  work  ;  but  he  gave  special  attention  to  his  Bible- 
class,  in  which  he  set  forth  the  gospel  with  clearness  and  zeal.  Whenever  any  one 
of  his  young  men  left  the  country  town  in  which  he  lived,  he  would  be  sure  to 
arrange  a  parting  interview.  There  was  a  wide-spreading  oak  down  in  the  fields  ; 
and  there  he  was  wont  to  keep  an  early  morning  appointment  with  John,  or  Thomas, 
or  William  ;  and  that  appointment  very  much  consisted  of  earnest  pleading  with  the 
Lord  that,  in  going  up  to  the  great  city,  the  young  man  might  be  kept  from  sin,  and 
made  useful.  Under  that  tree  several  decided  for  the  Saviour.  It  was  an  impressive 
act,  and  left  its  influence  upon  them  ;  for  many  men  came,  in  after  years,  to  see  the 
spot,  made  sacred  by  their  teacher's  prayers. 

Oh  !  how  my  young  heart  once  ached  in  boyhood,  when  I  first  loved  the 
Saviour.  I  was  far  away  from  father  and  mother,  and  all  I  loved,  and  I  thought  my 
heart  would  burst  ;  for  I  was  an  usher  in  a  school,  in  a  place  where  I  could  meet 
with  little  sympathy  or  help.  Well,  I  went  to  my  chamber,  and  told  my  little  griefs 
into  the  ears  of  Jesus.     They  were  great  griefs  to  me  then,  though  they  are  nothing 


164  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

now.  When  on  my  knees  I  just  whispered  them  into  the  ear  of  Him  who  had  loved 
me  with  an  everlasting  love,  oh,  it  was  so  sweet  !  If  I  had  told  them  to  others,  they 
would  have  told  them  again  ;  but  He,  my  blessed  Confidant,  knows  all  my  secrets, 
and  He  never  tells  again. 

There  is  one  verse  of  Scripture  which,  as  a  young  believer,  I  used  often  to 
repeat,  for  it  was  very  dear  to  me  ;  it  is  this  :  "  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even 
unto  the  horns  of  the  altar."  I  did  feel  then  that  I  was  wholly  Christ's.  In  the 
marriage  covenant  of  which  the  Lord  speaks,  when  the  Husband  put  the  ring  upon 
His  bride's  finger.  He  said  to  her,  "Thou  hast  become  Mine;"  and  I  remember 
when  I  felt  upon  my  finger  the  ring  of  infinite,  everlasting,  covenant  love  that  Christ 
put  there.  Oh,  it  was  a  joyful  day,  a  blessed  day  !  Happy  day,  happy  day,  when 
His  choice  was  known  to  me,  and  He  fixed  my  choice  on  Him  !  That  blessed  rest 
of  soul,  which  comes  of  a  sure  possession  of  Christ,  is  not  to  be  imitated,  but  it  is 
greatly  to  be  desired.  I  know  that  some  good  people,  who  I  believe  will  be  saved, 
nevertheless  do  not  attain  to  this  sweet  rest.  They  keep  on  thinking  that  it  is  some- 
thing that  they  may  get  when  they  are  very  old,  or  when  they  are  about  to  die,  but  they 
look  upon  the  full  assurance  of  faith,  and  the  personal  grasping  of  Christ,  and  saying, 
"  My  Beloved  is  mine,"  as  something  very  dangerous.  I  began  my  Qiristian  life  in 
this  happy  fashion  as  a  boy  fifteen  years  of  age  ;  I  believed  fully  and  without 
hesitation  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  and  when  I  went  to  see  a  good  Christian 
woman,  I  was  simple  enough  to  tell  her  that  I  believed  in  Christ,  that  He  was 
mine,  and  that  He  had  saved  me.  I  expressed  myself  very  confidently  concerning  the 
great  truth  that  God  would  ne'er  forsake  His  people,  nor  leave  His  work  undone.  I 
was  at  once  chid,  and  told  that  I  had  no  right  to  speak  so  confidently,  for  it  was 
presumptuous.  The  good  woman  said  to  me,  "Ah  !  I  don't  like  such  assurance  as 
that,"  and  then  she  added,  "  I  trust  you  are  believing  in  Christ, — I  hope  so  ; — but  I 
have  never  got  beyond  a  hope  or  a  trust,  and  I  am  an  old  woman."  Bless  the  old 
woman,  she  was  no  e.xample  for  us  who  know  whom  we  have  believed  ;  we  ought  to 
rise  far  above  that  grovelling  kind  of  life.  The  man  who  begins  right,  and  the 
boy  who  begins  right,  and  the  girl  who  begins  right,  will  begin  by  saying,  "God  hath 
said  it  :  '  He  that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  condemned.'  I  believe  on  Him,  therefore 
I  am  not  condemned  ;  Christ  is  mine." 

Before  my  conversion,  I  was  accustomed  to  read  the  Scriptures  to  admire  their 
grandeur,  to  feel  the  charm  of  their  history,  and  wonder  at  the  majesty  of  their 
language  ;  but  I  altogether  missed  the  Lord's  intent  therein.  But  wiien  the  Spirit 
came  with  His  Divine  life,  and  quickened  all  the  Book  to  my  newly-enlightened 
soul,  the  inner  meaning  shone  forth  with  wondrous  glory.  I  was  not  in  a  frame  of 
mind  to  judge  God's  Word,  but  I  accepted  it  all  without  demur  ;  I  did  not  venture 
to  sit  in  judgment  upon  my  Judge,  and  become  the   reviser  of  the  unerring  God. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiograph\.  165 

Whatever  I  found  to  be  in  His  Word,  I  received  with  intense  joy.  From  that  hour, 
I  bless  God  that,  being  not  exempt  from  trouble,  and  especially  not  free  from  a 
tendency  to  despondency  which  is  always  with  me,  I  yet  rejoice  and  will  rejoice,  and 
am  happy,  unspeakably  happy  in  resting  upon  Jesus  Christ.  Moreover,  I  have  found 
that  those  points  of  my  character  which  were  most  weak  have  been  strengthened, 
while  strong  passions  have  been  subdued,  evil  propensities  have  been  kept  under,  and 
new  principles  have  been  implanted.  I  am  changed  ;  I  am  as  different  from  what  I 
was  as  a  man  could  be  who  had  been  annihilated,  and  had  then  been  made  over  again. 
Nor  do  I  claim  any  of  the  credit  for  this  change, — far  from  it.  God  has  done  great 
things  for  me,  but  He  has  done  the  same  for  others,  and  is  willing  to  do  it  for  any 
soul  that  seeks  His  face  through  Jesus  Christ  and  His  great  atoning  sacrifice. 

I  have  known  some  men  who  were  almost  idiots  before  conversion,  but  they 
afterwards  had  their  faculties  wonderfully  developed.  Some  time  ago,  there  was  a 
man  who  was  so  ignorant  that  he  could  not  read,  and  he  never  spoke  anything  like 
grammar  in  his  life,  unless  by  mistake  ;  and,  moreover,  he  was  considered  to  be  what 
the  people  in  his  neighbourhood  called  "  daft."  But  when  he  was  converted,  the 
first  thing  he  did  was  to  pray.  He  stammered  out  a  few  words,  and  in  a  little  time 
his  powers  of  speaking  began  to  develop  themselves.  Then  he  thought  he  would 
like  to  read  the  Scriptures,  and  after  long,  long  months  of  labour,  he  learned  to  read. 
And  what  was  the  next  thing?  He  thought  he  could  preach  ;  and  he  did  preach  a 
little,  in  his  own  homely  way,  in  his  house.  Then  he  thought,  "  I  must  read  a  few 
more  books."  And  so  his  mind  expanded,  until,  I  believe  he  is  at  the  present  day  a 
useful  minister,  settled  in  a  country  village,  labouring  for  God. 

An  idea  has  long  possessed  the  public  mind,  that  a  religious  man  can  scarcely 
be  a  wise  man.  It  has  been  the  custom  to  talk  of  infidels,  atheists,  and  deists,  as 
men  of  deep  thought  and  comprehensive  intellect ;  and  to  tremble  for  the  Christian 
controversialist  as  if  he  must  surely  fall  by  the  hand  of  his  enemy.  But  this  is  purely 
a  mistake ;  for  the  gospel,  is  the  sum  of  wisdom,  an  epitome  of  knowledge,  a 
treasure-house  of  truth,  and  a  revelation  of  mysterious  secrets.  In  it  we  see  how 
justice  and  mercy  may  be  married  ;  here  we  behold  inexorable  law  entirely  satisfied,  \ 
and  sovereign  love  bearing  away  the  sinner  in  triumph.  Our  meditation  upon  it 
enlarges  the  mind  ;  and  as  it  opens  to  our  soul  in  successive  flashes  of  glory,  we 
stand  astonished  at  the  profound  wisdom  manifest  in  it.  I  have  often  said  that, 
before  I  knew  the  gospel,  I  had  gathered  up  a  heterogeneous  mass  of  all  kinds  of 
knowledge  from  here,  there,  and  everywhere, — a  bit  of  chemistry,  a  bit  of  botany,  a 
bit  of  astronomy,  and  a  bit  of  this,  that,  and  the  other.  I  put  them  all  together,  in 
one  great  confused  chaos  ;  but  when  I  learned  the  gospel,  I  got  a  shelf  in  my  head  to 
put  everything  upon  just  where  it  should  be.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if,  when  I  had 
discovered  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  I  had  found  the  centre  of  the  system,  so  that  I 


1 66  C.      H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

could  see  every  other  science  revolving  in  due  order.  From  the  earth,  the  planets 
appear  to  move  in  a  very  irregular  manner, — they  are  progressive,  retrograde,  or 
stationary  ;  but  if  you  could  get  upon  the  sun,  you  would  see  them  marching  round 
in  their  constant,  uniform,  circular  motion.  So  is  it  with  knowledge.  Begin  with  any 
other  science  you  like,  and  truth  will  seem  to  be  all  awry.  Begin  with  the  science  of 
Christ  crucified,  and  you  will  begin  with  the  sun,  you  will  see  every  other  science 
moving  round  it  in  complete  harmony.  The  greatest  mind  in  the  world  will  be 
evolved  by  beginning  at  the  right  end.  The  old  saying  is,  "  Go  from  nature  up  to 
nature's  God  ; "  but  it  is  hard  work  going  up-hill.  The  best  thing  is  to  go  from 
nature's  God  down  to  nature  ;  and  if  you  once  get  to  nature's  God,  and  believe  Him, 
and  love  Him,  it  is  surprising  how  easy  it  is  to  hear  music  in  the  waves,  and  songs 
in  the  wild  whisperings  of  the  winds,  to  see  God  everywhere,  in  the  stones,  in  the 
rocks,  in  the  rippling  brooks,  and  to  hear  Him  everywhere,  in  the  lowing  of  cattle,  in 
the  rolling  of  thunders,  and  in  the  fury  of  tempests.  Christ  is  to  me  the  wisdom  of 
God.     I  can  learn  everything  now  that  I  know  the  science  of  Christ  crucified. 


CHAPTER    XVI. 


^  icftuct  of  Calbinism. 


Tlie  old  truth  that  Calvin  preached,  that  Augustine  preached,  that  Paul  preached,  is  the  truth 
that  I  must  preach  to-day,  or  else  be  false  to  my  conscience  and  ray  God.  I  cannot  shape  the  truth  ;  I 
know  of  no  such  thing  as  paring  off  the  rough  edges  of  a  doctrine.  John  Knox's  gospel  is  my  gospel. 
That  which  thundered  through  Scotland  must  thunder  through  England  again.— C.  H.  S. 


T  is  a  great  thing  to  begin  the  Christian  life  by  believing  good  solid 


doctrine.  Some  people  have  received  twenty  different  "gospels" 
in  as  many  years  ;  how  many  more  they  will  accept  before  they  get 
to  their  journey's  end,  it  would  be  difficult  to  predict.  I  thank  God 
that  He  early  taught  me  t!ic  gospel  ;  and  I  have  been  so  perfectly 
satisfied  with  it,  that  I  do  not  want  to  know  any  other.  Constant 
change  of  creed  is  sure  loss.  If  a  tree  has  to  be  taken  up  two  or  three  times  a 
year,  you  will  not  need  to  build  a  very  large  loft  in  which  to  store  the  apples.  When 
people  are  always  shifting  their  doctrinal  principles,  they  are  not  likely  to  bring  forth 
much  fruit  to  the  glory  of  God.  It  is  good  for  young  believers  to  begin  with  a  firm 
hold  upon  those  great  fundamental  docrines  which  the  Lord  has  taught  in  His  Word. 
Why,  if  I  believed  what  some  preach  about  the  temporary,  trumpery  salvation  which 
only  lasts  for  a  time,  I  would  scarcely  be  at  all  grateful  for  it  ;  but  when  I  know- 
that  those  whom  God  saves  He  saves  with  an  everlasting  salvation,  when  I  know- 
that  He  gives  to  them  an  everlasting  righteousness,  when  I  know  that  He  settles 
them  on  an  everlasting  foundation  of  everlasting  love,  and  that  He  will  bring  them 
to  His  everlasting  kingdom,  oh,  then  I  do  wonder,  and  I  am  astonished  that  such  a 
blessincT  as  this  should  ever  ha 


ave  been  given  to  me  ! 


"Pause,  my  soul!    adore,  and  wonder! 
Ask,  'Oh,  why  suth  love  to  me?' 
Grace  hath  put  me  in  the  number 
Of  the  Saviour's  family: 

Hallelujah! 
Thanks,  eternal  thanks,  to  Thee  !  " 

I  suppose  there  are  some  persons  whose  minds  naturally  incline  towards  the 
doctrine  of  free-will.  I  can  only  say  that  mine  inclines  as  naturally  towards  the 
doctrines  of  sovereign  crrace.  Sometimes,  when  I  see  some  of  the  worst  characters 
in  the  street,  I  feel  as  if  my  heart  must  burst  forth  in  tears  of  gratitude  that  God  has 
never  let  me  act  as  they  have  done  !      I  have  thought,  if  God  had  left  me  alone,  and 


1 68  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

had  not  touched  me  by  His  grace,  what  a  great  sinner  I  should  have  been  !  I 
should  have  run  to  the  utmost  lengths  of  sin,  dived  into  the  very  depths  of  evil,  nor 
should  I  have  stopped  at  any  vice  or  folly,  if  God  had  not  restrained  me.  I  feel  that 
I  should  have  been  a  very  king  of  sinners,  if  God  had  let  me  alone.  I  cannot 
understand  the  reason  why  I  am  saved,  except  upon  the  ground  that  God  would 
have  it  so.  I  cannot,  ii  I  look  ever  so  earnestly,  discover  any  kind  of  reason  in 
myself  why  I  should  be  a  partaker  of  Divine  grace.  If  I  am  not  at  this  moment 
without  Christ,  it  is  only  because  Christ  Jesus  would  hav^e  His  will  with  me,  and 
that  will  was  that  I  should  be  with  Him  where  He  is,  and  should  share  His  glory. 
I  can  put  the  crown  nowhere  but  upon  the  head  of  Him  whose  mighty  grace  has 
saved  me  from  going  down  into  the  pit.  Looking  back  on  my  past  life,  I  can  see 
that  the  dawning  of  it  all  was  of  God  ;  of  God  effectively.  I  took  no  torch  with 
which  to  light  the  sun  ;  but  the  sun  enlightened  me.  I  did  not  commence  my  spiritual 
life, — no,  I  rather  kicked  and  struggled  against  the  things  of  the  Spirit :  when  He 
drew  me,  for  a  time  I  did  not  run  after  Him  :  there  was  a  natural  hatred  in  my  soul 
of  everything  holy  and  good.  Wooings  were  lost  upon  me, — warnings  were  cast  to 
the  wind, — thunders  were  despised  ;  and  as  for  the  whispers  of  His  love,  they  were 
rejected  as  being  less  than  nothing  and  vanity.  But,  sure  I  am,  I  can  say  now, 
speaking  on  behalf  of  myself,  "He  only  is  my  salvation."  It  was  He  who  turned 
my  heart,  and  brought  me  down  on  my  knees  before  Him.  I  can  in  very  deed,  say 
with  Doddridge  and  Toplady,- 

"  Grace  taught  my  soul  to  pray, 
And  made  my  eyes  o'erfluu- ; " 

and  coming  to  this  moment,  I  can  add, — 

"'Tis  grace  has  kept  me  to  tliis  day, 
And  will  not  let  me  go. 

Well  can  I  remember  the  manner  in  which  I  learned  the  doctrines  of  grace  in  a 
single  instant.  Born,  as  all  of  us  are  by  nature,  an  Arminian,  I  still  believed  the 
old  things  I  had  heard  continually  from  the  pulpit,  and  did  not  see  the  grace  of  God. 
When  I  was  coming  to  Christ,  I  thought  I  was  doing  it  all  myself,  and  though  I 
sought  the  Lord  earnestly,  I  had  no  idea  the  Lord  was  seeking  me.  I  do  not  think 
the  young  convert  is  at  first  aware  of  this.  I  can  recall  the  very  day  and  hour  when 
first  I  received  those  truths  in  my  own  soul,* — when  they  were,  as  John  Bunyan  says, 
burnt  into  my  heart  as  with  a  hot  iron  ;  and  I  can  recollect  how  I  felt  that  I  had 
grown  on  a  sudden  from  a  babe  into  a  man, — that  I  had  made  progress  in  Scriptural 
knowledge,  through  havino-  found,  once  for  all,  the  clue  to  the  truth  of  God.  One 
week-night,  when  1  was  sitting  in  the  house  of  God,  I  was  not  thinking  much  about 
the  preacher's  sermon,  for  I  did  not  believe  it.     The  thought  struck  me,  ''How  did 

*  See  the  letter,  dated  April  6,  1850,  on  page  121,  and  the  entry  in  Diary  on  page  129, — April  7: — "  Arminianism  does  not  suit 
me  now." 


C.     II.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGKArilY.  It)9 

yo7t  come  to  he  a  Christiaii  ?"  I  sought  the  Lord.  "/??//'  hotv  did  you  come  to  seek 
the  Lord?"  The  truth  flashed  across  my  mind  in  a  moment, — I  should  not  have 
sought  Him  unless  there  had  been  some  previous  influence  in  my  mind  to  make  me 
seek  Him.  I  prayed,  thought  I  ;  but  then  I  asked  myself,  Hoiu  came  I  to  pray? 
I  was  induced  to  pray  by  reading  the  Scriptures.  Hoii)  came  I  to  read  the  Scrip- 
tures ?  I  did  read  them  ;  but  what  led  me  to  do  so  1  Then,  in  a  moment,  I  saw 
that  God  was  at  the  bottom  of  it  all,  and  that  He  was  the  Author  of  my  failh  ;  and 
so  the  whole  doctrine  of  grace  opened  up  to  me,  and  from  that  doctrine  I  have  not 
departed  to  this  day,  and  I  desire  to  make  this  my  constant  confession,  "  I  ascribe 
my  change  wholly  to  God." 

I  once  attended  a  service  where  the  text  happened  to  be,  "  He  shall  choose 
our  inheritance  for  us  ; "  and  the  good  man  who  occupied  the  pulpit  was  more 
than  a  little  of  an  Arminian.  Therefore,  when  he  commenced,  he  said,  "  This 
passage  refers  entirely  to  our  temporal  inheritance,  it  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  our  everlasting  destiny  ;  for,"  said  he,  "we  do  not  want  Christ  to  choose  ior  us 
in  the  matter  of  Heaven  or  hell.  It  is  so  plain  and  easy,  that  every  man  who  has  a 
grain  of  common  sense  will  choose  Heaven  ;  and  any  person  would  know  better  than 
to  choose  hell.  We  have  no  need  of  any  superior  intelligence,  or  any  greater  Being, 
to  choose  Heaven  or  hell  for  us.  It  is  left  to  our  own  free-will  ;  and  we  have 
enough  wisdom  given  us,  sufficiently  correct  means  to  judge  for  ourselves,"  and 
therefore,  as  he  very  logically  inferred,  there  was  no  necessity  for  Jesus  Christ,  or 
anyone,  to  make  a  choice  for  us.  We  could  choose  the  inheritance  for  ourselves 
without  any  assistance.  "Ah!"  I  thought,  "but,  my  good  brother,  it  maybe  very 
true  that  we  could,  but  I  think  we  should  want  something  more  than  common  sense 
before  we  should  choose  aright." 

First,  let  me  ask,  must  we  not  all  of  us  admit  an  over-ruling  Providence,  and 
the  appointment  of  Jehovah's  hand,  as  to  the  means  whereby  we  came  into  this 
world .''  Those  men  who  think  that,  afterwards,  we  are  left  to  our  own  free-will  to 
choose  this  one  or  the  other  to  direct  our  steps,  must  admit  that  our  entrance  into 
the  world  was  not  of  our  own  will,  but  that  God  had  then  to  choose  for  us.  What 
circumstances  were  those  in  our  power  which  led  us  to  elect  certain  persons  to  be 
our  parents  .''  Had  we  anything  to  do  with  it?  Did  not  God  Himself  appoint  our 
parents,  native  place,  and  friends?  Could  He  not  have  caused  me  to  be  born  with 
the  skin  of  the  Hottentot,  brought  forth  by  a  filthy  mother  who  would  nurse  me  in 
her  "  kraal  ",  and  teach  me  to  bow  down  to  Pagan  gods,  quite  as  easily  as  to  have 
given  me  a  pious  mother,  who  would  each  morning  and  night  bend  her  knee  in 
prayer  on  my  behalf?  Or,  might  He  not,  if  He  had  pleased,  have  given  me  some 
profligate  to  have  been  my  parent,  from  whose  lips  I  might  have  early  heard  fearful. 


170  ,  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

filthy,  and  obscene  language?  Might  He  not  have  placed  me  where  I  should  have 
had  a  drunken  father,  who  would  have  immured  me  in  a  very  dungeon  of  ignorance, 
and  brought  me  up  in  the  chains  of  crime  ?  Was  it  not  God's  Providence  that  I  had 
so  happy  a  lot,  that  both  my  parents  were  His  children,  and  endeavoured  to  train 
me  up  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  ? 

John  Newton  used  to  tell  a  whimsical  story,  and  laugh  at  it,  too,  of  a  good 
woman  who  said,  in  order  to  prove  the  doctrine  of  election,  "Ah  !  sir,  the  Lord  must 
have  loved  me  before  I  was  born,  or  else  He  would  not  have  seen  anything  in  me  to 
love  afterwards."  I  am  sure  it  is  true  in  my  case  ;  I  believe  the  doctrine  of  election, 
because  I  am  quite  certain  that,  if  God  had  not  chosen  me,  I  should  never  have 
chosen  Him  ;  and  I  am  sure  He  chose  me  before  I  was  born,  or  else  He  never 
would  have  chosen  me  afterwards ;  and  He  must  have  elected  me  for  reasons 
unknown  to  me,  for  I  never  could  find  any  reason  in  myself  why  He  should  have 
looked  upon  me  with  special  love.  So  I  am  forced  to  accept  that  great  Biblical 
doctrine.  I  recollect  an  Arminian  brother  telling  me  that  he  had  read  the  Scriptures 
through  a  score  or  more  times,  and  could  never  find  the  doctrine  of  election  in  them. 
He  added  that  he  was  sure  he  would  have  done  so  if  it  had  been  there,  for  he  read 
the  Word  on  his  knees.  1  said  to  him,  "  I  think  you  read  the  Bible  in  a  very 
uncomfortable  posture,  and  if  you  had  read  it  in  your  easy  chair,  you  would  have 
been  more  likely  to  understand  it.  Pray,  by  all  means,  and  the  more,  the  better  ; 
but  it  is  a  piece  of  superstition  to  think  there  is  anything  in  the  posture  in  which 
a  man  puts  himself  for  reading  :  and  as  to  reading  through  the  Bible  twenty  times 
without  having  found  anything  about  the  doctrine  of  election,  the  wonder  is  that  you 
found  anything  at  all :  you  must  have  galloped  through  it  at  such  a  rate  that  you 
were  not  likely  to  have  any  intelligible  idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures." 

If  it  would  be  marvellous  to  see  one  river  leap  up  from  the  earth  full-grown, 
what  would  it  be  to  gaze  upon  a  vast  spring  from  which  all  the  rivers  of  the  earth 
should  at  once  come  bubbling  up,  a  million  of  them  born  at  a  birth  ?  What  a 
vision  would  it  be !  Who  can  conceive  it  ?  And  yet  the  love  of  God  is  that 
fountain,  from  which  all  the  rivers  of  mercy,  which  have  ever  gladdened  our  race, — 
all  the  rivers  of  grace  in  time,  and  of  glory  hereafter, — take  their  rise.  My  soul, 
stand  thou  at  that  sacred  fountain-head,  and  adore  and  magnify  for  ever  and  ever 
God,  even  our  Father,  who  hath  loved  us  !  In  the  very  beginning,  when  this  great 
universe  lay  in  the  mind  of  God,  like  unborn  forests  in  the  acorn  cup  ;  long  ere  the 
echoes  awoke  the  solitudes  ;  before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth  ;  and  long  ere 
the  light  flashed  through  the  sky,  God  loved  His  chosen  creatures.  Before  there 
was  any  created  being, — when  the  ether  was  not  fanned  by  an  angel's  wing,  when 
space  itself  had  not  an  existence  ;  when  there  was  nothing  save  God  alone  ;  even 
then,  in  that  loneliness  of  Deity,  and  in  that  deep  quiet  and  profundity,  His  bowels 


C.      H.     SFUKGEONS     AUTOIilOGRAl'HY.  IJI 

moved  with  love  for  His  chosen.  Their  names  were  written  on  His  heart,  and  then 
were  they  dear  to  His  soul.  Jesus  loved  his  people  before  the  foundation  ol  the 
world, — even  from  eternity!  and  when  He  called  me  by  His  grace,  He  said  to  me, 
"  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  :  therefore  with  lovingkindness  have  I 
drawn  thee." 

Then,  in  the  fulness  of  time.  He  purchased  me  with  His  blood  ;  He  let  His  heart 
run  out  in  one  deep  gaping  wound  for  me  long  ere  I  loved  Him.  Yea,  when  He 
first  came  to  me,  did  I  not  spurn  Him?  When  He  knocked  at  the  door,  and  asked 
for  entrance,  did  I  not  drive  Him  away,  and  do  despite  to  His  grace?  Ah  !  I  can 
remember  that  I  full  often  did  so  until,  at  last,  by  the  power  of  His  eftectual  grace. 
He  said,  "  I  must,  I  will  come  in  ;"  and  then  He  turned  my  heart,  and  made  me 
love  Him.  But  even  till  now  I  should  have  resisted  Him,  had  it  not  been  for  His 
grace.  Well,  then,  since  He  purchased  me  when  I  was  dead  in  sins,  does  it  not 
follow,  as  a  consequence  necessary  and  logical,  that  He  must  have  loved  me  first? 
Did  my  Saviour  die  for  me  because  I  believed  on  Him?  No  ;  I  was  not  then  in 
existence  ;  I  had  then  no  beincj.  Could  the  Saviour,  therefore,  have  died  because  I 
had  faith,  when  I  myself  was  not  yet  born  ?  Could  that  have  been  possible  ?  Could 
that  have  been  the  origin  of  the  Saviour's  love  towards  me  ?  Oh  !  no  ;  my  Saviour 
died  for  me  long  before  I  believed.  "  But,"  says  someone,  "  He  foresaw  that  you 
would  have  faith  ;  and,  therefore,  He  loved  you."  What  did  He  foresee  about  my 
faith?  Did  He  foresee  that  I  should  get  that  faith  myself  and  that  I  should  believe 
on  Him  of  myself?  No;  Christ  could  not  foresee  that,  because  no  Christian  man 
will  ever  say  that  faith  came  of  itself  without  the  gift  and  without  the  working  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  I  have  met  with  a  great  many  believers,  and  talked  with  them 
about  this  matter  ;  but  I  never  knew  one  w^ho  could  put  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and 
say,  "  I  believed  in  Jesus  without  the  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit." 

I  am  bound  to  the  doctrine  of  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  because  I  find 
myself  depraved  in  heart,  and  have  daily  proofs  that  in  my  flesh  there  dwelleth  no 
good  thing.  If  God  enters  into  covenant  with  unfallen  man,  man  is  so  insignificant 
a  creature  that  it  must  be  an  act  of  gracious  condescension  on  the  Lord's  part ;  but  if 
God  enters  into  covenant  with  sinful  man,  he  is  then  so  offensive  a  creature  that  it 
must  be,  on  God's  part,  an  act  of  pure,  free,  rich,  sovereign  grace.  When  the  Lord 
entered  into  covenant  with  me,  I  am  sure  that  it  was  all  of  grace,  nothing  else  but 
grace.  When  I  remember  what  a  den  of  unclean  beasts  and  birds  my  heart  was, 
and  how  strong  was  my  unrenewed  will,  how  obstinate  and  rebellious  against  the 
sovereignty  of  the  Divine  rule,  I  always  feel  inclined  to  take  the  very  lowest  room  in 
my  Father's  house  ;  and  when  I  enter  Heaven,  it  will  be  to  go  among  the  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  and  with  the  chief  of  sinners. 

The  late   lamented    Mr.  Denham  has   put,   at  the  foot  of  his  portrait,   a   most 


J  72  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

admirable  text,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  That  is  just  an  epitome  of  Calvinism  ; 
it  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  it.  If  anyone  should  ask  me  what  I  mean  by  a 
Calvinist,  I  should  reply,  "  He  is  one  who  says,  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  I 
cannot  find  in  Scripture  any  other  doctrine  than  this.  It  is  the  essence  of  the  Bible. 
"  He  only  is  my  rock  and  my  salvation."  Tell  me  anything  contrary  to  this  truth, 
and  it  will  be  a  heresy  ;  tell  mc  a  heresy,  and  I  shall  find  its  essence  here,  that  it  has 
departed  from  this  great,  this  fundamental,  this  rock-truth,  "  God  is  my  rock  and 
my  salvation."  What  is  the  heresy  of  Rome,  but  the  addition  of  something  to  the 
perfect  merits  of  Jesus  Christ, — the  bringing  in  of  the  works  of  the  flesh,  to  assist 
in  our  justification  ?  And  what  is  the  heresy  of  Arminianism  but  the  addition  of 
somethincr  to  the  work  of  the  Redeemer  ?  Every  heresy,  if  brought  to  the  touch- 
stone, will  discover  itself  here.  I  have  my  own  private  opinion  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  as  preaching  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  unless  we  preach  what  nowadays  is 
called  Calvinism.  It  is  a  nickname  to  call  it  Calvinism  ;  Calvinism  is  the  gospel, 
and  nothino'  else.  I  do  not  believe  we  can  preach  the  gospel,  if  we  do  not  preach 
justification  by  faith,  without  works  ;  nor  unless  we  preach  the  sovereignty  of  God  in 
His  dispensation  of  grace  ;  nor  unless  we  e.xalt  the  electing,  unchangeable,  eternal, 
immutable,  conquering  love  of  Jehovah  ;  nor  do  I  think  we  can  preach  the  gospel, 
unless  we  base  it  upon  the  special  and  particular  redemption  of  His  elect  and  chosen 
people  which  Christ  wrought  out  upon  the  cross  ;  nor  can  I  comprehend  a  gospel 
which  lets  saints  fall  away  after  they  are  called,  and  suffers  the  children  of  God  to  be 
burned  in  the  fires  of  damnation  after  having  once  believed  in  Jesus.  Such  a 
gospel  I  abhor. 

"  If  ever  it  should  come  to  pass, 

Tliat  sheep  of  Christ  miglit  fall  away, 
My  fickle,  feeble  soul,  alas ! 
Would  fall  a  thousand  times  a  day." 

If  one  dear  saint  of  God  had  perished,  so  might  all  ;  if  one  of  the  covenant  ones  be 
lost,  so  may  all  be  ;  and  then  there  is  no  gospel  promise  true,  but  the  Bible  is  a  lie, 
and  there  is  nothing  in  it  worth  my  acceptance.  I  will  be  an  infidel  at  once  when  I 
can  believe  that  a  saint  of  God  can  ever  fall  finally.  If  God  hath  loved  me  once, 
then  He  will  love  me  for  ever.  God  has  a  master-mind  ;  He  arranged  everything  in 
His  gigantic  intellect  long  before  He  did  it;  and  once  having  settled  it,  He  never 
alters  it.  "  This  shall  be  done,"  saith  He,  and  the  iron  hand  of  destiny  marks  it 
down,  and  it  is  brought  to  pass.  "  This  is  My  purpose,"  and  it  stands,  nor  can  earth 
or  hell  alter  it.  "This  is  My  decree,"  saith  He,  "promulgate  it,  ye  holy  angels  . 
rend  it  down  from  the  gate  of  Heaven,  ye  devils,  if  ye  can  ;  but  ye  cannot  alter  the 
decree,  it  shall  stand  for  ever."  God  altereth  not  His  plans;  why  should  He? 
He  is  Almighty,  and  therefore  can  perform  His  pleasure.  Why  should  He?  He 
is  the  All-wise,  and  therefore  cannot  have  planned  wrongly.     Why  should  He?     He 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGKAI'llV.  173 

is  the  everlasting  God,  and  therefore  cannot  die  before  His  plan  is  accomplished. 
Why  should  He  change  ?  Ye  worthless  atoms  of  earth,  ephemera  of  a  day,  ye 
creeping  insects  upon  this  bay-leaf  of  existence,  ye  may  change  your  plans,  but  He 
shall  never,  never  change  His.  Has  He  told  me  that  His  plan  is  to  save  me?  If 
so,  I  am  for  ever  sate. 

"My  name  from  the  palms  of  His  hands 
Eternity  will  not  erase  ; 
Impress'd  on  His  heart  it  remains, 
In  marks  of  indelible  grace." 

I  do  not  know  how  some  people,  who  believe  that  a  Christian  can  fall  from 
grace,  manage  to  be  happy.  It  must  be  a  very  commendable  thing  in  them  to  be 
able  to  get  through  a  day  without  despair.  If  I  did  not  believe  the  doctrine  of  the 
final  perseverance  of  the  saints,  I  think  I  should  be  of  all  men  the  most  miserable, 
because  I  should  lack  any  ground  of  comfort.  I  could  not  say,  whatever  state  of 
heart  I  came  into,  that  I  should  be  like  a  well-spring  of  water,  whose  stream  fails  not ; 
I  should  rather  have  to  take  the  comparison  of  an  intermittent  spring,  that  might  stop 
on  a  sudden,  or  a  reservoir,  which  I  had  no  reason  to  e.xpect  would  always  be  full. 
I  believe  that  the  happiest  of  Christians  and  the  truest  of  Christians  are  those  who 
never  dare  to  doubt  God,  but  who  take  His  Word  simply  as  it  stands,  and  believe  it, 
and  ask  no  questions,  just  feeling  assured  that  if  God  has  said  it,  it  will  be  so.  I 
bear  my  willing  testimony  that  I  have  no  reason,  nor  even  the  shadow  of  a  reason, 
to  doubt  my  Lord  ;  and  I  challenge  Heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell  to  bring  any  proof 
that  God  is  untrue.  From  the  depths  of  hell  I  call  the  fiends,  and  from  this  earth  I 
call  the  tried  and  afflicted  believers,  and  to  Heaven  I  appeal,  and  challenge  the  long- 
experience  of  the  blood-washed  host,  and  there  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  three 
realms  a  single  person  who  can  bear  witness  to  one  fact  which  can  disprove  the 
faithfulness  of  God,  or  weaken  His  claim  to  be  trusted  by  His  servants.  There  are 
many  things  that  may  or  may  not  happen,  but  this  I  know  shall  happen, — 

"  He  shall  present  my  soul, 
Unblemish'd  and  complete. 
Before  the  glory  of  His  face. 
With  joys  divinely  great." 

All  the  purposes  of  man  have  been  defeated,  but  not  the  purposes  of  God.  The 
promises  of  man  may  be  broken, — many  of  them  are  made  to  be  broken, — but  the 
promises  of  God  shall  all  be  fulfilled.  He  is  a  promise-maker,  but  He  never  was  a 
promise-breaker;  He  is  a  promise-keeping  God,  and  every  one  of  His  people  shall 
prove  it  to  be  so.  This  is  my  grateful,  personal  confidence,  "  The  Lord  ivill  perfect 
that  which  concerneth  mc" — unworthy  me,  lost  and  ruined  ))ic.  He  will  yet  save 
me;  and — 

"  I,  among  the  blood-wash'd  throng, 
Shall  wave  the  palm,  and  wear  the  crown. 
And  shout  loud  victory." 


174  •-'•      ^^-     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAI'IIV. 

I  go  to.  a  land  which  the  plough  of  earth  hath  never  upturned,  where  it  is  greener 
than  earth's  best  pastures,  and  richer  than  her  most  abundant  harvests  ever  saw. 
I  cfo  to  a  buildine  of  more  eoreeous  architecture  than  man  hath  ever  builded  ;  it  is 
not  of  mortal  design  ;  it  is  "a  building  of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal 
in  the  Heavens."  All  I  shall  know  and  enjoy  in  Heaven,  will  be  given  to  me  by  the 
Lord  ;  and  I  shall  say,  when  at  last  I  appear  before  Him, — 

"  Grace  all  the  work  shall  crown 
Through  everlasting  days ; 
It  lays  in  Heaven  the  topmost  stone, 
And  well  deserves  the  praise." 

I  know  there  arc  some  who  think  it  necessary  to  their  system  of  theology  to 
limit  the  merit  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  :  if  my  theological  system  needed  such  a 
limitatitjn,  1  would  cast  it  to  the  winds.  I  cannot,  I  dare  not,  allow  the  thought  to 
find  a  lodging  in  my  mind,  it  seems  so  near  akin  to  blasphemy.  In  Christ's  finished 
work  I  see  an  ocean  of  merit  ;  my  plummet  finds  no  bottom,  my  eye  discovers  no 
shore.  There  must  be  sufficient  efficacy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  if  God  had  so  willed 
it,  to  have  saved  not  only  all  in  this  world,  but  all  in  ten  thousand  worlds,  had  they 
transgressed  their  Maker's  law.  Once  admit  infinity  into  the  matter,  and  limit  is 
out  of  the  question.  Having  a  Divine  Person  for  an  offering,  it  is  not  consistent 
to  conceive  of  limited  value  ;  bound  and  measure  are  terms  inapplicable  to  the 
Divine  sacrifice.  The  intent  of  the  Divine  purpose  fixes  the  application  of  the 
infinite  offering,  but  does  not  change  it  into  a  finite  work.  Think  of  the  numbers 
upon  whom  God  has  bestowed  His  grace  already.  Think  of  the  countless  hosts  in 
Heaven  :  if  thou  wert  introduced  there  to-day,  thou  wouldst  find  it  as  easy  to  tell 
the  stars,  or  the  sands  of  the  sea,  as  to  count  the  multitudes  that  are  before  the 
throne  even  now.  They  have  come  from  the  East,  and  from  the  West,  from  the 
North,  and  from  the  South,  and  they  are  sitting  down  with  Abraham,  and  with 
Isaac,  and  with  Jacob  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  ;  and  beside  those  in  Heaven,  think 
of  the  saved  ones  on  earth.  Blessed  be  God,  His  elect  on  earth  are  to  be  counted 
by  millions,  I  believe  ;  and  the  days  are  coming,  brighter  days  than  these,  when  there 
shall  be  multitudes  upon  multitudes  brought  to  know  the  Saviour,  and  to  rejoice  in 
Him.  The  Father's  love  is  not  for  a  few  only,  but  for  an  exceeding  great  company. 
"A  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could  number,"  will  be  found  in  Heaven.  A  man 
can  reckon  up  to  very  high  figures  ;  set  to  work  your  Newtons,  your  mightiest 
calculators,  and  they  can  count  great  numbers  ;  but  God  and  God  alone  can  tell  the 
multitude  of  His  redeemed.  I  believe  there  will  be  more  in  Heaven  than  in  hell. 
If  anyone  asks  me  why  I  think  so,  I  answer,  because  Christ,  in  everything,  is  to 
"have  the  pre-eminence,"  and  I  cannot  conceive  how  He  could  have  the  pre- 
eminence if  there  are  to  be  more  in  the  dominions  of  Satan  than  in  Paradise. 
Moreover,  I  have  never  read  that  there  is  to  be  in  hell  a  great  multitude,  which  no 


C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilY.  1 75 

man  could  number.  I  rejoice  to  know  that  the  souls  of  all  infants,  as  soon  as  they 
die,  speed  their  way  to  Paradise.  Think  what  a  multitude  there  is  of  them  !  Then 
there  are  already  in  Heaven  unnumbered  myriads  of  the  spirits  of  just  men  made 
perfect, — the  redeemed  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues  up  till 
now  ;  and  there  are  better  times  cominof,  when  the  reliyion  of  Christ  shall  be 
universal  ;  when — 

"He  shall  reign  from  pole  to  pole. 
With  illimitable  sway;" 

when  whole  kingdoms  shall  bow  down  before  Him,  and  nations  shall  be  born  in  a 
day  ;  and  in  the  thousand  years  of  the  great  millennial  state  there  will  be  enough 
saved  to  make  up  all  the  deficiencies  of  the  thousands  of  years  that  have  gone  before. . 
Christ  shall  be  Master  everywhere,  and  His  praise  shall  be  sounded  in  every  land. 
Christ  shall  have  the  pre-eminence  at  last ;  His  train  shall  be  far  larger  than  that 
which  shall  attend  the  chariot  of  the  grim  monarch  of  hell. 

Some  persons  love  the  doctrine  of  universal  atonement  because  they  say,  "  It 
is  so  beautiful.  It  is  a  lovely  idea  that  Christ  should  have  died  for  all  men  ;  it 
commends  itself"  they  say,  "to  the  instincts  of  humanity;  there  is  something  in  it 
full  of  joy  and  beauty."  I  admit  there  is  ;  but  beauty  may  be  often  associated  with 
falsehood.  There  is  much  which  I  might  admire  in  the  theory  of  universal  redemp- 
tion, but  I  will  just  show  what  the  supposition  necessarily  involves.  li  Christ  on 
His  cross  intended  to  save  every  man,  then  He  intended  to  save  those  who  were 
lost  before  He  died.  If  the  doctrine  be  true,  that  He  died  for  all  men,  then  He  died 
for  some  who  were  in  hell  before  He  came  into  this  world,  for  doubtless  there  were 
even  then  myriads  there  who  had  been  cast  away  because  of  their  sins.  Once  again, 
if  it  was  Christ's  intention  to  save  all  men,  how  deplorably  has  He  been  disappointed, 
for  we  have  His  own  testimony  that  there  is  a  lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and 
brimstone,  and  into  that  pit  of  woe  have  been  cast  some  of  the  very  persons  who, 
according  to  the  theory  of  universal  redemption,  were  bought  with  His  blood. 
That  seems  to  me  a  conception  a  thousand  times  more  repulsive  than  any  ot  those 
consequences  which  are  said  to  be  associated  with  the  Calvinistic  and  Christian 
doctrine  of  special  and  particular  redemption.  To  think  that  my  Saviour  died  for 
men  who  were  or  are  in  hell,  seems  a  supposition  too  horrible  for  me  to  entertain. 
To  imagine  for  a  moment  that  He  was  the  Substitute  for  all  the  sons  of  men,  and 
that  God,  having  first  punished  the  Substitute,  afterwards  punished  the  sinners 
themselves,  seems  to  conflict  with  all  my  ideas  of  Divine  justice.  That  Christ 
should  offer  an  atonement  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  all  men,  and  that  after- 
wards some  of  those  very  men  should  be  punished  for  the  sins  for  which  Christ  had 
already  atoned,  appears  to  me  to  be  the  most  monstrous  iniquity  that  could  ever 
have  been  imputed  to  Saturn,  to  Janus,  to  the  goddess  of  the  Thugs,  or  to  the  most 


176  C.     H.     STURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

diabolical  heathen  deities.     God  forbid  that  we  should  ever  think  thus  of  Jehovah, 
the  just  and  wise  and  good  ! 

There  is  no  soul  living  who  holds  more  firmly  to  the  doctrines  of  grace  than 
I  do,  and  if  any  man  asks  me  whether  I  am  ashamed  to  be  called  a  Calvinist,  I 
answer, — I  wish  to  be  called  nothing  but  a  Christian  ;  but  if  you  ask  me,  do  I  hold 
the  doctrinal  views  which  were  held  by  John  Calvin,  I  reply,  1  do  in  the  main  hold 
them,  and  rejoice  to  avow  it.  But  far  be  it  from  me  even  to  imagine  that  Zion 
contains  none  but  Calvinistic  Christians  within  her  walls,  or  that  there  are  none 
saved  who  do  not  hold  our  views.  Most  atrocious  things  have  been  spoken  about 
the  character  and  spiritual  condition  of  John  Wesley,  the  modern  prince  of 
Arminians.  I  can  only  say  concerning  him  that,  while  I  detest  many  of  the 
doctrines  which  he  preached,  yet  for  the  man  himself  I  have  a  reverence  second  to  no 
Wesleyan  ;  and  if  there  were  wanted  two  apostles  to  be  added  to  the  number  of  the 
twelve,  1  do  not  believe  that  there  could  be  found  two  men  more  fit  to  be  so  added 
than  George  Whitefield  and  John  Wesley.  The  character  of  John  Wesley  stands 
beyond  all  imputation  for  self-sacrifice,  zeal,  holiness,  and  communion  with  God  ;  he 
lived  far  above  the  ordinary  level  of  common  Christians,  and  was  one  "of  whom  the 
world  was  not  worthy."  I  believe  there  are  multitudes  of  men  who  cannot  see  these 
truths,  or,  at  least,  cannot  see  them  in  the  way  in  which  we  put  them,  who 
nevertheless  have  received  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  and  are  as  dear  to  the  heart  of 
the  God  of  crrace  as  the  soundest  Calvinist  in  or  out  of  Heaven. 

I  do  not  think  I  differ  from  any  of  my  Hyper-Calvinistic  brethren  in  what  I  do 
believe  ;  but  I  differ  from  them  in  what  they  do  not  believe.  I  do  not  hold  any  less 
than  they  do,  but  I  hold  a  little  more,  and,  1  think,  a  little  more  of  the  truth  revealed 
in  the  Scriptures.  Not  only  are  there  a  few  cardinal  doctrines,  by  which  we  can 
steer  our  ship  North,  South,  East,  or  West  ;  but  as  we  study  the  Word,  we  shall 
begrin  to  learn  something  about  the  North-west  and  North-east,  and  all  else  that  lies 
between  the  four  cardinal  points.  The  system  of  truth  revealed  in  the  Scriptures  is 
not  simply  one  straight  line,  but  two  ;  and  no  man  will  ever  get  a  right  view  of  the 
gospel  until  he  knows  how  to  look  at  the  two  lines  at  once.  For  instance,  I  read  in 
one  Book  of  the  Bible,  "The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that 
heareth  say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him 
take  the  water  of  life  freely."  Yet  I  am  taught,  in  another  part  of  the  same  inspired 
Word,  that  "it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that 
sheweth  mercy."  I  see,  in  one  place,  God  in  providence  presiding  over  all  ;  and  yet 
I  see,  and  I  cannot  help  seeing,  that  man  acts  as  he  pleases,  and  that  God  has  left 
his  actions,  in  a  great  measure,  to  his  own  free-will.  Now,  if  I  were  to  declare  that 
man  was  so  free  to  act  that  there  was  no  control  of  God  over  his  actions,  I  should  be 
driven  very  near  to  atheism  ;  and  if,  on  the  other  hand,  I  should  declare  that  God  so 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  177 

over-rules  all  things  that  man  is  not  free  enough  to  be  responsible,  I  should  be 
driven  at  once  into  Antinomianism  or  fatalism.  That  God  predestines,  and  yet  that 
man  is  responsible,  are  two  facts  that  few  can  see  clearly.  They  are  believed  to  be 
inconsistent  and  contradictory;  but  they  are  not.  The  fault  is  in  our  weak  judo-ment. 
Two  truths  cannot  be  contradictory  to  each  other.  If,  then,  I  find  tauoht  in  one 
part  of  the  Bible  that  everything  is  fore-ordained,  that  is  true ;  and  if  I  find,  in 
another  Scripture,  that  man  is  responsible  for  all  his  actions,  that  is  true ;  and  it  is 
only  my  folly  that  leads  me  to  imagine  that  these  two  truths  can  ever  contradict  each 
other.  I  do  not  believe  they  can  ever  be  welded  into  one  upon  any  earthly  anvil, 
but  they  certainly  shall  be  one  in  eternity.  They  are  two  lines  that  are  so  nearly 
parallel,  that  the  human  mind  which  pursues  them  farthest  will  never  discover  that 
they  converge  ;  but  they  do  converge,  and  they  will  meet  somewhere  in  eternity, 
close  to  the  throne  of  God,  whence  all  truth  doth  spring. 

It  is  often  said  that  the  doctrines  we  believe  have  a  tendency  to  lead  us  to  sin. 
I  have  heard  it  asserted  most  positively,  that  those  high  doctrines  which  we  love, 
and  which  we  find  in  the  Scriptures,  are  licentious  ones.  I  do  not  know  who  will 
have  the  hardihood  to  make  that  assertion,  when  they  consider  that  the  holiest  of 
men  have  been  believers  in  them.  I  ask  the  man  who  dares  to  say  that  Calvinism 
is  a  licentious  religion,  what  he  thinks  of  the  character  of  Augustine,  or  Calvin,  or 
Whitefield,  who  in  successive  ages  were  the  great  exponents  of  the  system  of  grace  ; 
or  what  will  he  say  of  the  Puritans,  whose  works  are  full  of  them  }  Had  a  man 
been  an  Arminian  in  those  days,  he  would  have  been  accounted  the  vilest  heretic 
breathing  ;  but  now  we  are  looked  upon  as  the  heretics,  and  they  as  the  orthodox. 
\Vc  have  gone  back  to  the  old  school  ;  we  can  trace  our  descent  from  the  apostles. 
It  is  that  vein  of  free-grace,  running  through  the  sermonizing  of  Baptists,  which  has 
saved  us  as  a  denomination.  Were  it  not  for  that,  we  should  not  stand  where  we 
are  to-day.  We  can  run  a  golden  line  up  to  Jesus  Christ  Himself  through  a  holy 
succession  of  mighty  fathers,  who  all  held  these  glorious  truths  ;  and  we  can  ask 
concerning  them,  "Where  will  you  find  holier  and  better  men  in  the  world.''"  No 
doctrine  is  so  calculated  to  preserve  a  man  from  sin  as  the  doctrine  of  the  orace  of 
God.  Those  who  have  called  it  "a  licentious  doctrine"  did  not  know  anythino-  at  all 
about  it.  Poor  ignorant  things,  they  little  knew  that  their  own  vile  stuff  was  the 
most  licentious  doctrine  under  Heaven.  If  they  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth, 
they  would  soon  see  that  there  was  no  preservative  from  lying  like  a  knowledoe 
that  we  are  elect  of  God  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  There  is  nothino-  like  a 
belief  in  my  eternal  perseverance,  and  the  immutability  of  my  Father's  affection,  which 
can  keep  me  near  to  Him  from  a  motive  of  simple  gratitude.  Nothing  makes  a  man 
so  virtuous  as  belief  of  the  truth.      A  lying  doctrine  will  soon  beget  a  lying  practice. 

M 


178  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

A  man  cannot  have  an  erroneous  belief  without  by-and-by  having  an  erroneous  life. 
I  believe  the  one  thing  naturally  begets  the  other.  Of  all  men,  those  have  the  most 
disinterested  piety,  the  sublimest  reverence,  the  most  ardent  devotion,  who  believe 
that  they  are  saved  by  grace,  without  works,  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  themselves, 
it  is  the  gift  of  God.  Christians  should  take  heed,  and  see  that  it  always  is  so,  lest 
by  any  means  Christ  should  be  crucified  afresh,  and  put  to  an  open  shame. 

In  my  early  Christian  days,  I  remember  seeing  a  man  about  to  enter  a  place  of 
worldly  amusement.  Though  he  was  a  professing  Christian,  he  was  going  to  spend 
the  evening  in  a  dancing  booth  at  the  village  fair,  drinking  and  acting  as  other  men 
did.  I  called  out  to  him,  just  as  he  was  at  the  entrance,  "  What  doest  thou  there, 
Elijah  ?  "  "  Why  do  you  ask  me  such  a  question  as  that  ?  "  said  he.  I  asked  again, 
"What  doest  thou  there,  Elijah?  Art  i/iou  going  in  their?"  "Yes,"  he  replied, 
with  some  sort  of  blush,  "  I  am,  but  I  can  do  so  with  impunity  ;  I  am  a  child  of 
God,  and  I  can  go  where  I  like,  and  yet  be  safe."  "/could  not,"  said  I  ;  "if  I  went 
there,  I  know  I  should  commit  sin.  It  is  a  place  of  danger,  and  I  could  not  go  there 
without  great  risk  of  sinning  against  God."  "Ah  !  "  said  he,  "  I  could  ;  I  have  been 
before,  and  I  have  had  some  sweet  thoughts  there.  I  find  it  enlarges  the  intellect. 
You  are  narrow-minded  ;  you  do  not  appreciate  these  good  things.  It  is  a  rich 
treat,  I  assure  you  ;  I  would  go  if  I  were  you."  "  No,"  I  said,  "  it  would  be 
dangerous  for  me  ;  from  what  I  hear,  the  name  of  Jesus  is  profaned  there  ;  and  there 
is  much  said  that  is  altogether  contrary  to  the  religion  I  believe.  The  persons  who 
attend  there  are  none  of  the  best,  and  it  will  surely  be  said  that  birds  of  a  feather 
flock  together."  "  Ah,  well  !  "  he  replied,  "  perhaps  you  young  men  had  better  keep 
away  ;  I  am  a  strong  man,  I  can  go  ;  "  and  oft  he  went  to  the  place  of  amusement. 
My  soul  revolted  from  the  man  ever  afterwards,  for  I  felt  that  no  child  of  God  would 
ever  be  so  wicked  as  to  take  poison  in  the  faith  that  his  Father  would  give  him  the 
antidote,  or  thrust  himself  into  the  fire,  in  the  hope  that  he  should  not  be  burned. 
That  man  was  an  apple  of  Sodom,  and  I  guessed  that  there  was  something  rotten 
at  the  core  ;  and  I  found  by  e.xperience  that  it  was  so,  for  he  was  a  downright 
sensualist  even  then.  He  wore  a  mask,  for  he  was  a  hypocrite,  and  had  none  of  the 
grace  of  God  in  his  heart. 

(This  is  evidendy  the  man  mentioned  in  the  Diary,  on  page  146,  and  is  quite 
a  different  person  from  "Old  Roads" — see  pages  23  and  24, — who  was  rebuked  by 
"  the  child "  for  frequenting  the  Stambourne  public-house,  and  who,  through  that 
rebuke,  was  restored  to  a  consistent  Christian  life.) 


CHAPTER     XVII. 


Bcniuntng  to  Stxht  tijc  iorlr. 

"As  Jesus  passed  forth  from  thence,  He  saw  a  man  named  Matthew,  sitting  at  the  receipt  of 
custom,  and  He  saith  unto  him,  Follow  Me  ;  and  he  arose,  and  followed  Him."  This  is  a  little  bit  of 
autobiography.  Matthew  wrote  this  verse  about  himself.  I  can  fancy  him,  with  his  pen  in  his  hand, 
writing  all  the  rest  of  this  Gospel  ;  but  I  can  imagine  that,  when  he  came  to  this  very  personal  passage, 
he  laid  the  pen  down  a  minute,  and  wiped  his  eyes.  He  was  coming  to  a  most  memorable  and  pathetic 
incident  in  his  own  life,  and  he  recorded  it  with  tremulous  emotion.  This  verse  reads  to  me  .so  tenderly 
that  I  do  not  know  how  to  communicate  to  you  just  how  I  feel  about  it.  I  have  tried  to  imagine  myself 
to  be  Matthew,  and  to  have  to  write  thii  story ;  and  I  am  sure  that,  if  I  had  not  been  inspired  as 
Matthew  was,  I  should  never  have  done  it  so  beautifully  as  he  has  done  it,  for  it  is  so  full  of  everything 
that  is  touching,  tender,  timid,  true,  and  gracious. 

I  know  another  man,  not  named  "Matthew,"  but  "Charles,"  and  the  Lord  said  to  him,  "Follow 
Me;"  and  he  also  arose,  and  followed  Him.  I  do  not  know  all  that  He  saw  when  He  looked  upon  me, 
I  fear  that  He  saw  nothing  in  me  but  sin,  and  evil,  and  vanity  ;  but  I  believe  that  He  did  say  to  Himself 
concerning  me,  "  I  see  one  to  whom  I  can  teach  My  truth,  and  who,  when  He  gets  a  hold  of  it,  will  grip 
it  fast,  and  never  let  it  go,  and  one  who  will  not  be  afraid  to  speak  it  wherever  he  is."  So  the  Lord  saw 
what  use  He  could  make  of  me.  There  is  an  adaptation  in  men,  even  while  they  are  unconverted, 
which  God  has  put  into  them  for  their  future  service.  Luke  was  qualified  to  write  his  Gospel  because 
he  had  been  a  physician  ;  and  Matthew  was  qualified  to  write  the  particular  Gospel  which  he  has  left 
us,  because  he  had  been  a  publican.  There  may  be  a  something  about  your  habits  of  life,  and  about 
your  constitution,  and  your  condition,  that  will  qualify  you  for  some  special  niche  in  the  Church  of  God 
in  the  years  to  come.  O  happy  day,  when  Jesus  shall  look  upon  you,  and  call  you  to  follow  Him! 
Happy  i!ay,  when  He  did  look  upon  some  of  us,  and  saw  in  us  what  His  love  meant  to  put  there,  that 
He  might  make  of  us  vessels  of  mercy  meet  for  the  Master's  use! — C.  H.  S. 


DO  not  see  how  our  sense  of  oneness  to  Christ  could  ever  have 
been  perfected  if  we  had  not  been  permitted  to  work  for  Him. 
If  He  had  been  pleased  to  save  us  by  His  precious  blood,  and 
then  leave  us  with  nothing  to  do,  we  should  have  had  fellowship 
with  Christ  up  to  a  certain  point,  but  (I  speak  from  experience) 
there  is  no  fellowship  with  Christ  that  seems  to  me  to  be  so  vivid, 
so  real  to  the  soul,  as  when  I  try  to  win  a  soul  for  Him.  Oh,  when  I  come 
to  battle  with  that  soul's  difficulties,  to  weep  over  that  soul's  hardness  ;  when 
I  begin  to  set  the  arguments  of  Divine  mercy  before  it,  and  find  myself  foiled  ; 
when  1  am  in  a  very  agony  of  spirit,  and  feel  that  I  could  die  sooner  than  that 
soul  should  perish  ;  then  I  get  to  read  the  heart  of  Him  whose  flowing  tears,  and 
bloody  sweat,  and  dying  wounds  showed  how  much  He  loved  poor  fallen  mankind. 

I  think  that,  when  I  was  first  converted  to  God,  if  the  Lord  had  said,  "  I  have 
taken  you  into  My  house,  and  I  am  going  to  make  use  of  you,  and  you  shall  be  a 
door-mat  for  the  saints  to  wipe  their  ieet  on,"  I  should  have  said,  "Ah,  happy  shall 


i8o  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

I  be  if  I  may  but  take  the  filth  off  their  blessed  feet,  for  I  love  God's  people  ;  and  if 
I  may  minister  to  them  in  the  sHghtest  degree,  it  shall  be  my  delight  !  "  I  know  it 
did  not  come  into  my  head,  at  that  time,  that  I  should  be  a  leader  in  God's  Israel. 
Ah,  no  ;  if  I  might  but  sit  in  the  corner  of  His  house,  or  be  a  door-keeper,  it  had  been 
enough  for  me!  If,  like  the  dog  under  the  table,  I  might  get  a  crumb  of  His  mercy, 
were  it  but  flavoured  by  His  hand,  because  He  had  broken  it  off,  that  was  all  I 
wanted.  In  that  day  when  I  surrendered  myself  to  my  Saviour,  I  gave  Him  my 
body,  my  soul,  my  spirit  ;  I  gave  Him  all  I  had,  and  all  I  shall  have  for  time  and  for 
eternity.  I  gave  Him  all  my  talents,  my  powers,  my  faculties,  my  eyes,  my  ears,  my 
limbs,  my  emotions,  my  judgment,  my  whole  manhood,  and  all  that  could  come  of  it, 
whatever  fresh  capacity  or  new  capability  I  might  be  endowed  with.  Were  I,  at  this 
good  hour,  to  change  the  note  of  gladness  for  one  of  sadness,  it  would  be  to  wail  out 
my  penitent  confession  of  the  times  and  circumstances  in  which  I  have  failed  to 
observe  the  strict  and  unwavering  allegiance  I  promised  to  my  Lord.  So  far  from, 
regretting  what  I  then  did,  I  would  fain  renew  my  vows,  and  make  them  over  again. 
I  pray  God,  if  I  have  a  drop  of  blood  in  my  body  which  is  not  His,  to  let  it  bleed 
away  ;  and  if  there  be  one  hair  in  my  head  which  is  not  consecrated  to  Him,  I 
would  have  it  plucked  out. 

The  very  first  service  which  my  youthful  heart  rendered  to  Christ  was  the  placing 
of  tracts  in  envelopes,  and  then  sealing  them  up,  that  I  might  send  them,  with  the 
hope  that,  by  choosing  pertinent  tracts,  applicable  to  persons  I  knew,  God  would 
bless  them.  And  I  well  remember  taking  other  tracts,  and  distributing  them  in 
certain  districts  in  the  town  of  Newmarket,  going  from  house  to  house,  and  telling, 
in  humble  language,  the  things  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  I  might  have  done  nothing 
for  Christ  if  1  had  not  been  encouraged  by  finding  myself  able  to  do  a  little.  Then  I 
sought  to  do  something  more,  and  from  that  something  more,  and  I  do  not  doubt 
that  many  of  the  servants  of  God  have  been  led  on  to  higher  and  nobler  labours 
for  their  Lord,  because  they  began  to  serve  Him  in  the  right  spirit  and  manner.  I 
look  upon  the  giving  away  of  a  religious  tract  as  only  the  first  step,  not  to  be 
compared  with  many  another  deed  done  for  Christ  ;  but  were  it  not  for  the  first 
step,  we  might  never  reach  to  the  second  ;  but  that  being  attained,  we  are  encouraged 
to  take  the  next,  and  so,  at  the  last,  God  helping  us,  we  may  be  made  extensively 
useful. 

I  think  I  never  felt  so  much  earnestness  after  the  souls  of  my  fellow-creatures 
as  when  I  first  loved  the  Saviour's  name,  and  though  I  could  not  preach,  and  never 
thought  I  should  be  able  to  testify  to  the  multitude,  I  used  to  write  texts  on  little 
scraps  of  paper,  and  drop  them  anywhere,  that  some  poor  creatures  might  pick  them 
up,  and  receive  them  as  messages  of  mercy  to  their  souls.  I  could  scarcely  content 
myself  even  for  five  minutes  without  trying  to  do  something  for  Christ.      If  1  walked 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOIilOGKAPHY.  lOl 

along  the  street,  I  must  have  a  few  tracts  with  me  ;  if  I  went  into  a  raihvay 
carriage,  I  must  drop  a  tract  out  of  the  window  ;  if  I  had  a  moment's  leisure,  I  must 
be  upon  my  knees  or  at  my  Bible  ;  if  I  were  in  company,  I  must  turn  the  subject  of 
conversation  to  Christ,  that  I  might  serve  my  Master.  It  may  be  that,  in  the  young 
dawn  of  my  Christian  life,  I  did  imprudent  things  in  order  to  serve  the  cause  of 
Christ  ;  but  I  still  say,  give  me  back  that  time  again,  with  all  Its  imprudence  and 
with  all  its  hastiness,  if  I  may  but  have  the  same  love  to  my  Master,  the  same 
overwhelming  influence  in  my  spirit,  making  me  obey  my  Lord's  commands  because 
it  was  a  pleasure  to  me  to  do  anything  to  serve  my  God. 

How  I  did  then  delight  to  sit  in  that  upper  room  where  stars  looked  between 
the  tiles,  and  hear  the  heavenly  conversation  which,  from  a  miserable  pallet 
surrounded  by  ragged  hangings,  an  enfeebled  saint  of  the  Lord  did  hold  with  me  ! 
Like  divers,  I  valued  the  pearl,  even  though  the  shell  might  be  a  broken  one  ;  nor 
did  I  care  where  I  went  to  win  it.  When  those  creaking  stairs  trembled  beneath  my 
weight,  when  that  bottomless  chair  afforded  me  uneasy  rest,  and  when  the  heat  and 
effluvia  of  that  sick  room  drove  my  companion-  away,  did  I  not  feel  more  than 
doubly  repaid  while  that  friend  of  Jesus  told  me  of  all  His  love.  His  faithfulness, 
and  His  grace  ?  It  is  frequently  the  case  that  the  most  despised  servants  of  the 
Lord  are  made  the  chosen  instruments  of  comforting  distressed  souls,  and  building 
them  up  in  the  faith. 

I  love  to  see  persons  of  some  standing  in  society  take  an  interest  in  Sabbath- 
schools.  One  great  fault  in  many  of  our  churches  is  that  the  children  are  leit  for  the 
young  people  to  take  care  of ;  the  older  members,  who  have  more  wisdom,  taking 
but  very  little  notice  of  them  ;  and  very  often,  the  wealthier  members  of  the  church 
stand  aside  as  if  the  teaching  of  the  poor  were  not  (as  indeed  it  is)  the  special 
business  of  the  rich.  I  hope  for  the  day  when  the  mighty  men  of  Israel  shall  be 
found  helping  in  this  great  warfare  against  the  enemy.  In  the  United  States,  we 
have  heard  of  presidents,  judges,  members  of  Congress,  and  persons  in  the 
highest  positions,  not  condescending, — for  I  scorn  to  use  such  a  term, — but  honour- 
ing themselves  by  teaching  little  children  in  Sabbath-schools.  He  who  teaches  a 
class  in  a  Sabbath-school  has  earned  a  grood  decree.  I  had  rather  receive  the  title 
of  S.S.T.  than  M.A.,  B.A.,  or  any  other  honour  that  ever  was  conferred  by  men. 

There  is  no  time  for  work  like  the  first  hours  of  the  day  ;  and  there  is  no  time 
for  serving  the  Lord  like  the  very  earliest  days  of  youth.  I  recollect  the  joy  I  had 
in  the  little  service  I  was  able  to  render  to  God  when  first  I  knew  Him.  I  was 
engaged  in  a  school  all  the  week ;  but  I  had  the  Saturday  afternoon  at  liberty, 
and  though  I  was  but  a  boy  myself,  and  might  rightly  have  used  that  time  for  rest, 
it  was  given  to  a  tract-district,  and  to  visiting  the  very  poor  within  my  reach  ;   and 


1 82  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

the  Sabbath-day  was  devoted  to  teaching  a  class,  and  later  on,  also  to  addressing 
the  Sunday-school.  When  I  began  to  teach, — I  was  very  young  in  grace  then, — I 
said  to  the  class  of  boys  whom  I  was  teaching,  that  Jesus  Christ  saved  all  those  who 
believed  in  Him.  One  of  them  at  once  asked  me  the  question,  "Teacher,  do yo?i- 
believe  in  Him.''"  I  replied,  "Yes,  I  hope  1  do."  Then  he  enquired  again,  "But 
are  you  not  sure  ?  "  I  had  to  think  carefully  what  answer  I  should  give.  The  lad 
was  not  content  with  my  repeating,  "  I  hope  so."  He  would  have  it,  "  It  you  have 
believed  in  Christ,  you  a7-e  saved."  And  I  felt  at  that  time  that  I  could  not  teach 
effectually  until  I  could  say  positively,  "  I  know  that  it  is  so.  I  must  be  able  to 
speak  of  what  I  have  heard,  and  seen,  and  tasted,  and  handled  of  the  good  Word  of 
life."  The  boy  was  right ;  there  can  be  no  true  testimony  except  that  which 
springs  from  assured  conviction  of  our  own  safety  and  joy  in  the  Lord.  If  I  was 
ever  a  little  dull,  my  scholars  began  to  make  wheels  of  themselves,  twisting  round  on 
the  forms  on  which  they  sat.  That  was  a  very  plain  intimation  to  me  that  I  must  give 
them  an  illustration  or  an  anecdote  ;  and  I  learned  to  tell  stories  partly  by  being 
obliged  to  tell  them.  One  boy,  whom  I  hiKl  in  the  class,  used  to  say  to  me,  "This 
is  very  dull,  teacher  ;  can't  you  pitch  us  a  yarn  ?  "  Of  course  he  was  a  naughty  boy, 
and  it  might  be  supposed  that  he  went  to  the  bad  when  he  grew  up,  though  I  am 
not  at  all  sure  that  he  did  ;  but  I  used  to  try  and  pitch  him  the  yarn  that  he  wanted, 
in  order  to  get  his  attention  again. 

At  one  of  the  teachers'  meetings,  the  suggestion  was  adopted  that  the  male 
teachers  should,  in  turn,  give  a  few  words  of  address  on  the  lesson  at  the  close  of 
the  teaching,  alternating  in  so  doing  with  the  superintendent.*  My  turn  came  in  due 
course.  After  I  had  spoken,  the  superintendent  requested  me  to  take  his  place  in 
addressing  the  school  on  the  followingr  Sabbath,  and  when  I  had  done  this,  he  asked 
me,  as  I  did  so  well,  to  speak  to  the  children  each  Lord's-day.  But  to  this  I 
demurred,  not  deeming  it  fair  to  the  other  teachers.  "Well,"  he  said,  "on  Sunday 
week,  I  shall  expect  you  to  give  the  address  in  my  stead."  The  precedent  thus 
instituted  soon  became  a  kind  of  usage  ;  so  that,  for  a  time,  it  was  usual  for  one  of 
the  teachers  and  myself  to  speak  on  alternate  Sabbaths.  Speedily  something  else 
followed.  The  older  people  also  took  to  coming  when  I  spoke  ;  and  that,  ere  long, 
in  such  numbers  that  the  auditory  looked  more  like  that  of  a  chapel  than  a  school, — 
a  circumstance  which  the  old  pastor,  jealous  of  the  seeming  invasion  of  his  province, 

*  (Copy  of  memorial  card.) 
In  Loving  Remembrance 

OF 

ROBERT     BROWN, 

Born,  July  5th,  1805;    Died,  March  23rd,  1881. 

Interred  in  Newmarket  Cemetery. 


Mr.  Robert  Brown  was  a  great  friend  of  mine  when  I  lived  at  Newmarket.     He  was  superintendent  of  the  Sunday-school, 
and  found  me  opportunities  for  speaking.    He  was  a  fishmonger  in  business,  and  a  genuine  Christian  in  his  life. — C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAniY.  1 83 

did  not  quite  like.  I  always  spoke  as  best  I  could,  after  carefully  preparing  my 
subject.  Though  only  a  youth,  I  said,  "  I  think  I  am  bound  to  give  myself  unto 
reading,  and  study,  and  prayer,  and  not  to  grieve  the  Spirit  by  unthought-of 
effusions  ;  "  and  I  soon  found  that  my  hearers  appreciated  what  I  said.  Oh,  but, 
how  earnestly  I  did  it  all  !  I  often  think  that  I  spoke  better  then  than  I  did  in  later 
years,  for  I  spoke  so  tremblingly,  but  my  heart  went  with  it  all.  And  when  I  began 
to  talk  a  little  in  the  villages  on  the  Sunday,  and  afterwards  every  night  in  the 
week,  I  know  that  I  used  to  speak  then  what  came  fresh  from  my  heart.  There 
was  little  time  for  gathering  much  from  books  ;  my  chief  library  was  the  Word  of 
God  and  my  own  e.xperience,  but  I  spoke  out  from  my  very  soul, — no  doubt  with 
much  blundering,  and  much  weakness,  and  much  youthful  folly,  but  oh,  with  such 
an  intense  desire  to  bring  men  to  Christ !  I  often  felt  that  I  could  cheerfully  lay 
down  my  life  if  I  might  but  be  the  means  of  saving  a  poor  old  man,  or  bring  a  boy 
of  my  own  age  to  the  Saviour's  feet.  I  feel  it  a  great  joy  to  have  been  called  to 
work  for  my  Lord  in  the  early  hours  of  my  life's  day  ;  and  I  hope  by-and-by  to  be 
able  to  say,  "  O  God,  Thou  hast  taught  me  from  my  youth  :  and  hitherto  have  I 
declared  Thy  wondrous  works.  Now  also  when  I  am  old  and  grey-headed,  O  God, 
forsake  me  not ;  until  I  have  shewed  Thy  strength  unto  this  generation,  and  Thy 
power  to  every  one  that  is  to  come."  I  do  not  think  my  Lord  will  turn  His  old 
servant  off;  when  I  get  old,  men  may  become  tired  of  me,  but  He  will  not ;  He  will 
hear  my  prayer, — 

"  Dismiss  me  not  Thy  service.  Lord." 

I  can  truly  say,  that  I  never  did  anything  which  was  a  blessing  to  my  fellow- 
creatures  without  feeling  compelled  to  do  it.  For  instance,  before  I  thought  of  going 
to  a  Sabbath-school  to  teach,  someone  called, — asked  me, — begged  me, — prayed  me 
to  take  his  class.  I  could  not  refuse  to  go  ;  and  there  I  was,  held  hand  and  foot  by 
the  superintendent,  and  was  compelled  to  go  on.  Then  I  was  asked  to  address 
the  children  ;  I  thought  I  could  not,  but  I  stood  up,  and  stammered  out  a  few  words. 
It  was  the  same  on  the  first  occasion  when  I  attempted  to  preach  to  the  people, — I 
am  sure  I  had  no  wish  to  do  it, — but  there  was  no  one  else  in  the  place  who  could, 
and  the  little  congregation  must  have  gone  away  without  a  single  word  of  warning 
or  invitation.  How  could  I  suffer  it  ?  I  felt  forced  to  address  them  ;  and  so  it  has 
been  with  whatever  I  have  laid  my  hand  to.  I  have  always  felt  a  kind  of  impulse 
which  I  could  not  resist  ;  but,  moreover,  I  have  felt  placed  by  Providence  in  such 
a  position  that  I  had  no  wish  to  avoid  the  duty,  and  if  1  had  desired  it,  I  could 
not  have  helped  myself 

I  shall  never  forget  standing  by  the  bed-side  of  a  youth  who  had  been  in  my 
Sunday-school  class  ;  he  had  received  very  little  good  training  at  home,  and  though 
he  was  but  a  lad  of  seventeen,  he  became  a  drunkard,  and  drank  himself  to  death  at 


184  c.    H.    spurgeon's    AUTOEIOGRAPHV. 

one  debauch.  I  saw  him,  and  talked  to  him,  and  tried  to  point  him  to  the  Saviour, 
and  heard  at  last  the  death-rattle  in  his  throat ;  and  as  I  went  downstairs,  I  thought 
everybody  a  fool  for  doing  anything  except  preparing-  to  die.  I  began  to  look  upon 
the  men  who  drove  the  carts  in  the  street,  those  who  were  busy  at  their  shops,  and 
those  who  were  selling  their  wares,  as  being  all  foolish  for  attending  to  anything  except 
their  eternal  business,  and  myself  most  of  all  foolish  for  not  pointing  dying  sinners 
to  a  living  Christ,  and  inviting  them  to  trust  in  His  precious  blood.  And  yet,  in  an 
hour  or  so,  all  things  took  their  usual  shape,  and  I  began  to  think  that  I  was  not 
dying  after  all,  and  I  could  go  away  and  be  as  unconcerned  as  before, — I  could  begin 
to  think  that  men  were,  after  all,  wise  in  thinking  of  this  world,  and  not  the  next ;  I 
mean  not  that  I  really  thought  so,  but  I  tear  I  acted  as  if  I  thought  so  ;  the 
impression  of  the  death-bed  was  so  soon  obliterated.  It  is  sadly  true,  that  even  a 
Christian  will  grow  by  degrees  so  callous,  that  the  sin  which  once  starded  him,  and 
made  his  blood  run  cold,  does  not  alarm  him  in  the  least.  I  can  speak  from  my  own 
experience.  When  first  I  heard  an  oath,  I  stood  aghast,  and  knew  not  where  to  hide 
myself;  yet  now,  if  I  hear  an  imprecadon  or  blasphemy  against  God,  though  a 
shudder  still  runs  through  my  veins,  there  is  not  that  solemn  feeling,  that  intense 
anguish,  which  I  felt  when  first  I  heard  such  evil  utterances.  By  degrees  we  get 
familiar  with  sin.  I  am  fearful  that  even  preaching  against  sin  may  have  an  injurious 
effect  upon  the  preacher.  I  frankly  confess  that  there  is  a  tendency,  with  those  of 
us  who  have  to  speak  upon  these  themes,  to  treat  them  professionally,  rather  than  to 
make  application  of  them  to  ourselves  ;  and  thus  we  lose  our  dread  of  evil  in  some 
degree,  just  as  young  doctors  soon  lose  their  tender  nervousness  in  the  dissecting- 
room.  We  are  compelled  in  our  office  to  see  ten  thousand  things  which  at  first  are 
heart-breakers  to  us.  In  our  young  ministry,  when  we  meet  with  hypocrisy  and 
inconsistency,  we  are  ready  to  lie  down  and  die  ;  but  the  tendency  in  after  years  is  to 
take  these  terrible  evils  as  matters  of  course.  Worldliness,  covetousness,  and 
carnality,  shock  us  most  at  the  outset  of  our  work  :  is  not  this  a  sad  sign,  that  even 
God's  ministers  may  feel  the  hardening  eftect  of  sin?  I  daily  feel  that  the  atmos- 
phere of  earth  has  as  much  a  tendency  to  harden  my  heart  as  to  harden  piaster 
which  is  newly  spread  upon  the  wall  ;  and  unless  I  am  baptized  anew  with  the  Spirit 
of  God,  and  constantly  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  reading  the  curse  of  sin  in  the 
crimson  hieroglyphics  of  my  Saviour's  dying  agonies,  I  shall  become  as  steeled  and 
insensible  as  many  professors  already  are. 


CHAPTER   XVIIL 


tonbdbge  Mt  mxH  itttcrs.  1850-1851. 

T  was  my  privilege,  at  Cambridge,  to  live  in  a  house  where,  at  eight 
o'clock,  every  person,  from  the  servant  to  the  master,  would  have 
been  found  for  half-an-hour  in  prayer  and  meditation  in  his  or  her 
chamber.  As  regularly  as  the  time  came  round,  that  was  done, 
just  as  we  partook  of  our  meals  at  appointed  hours.  If  that  were 
the  rule  in  all  households,  it  would  be  a  grand  thing  for  us.  In 
the  old  Puritanic  times,  a  servant  would  as  often  answer  one  who  enquired  for  him, 
"Sir,  my  master  is  at  prayers,"  as  he  would  nowadays  reply,  "My  master  is 
engaged."  It  was  then  looked  upon  as  a  recognized  fact  that  Christian  men  did 
meditate,  and  study  the  Word,  and  pray  ;  and  society  respected  the  interval  set 
apart  for  devotion.  It  is  said  that,  in  the  days  of  Cromwell,  if  you  had  walked 
down  Cheapside  at  a  certain  hour  in  the  morning,  you  would  have  seen  the  blinds 
down  at  every  house.  Alas  !  where  will  you  find  such  streets  nowadays  .''  I  fear 
that  what  was  once  the  rule,  is  now  the  exception. 


When  I  joined  the  Baptist  Church  at  Cambridge, — one  of  the  most  respectable 
churches  that  can  be  found  in  the  world,  one  of  the  most  generous,  one  of  the  most 
intelligent, — this  was  a  good  many  years  ago,  when  I  was  young, — nobody  spoke 
to  me.  On  the  Lord's-day,  I  sat  at  the  communion  table  in  a  certain  pew  ;  there 
was  one  gentleman  in  it,  and  when  the  service  was  over,  I  said  to  him,  "  I  hope  you 
are  quite  well,  sir?"  He  said,  "You  have  the  advantage  of  me."  I  answered,  "I 
don't  think  I  have,  for  you  and  I  are  brothers."  "  I  don't  quite  know  what  you 
mean,"  said  he.  "Well,"  I  replied,  "when  I  took  the  bread  and  wine,  just  now,  in 
token  of  our  being  one  in  Christ,  I  meant  it,  did  not  you  .''  "  We  were  by  that  time 
in  the  street ;  he  put  both  his  hands  on  my  shoulders, — I  was  about  sixteen  years 
old  then, — and  he  said,  "Oh,  sweet  simplicity!"  Then  he  added,  "You  are  quite 
right,  my  dear  brother,  you  are  quite  right  ;  come  in  to  tea  with  me.  I  am  afraid  I 
should  not  have  spoken  to  you  if  you  had  not  first  addressed  me."  I  went  to  tea 
with  him  that  evening  ;  and  when  I  left,  he  asked  me  to  go  again  the  next  Lord's-day, 
so  1  went,  and  that  Sabbath  day  he  said  to  me,  "  You  will  come  here  every  Sunday 
evening,    won't  you  ? "       That   dear  friend   used  to  walk  with  me   into  the  villages 


1 86  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

when  I  afterwards  went  out  to  preach,  and  he  remains  to  this  day  one  of  the  truest 
Christian  friends  I  have,  and  often  have  we  looked  back,  and  laughed  at  the  fact  that 
I  should  have  dared  to  assume  that  Christian  fellowship  was  really  a  truth.  I 
remember  that  he  said  to  me  at  the  time,  "  I  am  rather  glad  you  spoke  to  me,  for  if 
you  had  gone  to  some  of  our  deacons,  I  am  afraid  you  would  not  have  received  quite 
as  friendly  a  reply  as  I  have  given  you." 

*  *  *  >;.= 

(In  August,  1850,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  went  to  Cambridge,  to  assist  his  old  tutor, 
Mr.  Leeding,  who  was  conducting  a  private  school  in  the  Univ^ersity  town.  On 
page  44,  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  recorded  his  recollections  of  Mr.  Leeding  ;  the  following 
is  the  tutor's  account  of  his  pupil,  as  furnished  by  him  to  Mr.  Spurgeon  for  this 
Autobiography,  in  March,  1890: — 

"  My  acquaintance  with  the  Rev.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  commenced  in 
1845,  when  I  was  engaged  by  Henry  Lewis,  Esq.,  of  Colchester,  having  just  passed 
the  Degree  Examination  at  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge.  I  was  to  conduct  his 
school  for  boarders  and  day-pupils,  and  it  was  agreed  that  the  course  of  studies 
should  be  designed  to  p-round  and  advance  them  in  the  course  of  a  first-class 
education.  Besides  the  usual  English  subjects,  some  began  Latin  and  French  ; 
Spurgeon  began  Latin  at  this  time.  We  worked  together  for  four  years,  and  left 
at  the  same  time,  he  to  proceed  to  another  school  (at  Maidstone),  and  myself  (who 
left  merely  because  the  terms  of  the  increase  of  my  salary  were  said  to  absorb  all 
the  profit)  to  return  home  to  Cambridge,  where  some  friends  desired  that  I  should 
remain,  and  conduct  a  school  of  my  own,  several  pupils  bc;ng  ready  for  me. 
Spurgeon  had  made  good  progress  with  me  at  Colchester  ;  in  mathematical  studies, 
he  was  far  ahead  of  the  rest,  and  generally  took  the  first  prize  in  the  general 
examination. 

"  Before  1  had  been  many  months  at  Cambridge,  I  received  a  letter  from  his 
father,  begging  me  to  take  him  as  an  assistant  with  no  salary,  but  only  to  receive 
such  help  in  his  studies  as  would  contribute  to  qualify  him  for  public  life." 

(Mr.  Spurgeon  had  preserved  among  his  papers  Mr.  Leeding's  reply  to  his 
father's  letter  ;  it  was  as  follows  ; — 

"  Academy, 

"  Union  Road, 
"  Cambridge, 

"Aug.  6th,  1850. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I   hasten  to  reply  to  your  most  welcome  letter,  which  I  received  this 
morning.      I   have  more  than   once  wished   it  possible   that   an    arrangement   could 


C.     H,     SPURGEOn's     AUTOBIOGRArHY.  187 

be  made  for  securing-  your  son's  services  in  the  event  of  an  Increase  in  my  school  ; 
but  my  partial  success  has  appeared  to  me  a  bar  to  such  an  engagement,  for  I  have 
such  an  estimate  of  him,  that  I  could  never  have  started  the  proposal  on  such  terms 
as  have  proceeded  from  you.  I  will  readily  engage  to  give  him  all  the  assistance  in 
my  power  for  the  prosecution  of  his  own  studies,  and  his  board  and  washing  in 
return  for  his  assistance.  You  do  me  an  honour,  that  I  am  perhaps  unworthy  of  in 
making  this  proposition  when  you  have  a  premium  at  your  option,  but  I  must  say 
you  could  not  send  him  to  anyone  who  feels  so  great  an  interest  in  and  affection 
for  him,  nor  to  a  situation  where  he  could  possibly  have  better  opportunities  for 
improving  himself  You  may,  with  Mrs.  S.,  rest  assured  of  his  domestic  comfort,  as 
I  am  sure  he  will  himself  anticipate.  I  am  unwilling  to  pledge  myself  at  present  to 
an  engagement  that  shall  bind  me  to  give  a  salary  hereafter.  I  am  sure  we  shall 
not  differ  in  that  particular  when  once  it  necessarily  occurs. 

"  Your  offer,  coming  to  me  at  this  particular  juncture,  is  a  striking  interposition 
of  the  Providence  of  God  on  my  behalf  Through  a  violent  cold,  I  have  for  the  last 
fortnight  been  sufferine  from  intlammation  on  the  chest,  which  has  rendered  so  much 
speaking  extremely  painful,  and  now  at  length  very  dangerous  ;  so  much  so  that 
I  have  been  on  the  point  of  applying  to  a  person  in  the  town  for  his  assistance. 
You  will  at  once  see  how  acceptable  Charles's  presence  will  be  to  me  now  ;  it  will 
be  doinor  me  a  grreat  kindness  if  he  can  be  allowed  to  set  out  as  soon  as  possible.  I 
will  expect  him  on  Thursday.  If  you  intended  him  to  travel  by  third  class,  I  will 
gladly  pay  his  fare  from  London  by  second,  and  also  any  expense  of  carriage  of  any 
part  of  his  luggage  that  may  require  to  be  sent  after  him. 

"  With  many  thanks  for  your  united  Christian  regards  and  kindness, 

"  1  am, 

*'  Dear  Sir, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  E.   S.   Leedinc.  " 
"Mr.  J.  Spurgeon." 

(Mr.  Leeding's  account  of  his  young  assistant  continues  : — 
"  After  a  few  months'  residence  with  me,  he  began  preaching  in  two  or  three 
villages  near  Cambridge  ;  he  became  popular  among  his  hearers,  and  extended  his 
circuit  until  he  excited  much  interest  among  the  Dissenters  of  Cambridge,  some  of 
whom  (members  of  the  St.  Andrew's  Street  Baptist  Church,  once  the  scene  of 
Rev.  Robt.  Hall's  labours,)  proposed  to  send  him  to  a  Dissenting  College.  At  the 
time,  it  seemed  to  me  that  such  a  foundation  had  been  laid  for  his  literary  progress, 
that  the  advantages  to  be  thus  acquired  would  not  repay  the  time  occupied  in  such  a 
course,  and  the  scheme  was  abandoned.     Soon  after,  some  ol  his  friends  proposed 


1 88  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

that  he  should  compete  for  a  sizarship  at  St.  John's  College  (which  would  have 
reduced  the  expenses  of  a  College  course  /30  per  annum),  but  it  seemed  to  myself 
and  others  that  three  years  (the  time  of  College  work  at  Cambridge),  would  be  too 
long  a  period  to  expend  on  studies  whose  bearing  on  ministerial  work^is  so  remote  as 
that  of  mathematics,  and  this  also  was  abandoned.  He  now  became  more  than 
ever  intent  upon  preaching, — reading,  besides  the  Greek  Testament,  the  Septuagint 
translation,  Whateley's  Logic,  &c.,  and  soon  occupied  constantly  the  pulpit  at 
Waterbeach,  a  large  village  a  few  miles  from  Cambridge.  It  must  not  be  omitted 
that  the  final  decision  as  to  College  studies  was  made  after  what  we  deemed  a 
Providential  incident  *  which  took  place  at  Cambridge.") 

^,'?  '1?  ^  '^ 

"  Cambridge, 

"August  22nd,  1850. 

"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  I  received  your  kind  note  this  morning.     We  do  not  have  our  letters 

till  10  o'clock Mr.  Leeding  is  very  much  better;  has  been  in  the  school. 

I   am  studying  through  Romans  in  the  Greek,  with  Barnes,  Doddridge, 

and  Chalmers  for  my  commentaries.      Mr.  Leeding  gives  me  every  attention,  and  I 

hope   to  progress  rapidly.     Our  lecture  to-night  was  on,  '  Having  loved   His   own, 

He  loved  them  unto  the  end.'     Give  my  respects  to   all  friends  making 

enquiries.      Mr.  and  Mrs.   L.   desire  their  kind  respects  to  you.      My  love  to  dear 

Mother,  Eliza,  Archer,  Emily,  Lottie,  and  Louisa,  and  accept  the  same  yourself      I 

ao-ain  thank  you  for  your  kindness  to  me.      1  will  do  my  best  with  my  clothes,  and 

hope  ever  to  be — 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"ClIAKLES." 
*  *  *  * 

"  No.  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"  19th  Sept.,  '50. 
"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  1  received  your  kind  letter  in  due  time.  1  joined  the  Church  here  at 
the  Lord's  table  last  Ordinance  day.  I  shall  write  for  my  dismission  ;  I  intended  to 
have  done  so  before.  The  Baptists  are  by  far  the  most  respectable  denomination  in 
Cambridge ;  there  are  three  Baptist  Chapels,— St.  Andrew's  Street,  where  we  attend, 
Zion  Chapel,  and  Eden  Chapel.  There  is  a  very  fine  Wesleyan  Chapel  and  some 
others.  I  teach  in  the  Sunday-school  all  the  afternoon.  Mr.  Leeding  takes  the 
morninn-  work.     Last  Sabbath-dav  we  had  a  funeral  sermon  from  Hebrews  vi.  11,  12. 


•  See  Chapter  xxii., — "  The  Lord's  Hand  behind  the  Maid's  Mistake." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGKAPHY.  1 89 

We  have  a  prayer-meeting  at  7  in  the  morning,  and  one  after  the  evening  service  ; 
they  are  precious  means  of  grace,  I  trust,  to  my  soul.  How  soon  would  the  lamps 
go  out  did  not  our  mighty  Lord  supply  fresh  oil  ;  and  if  it  were  not  for  His  unshaken 
promise  to  supply  our  need  out  of  the  fulness  of  His  grace,  poor  indeed  should 
we  be. 

"Yes,  where  Jesus  comes.  He  comes  to  reign  :  how  I  wish  He  would  reign 
more  in  my  heart  ;  then  I  might  hope  that  every  atom  of  self,  self-confidence,  and 
self-righteousness,  would  be  quite  swept  out  of  my  soul.  I  am  sure  I  long  for  the 
time  when  all  evil  aflections,  corrupt  desires,  and  rebellious,  doubting  thoughts  shall 
be  overcome,  and  completely  crushed  beneath  the  Prince's  feet,  and  my  whole  soul 
be  made  pure  and  holy.  But  so  long  as  I  am  encaged  within  this  house  of  clay,  I 
know  they  will  lurk  about,  and  I  must  have  hard  fighting  though  the  victory  by 
grace  is  sure.      Praying  is  the  best  fighting  ;  nothing  else  will  keep  them  down. 

"  I  have  written  a  letter  to  grandfather  ;  I  am  sorry  he  is  so  poorly.  He  wants 
the  promises  now,  and  why  may  not  young  and  old  live  upon  them  }  They  are  the 
bread-corn  of  Heaven,  the  meat  of  the  Kingdom  ;  and  who  that  has  once  tasted  them 
will  turn  to  eat  husks  without  any  sweetness  and  comfort  in  them  }  God's  power 
will  keep  all  His  children  ;  while  He  says  to  them,  '  How  shall  ye  who  are  dead  to 
sin  live  any  longer  therein .'' '  I  feel  persuaded  that  I  shall  never  fathom  the  depths 
of  my  own  natural  depravity,  nor  climb  to  the  tops  of  the  mountains  of  God's  eternal 
love.  I  feel  constrained  day  by  day  to  fall  flat  down  upon  the  promises,  and  leave 
my  soul  in  Jesu's  keeping.  It  is  He  that  makes  my  feet  move  even  in  the  slow 
obedience  which  marks  them  at  present,  and  every  attainment  of  grace  must  come 
from  Him.  I  would  go  forth  by  prayer,  like  the  Israelites,  to  gather  up  this 
Heavenly  manna,  and  live  upon  free-grace. 

"  Add  to  all  your  great  kindness  and  love  to  me,  through  my  life,  a  constant 

remembrance  of  me  in  your  prayers.       I  thank  you  for  those  petitions  which  you  and 

dear  Mother  have  so  often  sent  up  to  the  mercy-seat  for  me.     Give  my  love  to  my 

sisters  and  brother,  and  accept  the  same  for  yourself  and  dear  Mother.      Hoping  you 

are  all  quite  well, 

*'  I  remain, 

"  Your  obedient,  affectionate  son, 

"  Chas.   H.  Spurgeon." 

*  *  *  * 

"  Cambridge, 

"  October  3rd,  1850. 

"  My  Dear  Mother, 

"  I  am  generally  so  slack  of  news,  that  I  have  been  ashamed  to  send  a 

letter  with   nothing   in   it.      I   was  last   night  admitted   into   membership   with   this 


igO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

church  by  dismission  from  Newmarket.  May  my  future  relation  with  them,  whether 
brief  or  protracted,  be  for  the  glory  of  Jesus  Christ !  I  am  very  fond  of  Mr.  Roffe  ; 
I  like  his  preaching  very  much.  There  is  to  be  a  baptizing  this  evening  ....  I 
trust  that  a  year  or  two  of  study  with  Mr.  Leeding  will  be  of  equal  benefit  to  me 

with  a  Colleoe  education I  have  found  a  great  many  Christian  friends  ;  last 

Sunday  I  had  two  invitations  to  tea.  I  went  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Watts,  a  coal 
merchant,  and  spent  the  time  very  happily.  We  read  round  with  the  children,  and 
it  seemed  just  like  home-days.  I  have  not  had  a  letter  from  Stambourne,  nor  from 
Aunt,  I  am  quite  solitary. 

"  Mr.  Roffe  preached  a  delightful  sermon  from  '  I  will  lift  up  mine  eyes  unto  the 
hills,  from  whence  cometh  my  help.'  I  trust  I  can  look  by  faith  to  the  hills,  and 
confidently  expect  the  help.  I  think  I  learn  more  every  day  of  my  own  natural 
depravity  and  love  of  sin  :  how  stupid  should  I  be  if  I  trusted  to  my  own  heart ! 
If  my  salvation  depended  upon  my  continuance  in  the  fervour  of  devotion,  how  soon 
should  I  perish  !  How  joyful  it  is  to  know  that  Jesus  will  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  to  Him,  and  that  he  will  at  length  save  every  one  of  His  redeemed 
ones  ! 

"  Give  my  best  love  to  dear  Father,  and  accept  the  same  yourself.      I  hope  you 

are  both  well  :  give  my  love  to  Eliza,  Archer,  Emily,  a  kiss  to  Louisa  and   Lottie. 

I    thank  you   for  your   many  prayers ;    continue   yet   to   plead   for  me,   and   may   I 

ever  be — 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles,  " 
«  #  #  # 

"  No.  9,  iJnion  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"  Oct.,  1850. 
"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  I  have  received  your  kind,  interesting  letter,   and   the   P.O.   enclosed. 

Aunt  [Walker]  has  written  to  me,  and  with  much  sorrow  has  told  me  her  case.      Mr. 

W.  has  promised  to  let  me  have  any  of  his  books  that  may  be  of  use  to  me.      I  did 

not  ask,   but  he  sent  that  word  himself.     Truly,  the   Lord  putteth  down   one,  and 

setteth  up  another,  according  to  His  ancient  decrees.      How  blest  to  feel  assured 

thac  Heaven's  treasures  never  can  rust,  nor  can  any  thief  rob  us  of  our  inheritance  ! 

"  I  went  to  Mr.  Watts's  again  last  Sunday  ;   I   am  quite  a  member  of  the  family, 

I  am  going  on  Friday  to  a  party  at  his  house  with  Rev.  Roffe,  Rev.  Keen,  and  Rev. 

Edmonds,   and  other    friends.       I   anticipate   much   spiritual  enjoyment.       I    would, 

however,  look  unto  the  Lord  ;  for  vain  is  the  help  of  man.      I  always  connect  in  my 

mind  the  deep  depravity,  and  utter  disease  of  my  soul,  with  the  all-conquering  power 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY,  I9I 

of  my  blessed  Lord,  who  will  save  every  one  of  His  redeemed.  Mr.  RofFe 
beautifully  says,  '  The  Scripture  says  not,  the  believer  shall  be  saved  ;  but,  he  is 
saved,  and  has  eternal  life  abiding  in  him.'  Perfectly  justified,  and  on  the  road 
to  perfect  sanctification,  though  proceeding  very  slowly  ;  who  shall  refuse  to  rejoice 
in  the  Lord  1  Secure  of  an  inheritance  in  the  skies,  I  would  desire  to  walk  worthy 
of  my  exalted  calling,  and  live  down  every  calumny,  and  prove  the  error  of  those 
who  speak  reproachfully  concerning  our  liberty  in  the  Lord.  How  blessed  to  feel 
sure  that  our  sins  are  covered  !  How  manifold  are  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  to  me  ; 
all  things  work  together  for  good  !  Since  I  am  persuaded  of  my  interest  in  Jesus, 
and  can  by  feeble  faith  lay  hold  on   Him,    I   will   not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto 

me 

"  Give  my  love  to  dear  Mother,  and  all  others  at  home  ;  accept  the  same 
yourself,  with  my  sincere  gratitude, 

"  From  your  affectionate  son, 

"  CuAS.   H.  Spurgeon." 

gp  ^  ^  ^  ■ 

"  No.  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"Nov.  1 2th,  1850. 

"  My  Dear  Mother, 

"  I  have  just  received  The  Maidstone  Journal,  in  which  you  will  see  an 
advertisement  of  Mr.  Walker's  sale.  In  one  of  my  late  letters  to  Aunt  (having  heard 
you  speak  of  her  as  somewhat  trusting  to  works),  I  ventured,  as  a  babe  in  grace,  to 
touch  upon  the  subject, — I  trust,  with  becoming  prudence  as  well  as  boldness.  I 
then  received  a  letter  from  Uncle, — a  long  one,  too, — containing  much  good  and 
even  religious  advice  ;  of  course,  speaking  as  (Oh,  how  I  desire  it !)  a  Christian 
should  speak.  Mixed  up  with  it,  there  was  a  tincture  of  naturalism  or  reason.  I 
have  therefore  ventured  on  another  letter,  and  have,  I  trust,  said,  though  feebly, 
what  a  boy  should  say  to  a  dying  Uncle.  False  fear  should  never  prevent  us  from 
being  faithful  with  men  walking  on  the  confines  of  the  grave.  Could  I  make  religion 
more  the  business  of  my  life,  how  happy  should  I  be  !  I  am  conscious  I  do  not  live 
up  to  my  duties  or  my  privileges  ;  and  did  I  n.)t  feel  sure  that  Jesus  will  certainly 
complete  what  He  has  begun,  I  should  never  think  of  reaching  Heaven  ;  but,  by  His 
might,  I  would  look  confidently  for  it. 

"  I  have  found  a  little  work  here.  I  have  twice  spoken  to  the  Sunday-school, 
and  am  to  read  an  Essay  on  some  subject  connected  with  Sunday-schools  at  the  next 
meeting  of  the  Teachers'  Institute  for  the  town.  I  only  do  so  just  to  fill  up.  I  have 
been  driven  to  it,  Mr.  Watts  and  some  others  having  taken  their  turns.      I  hope  yet. 


192  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

one  day,  to  prove  myself  no  Antinomian,  though  I  confess  my  daily  sins  and  short- 

comino-s  ;  yet  I  would  not  wilfully  sin,  and  I  feel  some  hatred  to  it.     I  desire  to  hate 

it  more. 

"  I  hope  you  enjoy  your  health,  and  that,  with  dear  Father,  you  have  much  of 

the  marrow  of  the  gospel   as  your  daily   meat.     Give  my  love  to  all  at  home,  and 

accept  the  same  for  yourself  and  Father,      I  am  pursuing  my  studies,  though  I  can 

say  little  about  progress.      I  am  most  happy,  and  quite  well  ;  and  hoping  to  see  you 

before  many  weeks, 

•*  1  remain 

"  Your  most  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 

(The  following  are  the  letters  to  the  Aunt  and  Uncle  referred  to  in  the  foregoing 
letter  ;  the  first  part  of  the  one  written,  to  Mrs.  Walker  is  missing  : — ) 

"  The  body  of  Christians,  of  which  for  some  little  while  I  have  been  a  member, 
is  not  distinguished  for  high  standing  in  the  world.  I  trust  I  shall  never  be  rich,  lest  I 
should  by  force  of  additional  temptation  ever  bring  dishonour  upon  the  name  of  Him 
with  whom  I  have  entered  into  solemn  league  and  covenant.  Would  that,  as  I  have 
been  buried  with  Him  in  baptism,  I  might  have  the  inward  spiritual  grace,  and  be 
dead  to  the  world,  but  alive  unto  the  service  of  the  Lord  ! 

"  There  has  been  much  stir  here  about  the  late  Popish  Aggression, — the  clergy 

seem  to  be  very  anxious  about  it I  hope  Uncle  will  not  write  to  me  until 

he  is  well.  He  is  so  very  kind  ;  but  he  may  tire  himself.  Tell  him  I  am  now 
studying  Paine's  Elements  of  lilental  Science  and  Porter's  Lectures  on  Homiletics. 
I  cannot  in  Greek  get  further  than  the  Testament.     We  have  only  thirteen  boys. 

"Accept  my  best  love  and  thanks  to  yourself  and  Uncle,  and  permit  me  ever  to 

subscribe  myself, 

"Your  most  affectionate  nephew, 

"  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 

"My  Dear  Uncle, 

"  Dumb  men  make  no  mischief.  Your  silence,  and  my  neglect,  make 
one  think  of  the  days  when  letters  were  costly,  and  not  of  penny  postage.  You  have 
doubtless  heard  of  me  as  a  top-tree  Antinomian.  I  trust  you  know  enough  of  me  to 
disbelieve  it.  It  is  one  object  of  my  life  to  disprove  the  slander.  I  groan  daily  under 
a  body  of  sin  and  corruption.  Oh,  for  the  time  when  I  shall  drop  this  flesh,  and  be 
free  from  sin  !  I  become  more  and  more  convinced  that,  to  attempt  to  be  saved  by  a 
mi.xed  covenant  of  works  and  faith  is,  in  the  words  of  Berridge,  'To  yoke  a  snail 
with  an  elephant.'  I  desire  to  press  forward  for  direction  to  my  Master  in  all  things ; 
but  as  to  trusting  to  my  own  obedience  and  righteousness,  I  should  be  worse  than  a 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  193 

fool,  and  ten  times  worse  than  a  madman.  Poor  dependent  creatures,  prayer  had 
need  be  our  constant  employment,  the  foot  of  the  throne  our  continued  dwelling- 
place  ;  for  the  Rock  of  ages  is  our  only  safe  Hiding-place.  I  rejoice  in  an  assured 
knowledge  by  faith  of  my  interest  in  Christ,  and  of  the  certainty  of  my  eternal 
salvation.  Yet  what  strivings,  what  conflicts,  what  dangers,  what  enemies  stand  in 
my  way  !  The  foes  in  my  heart  are  so  strong,  that  they  would  have  killed  me,  and 
sent  me  to  hell  long  ere  this,  had  the  Lord  left  me  ;  but,  blessed  be  His  name.  His 
electing,  redeeming,  and  saving  love  has  got  fast  hold  of  me  ;  and  who  is  able  to 
pluck  me  out  of  my  Father's  hand  ?  On  my  bended  knees,  I  have  often  to  cry  for 
succour;  and,  bless  His  name,  He  has  hitherto  heard  my  cry.  Oh,  if  I  did  not 
know  that  all  the  Lord's  people  had  soul-contention,  I  should  give  up  all  for  lost  !  I 
rejoice  that  the  promises  left  on  record  are  meant  for  me,  as  well  as  for  every  saint 
of  His,  and  as  such  I  desire  to  grasp  them.  Let  the  whole  earth,  and  even  God's 
professing  people,  cast  out  my  name  as  evil  ;  my  Lord  and  Master,  He  will  not.  I 
glory  in  the  distinguishing  grace  of  God,  and  will  not,  by  the  grace  of  God,  step  one 
inch  from  my  principles,  or  think  of  adhering  to  the  present  fashionable  sort  of 
religion. 

"Oh,  could  I  become  like  holy  men  of  past  ages, — fearless  of  men, — holding 
sweet  communion  with  God, — weaned  more  from  the  world,  and  enabled  to  fix  my 
thoughts  on  spiritual  things  entirely  !  But  when  I  would  serve  God,  I  find  my  old 
deceitful  heart  full  of  the  very  essence  of  hell,  rising  up  into  my  mouth,  polluting  all 
I  say  and  all  I  do.  What  should  I  do  if,  like  you,  I  were  called  to  be  engaged  about 
things  of  time  and  sense  ?  I  fear  I  should  be  neither  diligent  in  business,  nor 
fervent  in  spirit.  '  But,'  (say  you,)  '  he  keeps  talking  all  about  himself.'  True,  he 
does  ;  he  cannot  help  it.  Self  is  too  much  his  master.  I  am  proud  of  my  own 
ignorance  :  and,  like  a  toad,  bloated  with  my  own  venomous  pride, — proud  of  what 
I  have  not  got,  and  boasting  when  I  should  be  bemoaning.  I  trust  you  have  greater 
freedom  from  your  own  corruptions  than  I  have  ;  and  in  secret,  social,  and  family 
prayer  enjoy  more  blessed,  sanctified  liberty  at  the  footstool  of  mercy. 

"  Rejoice  !  for  Heaven  awaits  us,  and  all  the  Lord's  family  !  The  mansion  is 
ready  ;  the  crown  is  made  ;  the  harp  is  strung  ;  there  are  no  willows  there.  May  we 
be  enabled  to  go  on,  brave  as  lions,  and  valiant  for  the  truth  and  cause  of  King  Jesus, 
and  by  the  help  of  the  Spirit,  vow  eternal  warfare  with  every  sin,  and  rest  not 
until  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  has  destroyed  all  the  enemies  in  our  hearts  !  May  we 
be  enabled  to  trust  the  Lord,  for  He  will  help  us  ;  we  must  conquer  ;  we  cannot  be 
lost.     Lost  ?     Impossible  !      For  who  is  able  to  snatch  us  out  of  our  Father's  hand  ? 

"  May  the  Lord  bless  you  exceedingly  ! 

"  Your  affectionate  nephew, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

N 


194  c.   H.   spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  Monday. 
"  My  Dear    Mother, 

"  I  write  to  acknowledge  and  thank  you  for  a  box  from  home.  Dear 
Mother,  you  are  indeed  very  kind  ;  how  I  ought  to  bless  God  for  such  parents  I 
.  .  .  Mr.  Leeding  is  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  ham,  and  Mr.  Spurgeon, 
your  son,  desires  to  thank  you  for  a  nice  cake,  apples,  &c.  I  wish  you  had  not  laid 
your  hand  on  the  Key  to  the  Bible  ;  for,  if  I  had  had  it,  I  should  have  been  delighted 
to  have  given  it  to  my  dear  Mother.  Perhaps  I  may  take  the  credit  for  it  now.  .  .  . 
We  have  no  minister  yet.  Mr.  Leeding  said,  the  other  morning,  '  I  need  not  ask 
you  how  you  are  ;  you  are  always  well,  like  some  tree.'  I  have  been,  several  times, 
to  see  a  lady  in  this  town,  mother  of  one  of  our  boys.  She  goes  to  church,  but  I 
have  reason  to  think  her  an  eminent  Christian.  She  is  all  day  in  pain,  never  goes 
out,  and  can  hardly  sleep.  She  made  me  think  of  your  rheumatics.  She  has  four 
little  children.  They  are  rich  ;  her  husband  is  a  good,  kind  sort  of  man,  but  he  is 
not,  I  fear,  a  renewed  man.  She  has  wave  upon  wave.  She  has  no  one  to  speak 
to.  I  think  it  a  privilege  to  talk  to  any  of  God's  people,  to  comfort  and  console 
them.  We  do  not  know  how  many  need  our  prayers. 
"  My  best  love,  dear  Mother,  to  you  and  Father. 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 


■  Charles." 


« 


"  Cambridge, 

"Thursday,  Dec,  1850. 
"  Miss  Caroline  Louisa  Spurgeon, 

"  Your  name  is  so  long  that  it  will  almost  reach  across  the  paper.  We 
have  one  young  gentleman  in  our  school  whose  name  is  Edward  Ralph  William 
Baxter  Tweed  ;  the  boys  tease  him  about  his  long  name  ;  but  he  is  a  very  good  boy, 
and  that  makes  his  name  a  good  one.  Everybody's  name  is  pretty,  if  they  are  good 
people.  The  Duke  of  Tuscany  has  just  had  a  little  son  ;  the  little  fellow  was  taken 
to  the  Catholic  Cathedral,  had  some  water  put  on  his  face,  and  then  they  named 
him — you  must  get  Eliza  to  read  it, — Giovanni  Nepomerceno  Maria  Annunziata 
Guiseppe  Giovanbaptista  Ferdinando  Baldassere  Luigi  Gonzaga  Pietro  Allesandro 
Zanobi  Antonino.  A  pretty  name  to  go  to  bed  and  get  up  with  ;  it  will  be  a  long 
while  before  he  will  be  able  to  say  it  all  the  way  through  !  If  anyone  is  called  by 
the  name  of  Christian,  that  is  better  than  all  these  great  words  :  it  is  the  best  name 
in  the  world,  except  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  My  best  love  to  you.  I 
hope  you  will  enjoy  yourself,  and  try  to  make  others  happy,  too  ;  for  then  you  are 
sure  to  be  happy  yourself ;  whereas,  if  you  only  look  out  to  please  yourself,  you  will 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography,  195 

make  others  uncomfortable,  and  will  not  make  even  yourself  happy.     However,  of 
course,  you  know  that,  and  I  need  not  tell  you  of  it.      A  happy  Christmas  to  you  ! 

"  Your  loving  brother, 

"  Charles." 
*  *  «=  * 

(Letter  addressed  to  Master  William  Cooper,  one  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  former 
pupils  at  Newmarket : — ) 

"  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

" ,  1 85 1. 

"  My  Dear  William, 

"You  see,  by  this  address,  that  I  am  no  longer  at  Mr.  Swindell's,  but  am 
very  comfortable  here  in  a  smaller  school  of  about  fifteen  boys.  I  suppose  you  are 
at  home,  but  find  farming  is  not  all  play,  nor  perhaps  altogether  so  profitable  or 
pleasant  as  study  ;  it  is  well  said,  '  We  do  not  know  the  value  of  our  mercies  till  we 
lose  them.' 

"  Knowing  (in  some  humble  measure,  at  least,)  the  value  of  religion,  let  me  also 
bring  it  before  your  attention.  If  you  give  yourself  time  to  think,  you  will  soon 
remember  that  you  must  die  ;  and  if  you  meditate  one  more  moment,  you  will 
recollect  that  you  have  a  soul,  and  that  soul  will  never  die,  but  will  live  for  ever : 
and  if  you  die  in  your  present  state,  it  must  live  in  endless  torment.  You  are  an 
accountable  being  ;  God,  who  made  you,  demands  perfect  obedience.  But  you  must 
own  that  you  have  sinned  ;  say  not,  '  I  am  not  a  great  sinner,'  for  one  sin  only  would 
be  sufficient  to  sink  your  soul  for  ever  in  the  pit  of  perdition.  The  sentence  ol 
death  stands  against  you,  and  mercy  alone  stays  its  e.xecution.  Seeing  now  that  you 
are  in  such  danger,  how  do  you  think  to  escape  ?  Surely  you  will  not  be  content  to 
die  as  you  are,  for  you  will  one  day  find  it  no  light  matter  to  endure  the  hot 
displeasure  of  an  angry  God.  Do  you  imagine  that,  if  you  live  better  for  the  future, 
God  will  forgive  your  past  offences  ?  That  is  a  mistake  ;  see  if  you  can  find  it  in  the 
Bible. 

"  Perhaps  you  intend  to  think  about  religion  after  you  have  enjoyed  sin  a  little 
longer  ;  or  (but  surely  you  are  not  so  foolish)  possibly  you  think  that  you  are  toe 
young  to  die.  But  who  knows  whether  that  future  time  will  be  afforded,  and  who 
said  that  you  can  turn  to  Christ  just  when  you  please  ?  Your  heart  is  deceitful 
above  all  things,  and  your  natural  depravity  so  great  that  you  will  not  turn  to  God. 
Trust  not,  then,  to  resolutions  made  in  your  own  strength,  they  are  but  wind  ;  nor  tc 
yourself,  who  are  but  a  broken  reed  ;  nor  to  your  own  heart,  or  you  are  a  fool. 
There  is  no  way  of  salvation  but  Christ  ;  you  cannot  save  yourself,  having  no  power 


196 


H.     SPURGEON'S    AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


even  to  think  one  good  thought ;  neither  can  your  parents'  love  and  prayers  save 
you  ;  none  but  Jesus  can,  He  is  the  Saviour  of  the  helpless,  and  I  tell  you  that  He 
died  for  all  such  as  feel  their  vileness,  and  come  to  Him  for  cleansing. 

"  You  do  not  deserve  salvation  ;  well,  there  is  not  a  jot  of  merit  on  the  sinner's 
part  mentioned  in  the  covenant.  You  have  nothing  ;  you  are  nothing  ;  but  Christ 
is  all,  and  He  must  be  everything  to  you,  or  you  will  never  be  saved.  None  reach 
Heaven  but  by  free-grace,  and  through  free-grace  alone.  Even  a  faint  desire 
after  any  good  thing  came  from  God,  from  whom  you  must  get  more,  for  He  giveth 
liberally,  and  no  poor  sinner,  begging  at  His  door,  was  ever  yet  sent  empty  away. 

"  Look  at  the  blessedness  of  real  religion,  no  one  is  truly  happy  but  a  child 
of  God.  The  believer  is  safe,  for  God  has  promised  to  preserve  him  ;  and  if  once 
you  have  the  pearl  of  great  price,  it  cannot  be  taken  from  you.  The  way  to 
Heaven  is  faith,  'looking  unto  Jesus;'  this  faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  none 
but  those  who  have  it  know  its  value.  Oh,  may  you  possess  it ! — is  the  earnest 
prayer  of — 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"Charles  H.  Spurgeon.' 


"  Cambridge, 

"May  3,   185 1. 
"My  Dear  Mother, 

"  Many  happy  returns  of  this  day,  I  pray  for  you.  Another  year's 
journey  of  the  vast  howling  wilderness  have  you  gone  ;  you  have  leaned  on  the 
arm  of  your  Beloved,  and  are  now  nearer  the  gates  of  bliss.  Happy  as  the  year 
has  been,  I  trust,  to  you,  yet  1  do  not  think  you  would  wish  to  traverse  it  over 
again,  or  to  go  back  one  step  of  the  way.  Glorious,  wondrous,  has  been  the  grace 
shown  to  all  of  us,  as  members  of  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  in  preservation, 
restraint  from  sin,  constraint  to  holiness,  and  perseverance  in  the  Christian  state. 
What  shall  a  babe  say  to  a  mother  in  Israel  ?  And  yet,  if  I  might  speak,  I  would 
say,  'Take  this  year's  mercies  as  earnests  of  next  year's  blessings.'  The  God  who 
has  kept  you  so  long,  you  may  rest  assured  will  never  leave  you.  If  He  had  not 
meant  to  do  good  continually  to  you,  He  would  not  have  done  it  at  all.  His  love 
in  time  past,   in  the  past  year,  forbids  you — 

"  '  Forbids  you  to  think, 
He'll  leave  you  at  last  in  trouble  to  sink.' 

"  The  rapturous  moments  of  enjoyment,  the  hallowed  hours  of  communion,  the 
blest  days  of  sunshine  in   His  presence,  are  pledges  of  sure,  certain,  inlallible  glory. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


197 


Mark  the  providences  of  this  year;  how  clearly  have  you  seen  His  hand  in  things 
which  others  esteem  chance  !  God,  who  has  moved  the  world,  has  exercised  His  own 
vast  heart  and  thought  for  you.  All  your  life,  your  spiritual  life,  all  things  have 
worked  together  for  good  ;  nothing  has  gone  wrong,  for  God  has  directed,  con- 
trolled all.  '  Why  sayest  thou,  O  Jacob,  and  speakest,  O  Israel,  My  way  is  hid  from 
the  Lord,  and  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God  ?'  He  who  counts  the  hairs 
of  our  heads,  and  keeps  us  as  the  apple  of  His  eye,  has  not  forgotten  you,  but  still 
loves  you  with  an  everlasting  love.  The  mountains  have  not  departed  yet,  nor  the 
hills  been  removed,  and  till  then  we  mav  have  confidence  that  we.  His  own  people, 
are  secure. 

"  But  I  am  writing  what  to  you  axe  everyday  meditations.  Well,  dear  Mother 
you  know  where  this  comes  from,  only  from  your  boy.  Let  us  rejoice  together ;  your 
prayers  for  us  1  know  will  be  answered,  they  are  sure  to  be,  for  God  has  said  so. 
May  God  give  you  a  feast — honey,  wine,  milk, — may  you  be  satisfied  with  marrow  and 
fatness,  satiated  with  the  dainties  and  luxuries  of  religion,  and  rejoice  exceedingly  in 
the  Lord  !  I  remember  that,  a  year  ago,  I  publicly  professed  the  name  of  Jesus  by 
baptism.  Pray  for  me,  that  I  may  not  dishonour  my  profession,  and  break  my  solemn 
vow.  While  I  look  back  through  the  year,  I  can  see  a  Great  Exhibition  of  love  and 
grace  to  me,  more  marvellous  than  even  that  now  opened  in  Hyde  Park.  Give  my 
love  to  dear  Father,  Archer,  and  sisters  ;  and  accept  the  same  doubly.  I  trust  all 
are  well.  I  have  nothing  the  matter  with  me.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  desire  respects. 
Many  thanks  for  the  postal  order. 

'  I  am, 

'  Your  affectionate  son, 

"Charles  H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XIX. 


"Ujt  Bos^^rcacljtr  of  tfje  ftns." 


EXTERIOR   OF  COTTAGE   AT  TEVERSHAM,   WHERE   I   FIRST   PREACHED. 

MY   FIRST   SERMON. 

REMEMBER   well   the  first  place   in    which   I   addressed   a  con- 
gregation   of    adults,    and    the    illustration    above    sets    it    clearly 
before  my  mind's  eye.      It  was  not  my  first  public  address   by  a 
great  many,   for  at  Newmarket,  and  Cambridge,  and  elsewhere,  the 
Sabbath-school    had   afforded    me    ample    scope    for    speaking  the 
gospel  ;    but  no   regular  set    discourse  to  a  congregation  met  for 
Divine  worship  had  I  delivered  till  one  eventful  Sabbath  evening,  which  found  me 
in  a  cottage  at  Teversham,  holding  forth  before  a  little  assembly  of  humble  villagers. 
The  tale  is  not  a  new  one,  but  it  is  worth  telling  again. 


200  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

There  is  a  Preachers'  Association  in  Cambridge,  connected  with  St.  Andrew's 
Street  Chapel,  once  the  scene  of  the  ministry  of  Robert  Robinson  and  Robert  Hall. 
A  number  of  worthy  brethren  preach  the  gospel  in  the  various  villages  surrounding 
Cambridge,  taking  each  one  his  turn  according  to  plan.  In  my  day,  the  presiding 
genius  was  the  venerable  Mr.  James  Vinter,  whom  we  were  wont  to  address  as 
Bishop  Vinter.  His  genial  soul,  warm  heart,  and  kindly  manner  were  enough  to 
keep  a  whole  fraternity  stocked  with  lo\e  ;  and,  accordingly,  a  goodly  company 
of  zealous  workers  belonged  to  the  Association,  and  laboured  as  true  yoke-fellows. 
My  suspicion  is,  that  he  not  only  preached  himself,  and  helped  his  brethren, 
but  that  he  was  a  sort  of  recruiting  sergeant,  and  drew  in  young  men  to  keep  up 
the  number  of  the  host ;  at  least,  I  can  speak  from  personal  experience  as  to 
one  case. 

I  had,  one  Saturday,  finished  morning  school,  and  the  boys  were  all  going 
home  for  the  half-holiday,  when  in  came  the  aforesaid  "  Bishop  "  to  ask  me  to  go 
over  to  Teversham,  the  next  evening,  for  a  young  man  was  to  preach  there  w-ho 
was  not  much  used  to  services,  and  very  likely  would  be  glad  of  company.  That 
was  a  cunningly-devised  sentence,  if  1  remember  it  rightly,  and  I  think  I  do ; 
for,  at  the  time,  in  the  light  of  that  Sunday  evening's  revelation,  I  turned  it  over, 
and  vastly  admired  its  ingenuity.  A  request  to  go  and  preach,  would  have  met 
with  a  decided  negative  ;  but  merely  to  act  as  company  to  a  good  brother  who  did 
not  like  to  be  lonely,  and  perhaps  might  ask  me  to  give  out  a  hymn  or  to  pray,  was 
not  at  all  a  difficult  matter,  and  the  request,  understood  in  that  fashion,  was 
cheerfully  complied  with.  Little  did  the  lad  know  what  Jonathan  and  David  were 
doing-  when  he  was  made  to  run  for  the  arrow,  and  as  little  did  I  know  when  I  was 
cajoled  into  accompanying  a  young  man  to  Teversham. 

My  Sunday-school  work  was  over,  tea  had  been  taken,  and  I  set  off 
through  Barnwell,  and  away  along  the  Newmarket  Road,  with  a  gendeman  some 
few  years  my  senior.  We  talked  of  good  things,  and  at  last  I  expressed  my 
hope  that  he  would  feel  the  presence  of  God  while  preaching.  He  seemed  to  start, 
and  assured  me  that  he  had  never  preached  in  his  life,  and  could  not  attempt  such 
a  thing  ;  he  was  looking  to  his  young  friend,  Mr.  Spurgeon,  for  that.  This  was  a 
new  view  of  the  situation,  and  1  could  only  reply  that  1  was  no  minister  ;  and  that, 
even  if  I  had  been,  I  was  quite  unprepared.  My  companion  only  repeated  that  he, 
in  a  still  more  emphatic  sense,  was  not  a  preacher,  that  he  would  help  me  in  any 
other  part  of  the  service,  but  that  there  would  be  no  sermon  unless  1  delivered 
one.  He  told  me  that,  if  I  repeated  one  of  my  Sunday-school  addresses,  it  would 
just  suit  the  poor  people,  and  would  probably  give  them  more  satisfaction  than  the 
studied  sermon  of  a  learned  divine.  I  felt  that  I  was  fairly  committed  to  do  my  best. 
I  walked  along  quietly,  lifting  up  my  soul  to  God,  and  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  could 


C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 


20I 


surely  tell  a  few  poor  cottagers  of  the  sweetness  and  love  of  Jesus,  for  I  felt  them  in 
my  own  soul.  Praying  for  Divine  help,  I  resolved  to  make  the  attempt.  My  text 
should  be,  "  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is  precious,"  and  I  would  trust 
the  Lord  to  open  my  mouth  in  honour  of  His  dear  Son.  It  seemed  a  great  risk  and 
a  serious  trial  ;  but  depending  upon  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  would  at  least 
tell  out  the  story  of  the  cross,  and  not  allow  the  people  to  go  home  without  a  word. 


INTERIOR   OF  COTTAGE   AT  TEVERSHAM,   WHERE   MR.    SPURGEON   FIRST  PREACHED. 

We  entered  the  low-pitched  room  of  the  thatched  cottage,  where  a  few  simple- 
minded  farm-labourers  and  their  wives  were  gathered  together  ;  we  sang,  and 
prayed,  and  read  the  Scriptures,  and  then  came  my  first  sermon.  How  long,  or  how 
short  it  was,  I  cannot  now  remember.  It  was  not  half  such  a  task  as  I  had 
feared  it  would  be,  but  I  was  glad  to  see  my  way  to  a  fair  conclusion,  and  to  the 
giving  out  of  the  last  hymn.  To  my  own  delight,  I  had  not  broken  down,  nor 
stopped  short  in  the  middle,  nor  been  destitute  of  ideas,  and  the  desired  haven  was 
in  view.  I  made  a  finish,  and  took  up  the  hymn-book  ;  but,  to  my  astonishment,  an 
aged  voice  cried  out,  "  Bless  your  dear  heart,  how  old  are  you  ?  "  ]\Iy  very  solemn 
reply  was,  "You  must  wait  till  the  service  is  over  before  making  any  such  enquiries. 
Let  us  now  sing."     We  did  sing,  the  young  preacher  pronounced  the  benediction. 


202  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

and  then  there  began  a  dialogue  which  enlarged  into  a  warm,  friendly  talk,  in 
which  everybody  appeared  to  take  part.  "  How  old  are  you?"  was  the  leading- 
question.  "  I  am  under  sixty,"  was  the  reply.  "Yes,  and  under  sixteen,"  was  the 
old  lady's  rejoinder.  "  Never  mind  my  age,  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  His 
preciousness,"  was  all  that  I  could  say,  after  promising  to  come  again,  if  the 
gentlemen  at  Cambridge  thought  me  fit  to  do  so.  Very  great  and  profound  was 
my  awe  of  "the  gentlemen  at  Cambridge"  in  those  days. 

Are  there  not  other  young  men  who  might  begin  to  speak  for  Jesus  in  some 
such  lowly  fashion, — young  men  who   hitherto  have   been  as  mute  as  fishes  ?     Our 
villages  and  hamlets  offer  fine  opportunities  for  youthful  speakers.      Let  them  not 
wait  till  they  are  invited  to  a  chapel,  or  have  prepared  a  fine  essay,  or  have  secured 
an  intelligent  audience.      If  they  will  go  and  tell  out  from  their  hearts  what  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  done  for  them,  they  will  find  ready  listeners.      Many  of  our  young  folks 
want  to  commence  their  service  for  Christ  by  doing  great  things,  and  therefore  do 
nothing  at  all  ;  let  none  of  my  readers  become  the  victims  of  such  an  unreasonable 
ambition.     He  who  is  willing  to  teach  infants,  or  to  give  away  tracts,  and  so  to  begin 
at  the  beginning,  is  far  more  likely  to  be  useful  than  the  youth  who  is  full  of  affectations, 
and  sleeps  in  a  white  necktie,  who  is  aspiring  to  the  ministry,  and  is  touching  up 
certain  superior  manuscripts  which  he  hopes  ere  long  to  read   from   the  pastor's 
pulpit.      He  who  talks  upon  plain  gospel  themes  in  a  farmer's  kitchen,  and  is  able  to 
interest  the  carter's  boy  and  the  dairymaid,  has  more  of  the  minister  in  him  than  the 
prim  little  man  who  keeps  prating  about  being  cultured,  and  means  by  that — being 
taught  to  use  words   which    nobody  can   understand.     To   make   the   very   poorest 
listen  with  pleasure  and  profit,  is  in  itself  an  achievement ;   and  beyond  this,  it  is  the 
best  possible  promise  and  preparation  for  an   influential  ministry.      Let  our  younger 
brethren  go  in  for  cottage  preaching,  and  plenty  of  it.      If  there  is  no  Lay  Preachers' 
Association,  let  them  work  by  themselves.     The  expense  is  not  very  great  for  rent, 
candles,  and  a   few   forms  :  many  a  young  man's   own    pocket-money  would  cover 
it   all.     No  isolated  group  of  houses  should    be    left    without    its  preaching-room, 
no  hamlet  without  its  evening  service.     This  is  the  lesson  of  the  thatched  cottage 
at  Teversham. 

(Preaching  at  the  Music  Hall,  Royal  Surrey  Gardens,  on  Lord's-day  morning, 
March  13th,  1859,  upon  the  words,  "Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is 
precious,"  Mr.  Spurgeon  said  : — This  text  calls  to  my  recollection  the  opening  of  my 
ministry.  It  is  about  eight  years  since,  as  a  lad  of  sixteen,  I  stood  up  for  the  first 
time  in  my  life  to  preach  the  gospel  in  a  cottage  to  a  handful  of  poor  people,  who 
had  come  together  for  worship.  I  felt  my  own  inability  to  preach,  but  I  ventured  to 
take  this  text,  "  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  He  is  precious."      I  do  not  think  I 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  203 

could  have  said  anytlTing  upon  any  other  text,  but  Christ  was  precious  to  my  soul, 
and  I  was  in  the  flush  of  my  youthful  love,  and  I  could  not  be  silent  when  a  precious 
Jesus  was  the  subject.  I  had  but  just  escaped  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  I  had 
not  foreotten  the  broken  fetter  ;  still  did  I  recollect  those  flames  which  seemed  to 
burn  about  my  path,  and  that  devouring  gulf  which  opened  its  mouth  as  if  ready  to 
swallow  me  up.  With  all  these  things  fresh  in  my  youthful  heart,  I  could  speak  of 
His  preciousness  who  had  been  my  Saviour,  and  had  plucked  me  as  a  brand  from  the 
burning,  and  set  me  upon  a  rock,  and  put  a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  and  established 
my  goings.  And  now,  at  this  time,  what  shall  I  say  ?  "  What  hath  God  wrought  !  " 
How  hath  the  little  one  become  a  thousand,  and  the  small  one  a  great  people  ! 
And  what  shall  I  say  concerning  this  text  but  that,  if  the  Lord  Jesus  was  precious 
then.  He  is  as  precious  now  ?  And  if  I  could  declare,  then,  that  Jesus  was  the 
object  of  my  soul's  desire,  that  for  Him  I  hoped  to  live,  and  for  Him  I  would  be 
prepared  to  die,  can  I  not  say,  God  being  my  witness,  that  He  is  more  precious  to 
me  this  day  than  ever  He  was  ?  In  the  recollection  of  His  unparalleled  mercy 
towards  the  chief  of  sinners,  I  must  anew  devote  myself  to  Him,  and  afresh 
surrender  my  heart  to  Him  who  is  my  Lord  and  King.  This  remark  is  uttered  by  way 
of  introduction,  it  may  seem  egotistical,  but  that  I  cannot  help.  I  must  give  glory 
to  God  in  the  midst  of  the  great  congregation,  and  pay  my  vows  to  the  Lord  now 
in  the  midst  of  all  His  saints,  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O  Jerusalem  !) 

Considerable  weight  is  to  be  given  to  the  judgment  of  men  and  women  who 
live  near  to  God,  and  in  most  instances  their  verdict  will  not  be  a  mistaken  one. 
Yet  this  appeal  is  not  final  nor  infallible,  and  is  only  to  be  estimated  in  proportion  to 
the  intelligence  and  piety  of  those  consulted.  I  remember  well  how  earnestly  I  was 
dissuaded  from  preaching  by  as  godly  a  Christian  matron  as  ever  breathed  ;  I 
endeavoured  to  estimate,  with  candour  and  patience,  the  value  of  her  opinion  ;  but  it 
was  outweighed  by  the  judgment  of  persons  of  wider  experience.  If  a  man  be 
truly  called  of  God  to  the  ministry,  I  will  defy  him  to  withhold  himself  from  it. 
A  man  who  has  really  within  him  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  calling  him  to 
preach,  cannot  help  it, — he  must  preach.  As  fire  within  the  bones,  so  will  that 
influence  be  until  it  blazes  forth.  Friends  may  check  him,  foes  criticise  him, 
despisers  sneer  at  him,  the  man  is  indomitable  ;  he  must  preach  if  he  has  the 
call  of  Heaven.  All  earth  might  forsake  him  ;  but  he  would  preach  to  the  barren 
mountain-tops.  If  he  has  the  call  of  Heaven,  if  he  had  no  congregation,  he  would 
preach  to  the  rippling  waterfalls,  and  let  the  brooks  hear  his  voice.  He  could  not 
be  silent.  He  would  become  a  voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way 
of  the  Lord."  I  no  more  believe  it  possible  to  stop  ministers  than  to  stop  the  stars 
of  heaven.      I   think  it  no  more  possible  to  make  a  man  cease  from  preaching",  if  he 


204  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHV. 

is  really  called,  than  to  stay  some  mighty  cataract,  by  seeking,  in  an  infant's  cup, 
to  catch  the  rushing  torrent.  The  man  has  been  moved  of  Heaven,  who  shall  stop 
him  ?  He  has  been  touched  of  God,  who  shall  impede  him  ?  With  an  eagle's  wing, 
he  must  fly;  who  shall  chain  him  to  the  earth  ?  With  a  seraph's  voice,  he  must  speak  ; 
who  shall  seal  his  lips  ?  And  when  a  man  does  speak  as  the  Spirit  gives  him 
utterance,  he  will  feel  a  holy  joy  akin  to  that  of  Heaven  ;  and  when  it  is  over,  he 
wishes  to  be  at  his  work  again,  he  longs  to  be  once  more  preaching.  Is  not  the 
Lord's  Word  like  a  fire  within  me?     Must  I  not  speak  if  God  has  placed  it  there  .'' 

I  was  for  three  years  a  Cambridge  man,  though  I  never  entered  the  University. 
I  could  not  have  obtained  a  degree,  because  I  was  a  Nonconformist  ;  and,  moreover, 
it  was  a  better  thing  for  me  to  pursue  my  studies  under  an  admirable  scholar  and 
tender  friend,  and  to  preach  at  die  same  time.  I  was,  by  my  tutor's  own  expressed 
verdict,  considered  to  be  sufficiently  proficient  in  my  studies  to  have  taken  a  good 
place  on  the  list  had  the  way  been  open.  "  You  could  win  in  a  canter,"  said  he  to 
me.  I  had,  however,  a  better  College  course,  for,  when  I  first  began  to  preach, 
this  was  my  usual  way  of  working.  I  was  up  in  the  morning  early,  praying  and 
reading  the  Word  ;  all  the  day,  I  was  either  teaching  my  scholars  or  studying 
theology  as  much  as  I  could  ;  then,  at  five  in  the  evening,  I  became  a  travelling 
preacher,  and  went  into  the  villages  around  Cambridge,  to  tell  out  what  I  had  learned. 
My  quiet  meditation  during  the  walk  helped  me  to  digest  what  I  had  read,  and  the 
rehearsal  of  my  lesson  in  public,  by  preaching  it  to  the  people,  fixed  it  on  my 
memory.  I  do  not  mean  that  I  ever  repeated  a  single  sentence  from  memory,  but 
I  thought  my  reading  over  again  while  on  my  legs,  and  thus  worked  it  into  my 
very  soul  ;  and  I  can  bear  my  testimony  that  I  never  learned  so  much,  or  learned  it 
so  thoroughly,  as  when  I  used  to  tell  out,  simply  and  earnesdy,  what  I  had  first 
received  into  my  own  mind  and  heart.  I  found  that  I  derived  greater  benefit  by 
proclaiming  to  others  what  I  had  learned  than  if  I  had  kept  it  all  to  myself 

I  must  have  been  a  singular-looking  youth  on  wet  evenings,  for  I  walked  three, 
five,  or  even  eight  miles  out  and  back  again  on  my  preaching  work  ;  and  when  it 
rained,  I  dressed  myself  in  waterproof  leggings  and  a  mackintosh  coat,  and  a  hat 
with  a  waterproof  covering,  and  I  carried  a  dark  lantern  to  show  me  the  way  across 
the  fields.  I  am  sure  that  I  was  greatly  profited  by  those  early  services  for  my  Lord. 
How  many  times  I  enjoyed  preaching  the  gospel  in  a  farmer's  kitchen,  or  in  a  cottage, 
or  in  a  barn  !  Perhaps  many  people  came  to  hear  me  because  I  was  then  only  a  boy. 
In  my  young  days,  I  fear  that  I  said  many  odd  things,  and  made  many  blunders  ; 
but  my  audience  was  not  hypercritical,  and  no  newspaper  writers  dogged  my  heels  ; 
so  I  had  a  happy  training-school,  in  which,  by  continual  practice,  I  attained  such  a 
degree  of  ready  speech  as  I  now  possess. 

1   had  many  adventures,   and  a  great   variety  of  experiences  in  this  itineratmg 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S    AUTODIOGRAPHY.  205 

work.  I  recollect  one  summer's  evening,  when  I  had  engaged  to  preach  at  a  village 
not  far  from  Waterbeach  ;  but,  before  I  could  reach  my  destination,  the  sky  darkened, 
and  a  severe  thunderstorm  burst  over  the  district.  Some  people  are  terrified  at 
lightning  ;  but  ever  since  I  believed  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  have  had  no  fear  in  a 
storm,  however  severe  it  might  be.  I  distinctly  remember,  while  quite  a  lad,  being 
in  my  uncle's  house  one  night  during  a  tremendous  tempest.  The  older  folks  were 
all  afraid  ;  but  I  had  really  trusted  myself  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  I  did  not  dare  to 
fear.  The  baby  was  upstairs,  and  nobody  was  brave  enough  to  fetch  it  down  because 
of  a  big  window  on  the  stairs.  I  went  up  to  the  bedroom,  and  brought  the  child  to 
its  mother,  and  then  read  a  Psalm,  and  prayed  with  my  relatives,  who  were  trembling 
in  terror.  There  was  real  danger,  for  a  stack  was  set  on  fire  a  short  distance  away  ; 
but  I  was  as  calm  as  in  the  sunshine  of  a  summer's  day,  not  because  I  was  naturally 
courageous,  but  because  I  had  unshaken  confidence  in  my  Lord.  I  love  the 
lightnings,  God's  thunder  is  my  delight  ;  I  never  feel  so  well  as  when  there  is  a 
great  thunder  and  lightning  storm.  Then  I  feel  as  if  I  could  mount  up  as  with  the 
wings  of  eagles,  and  my  whole  heart  loves  then  to  sing, — 

"The  God  that  rules  on  high, 
And  thunders  when  He  please, 
That  rides  upon  the  stormy  sky, 
And  manages  the  seas. 

"This  awful  God  is  ours, 
Our  Father  and  our  love ; 
He  shall  send  down  His  Heavenly  powers 
To  carry  us  above." 

Men  are  by  nature  afraid  of  the  heavens  ;  the  superstitious  dread  the  signs  in  the 
sky,  and  even  the  bravest  spirit  is  sometimes  made  to  tremble  when  the  firmament  is 
ablaze  with  lightning,  and  the  pealing  thunder  seems  to  make  the  vast  concave 
of  heaven  to  tremble  and  to  reverberate  ;  but  I  always  feel  ashamed  to  keep 
indoors  when  the  thunder  shakes  the  solid  earth,  and  the  lightnings  flash  like  arrows 
from  the  sky.  Then  God  is  abroad,  and  I  love  to  walk  out  in  some  wide  space,  and 
to  look  up  and  mark  the  opening  gates  of  heaven,  as  the  lightning  reveals  far  beyond, 
and  enables  me  to  gaze  into  the  unseen.  I  like  to  hear  my  Heavenly  Father's  voice 
in  the  thunder. 

On  this  particular  occasion,  while  walking  to  the  place  where  I  was  to  preach,  I 
was  enjoying  the  storm  ;  but  as  I  was  passing  a  cottage  on  the  road,  I  noticed  a 
woman  who  seemed  to  be  greatly  alarmed  and  in  sore  distress  because  of  the 
tempest.  I  did  not  like  to  pass  by,  and  leave  a  fellow-creature  in  trouble,  so  I 
entered  the  house,  read  a  few  verses  of  Scripture,  and  prayed,  and  so  comforted  the 
woman.  I  then  proceeded  to  my  destination,  to  fulfil  my  engagement.  On  entering 
the  village,  I  took  off  my  waterproof  coat,  because  the  smooth  surface  appeared  to 
reflect  the  vivid  flashes  of  lightning  in  a  way  that  might  alarm   the  timid.      I  found 


200  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

that,  because  of  the  seventy  of  the  tempest,  the  people  were  not  expecting  that 
there  would  be  a  service  ;  so  I  went  round  from  house  to  house,  and  invited  them 
to  come  to  the  regular  meeting  -  place.  This  unusual  method  of  gathering  a 
congregation  brought  me  many  hearers  ;  the  service  was  held,  and,  at  its  close,  I 
walked  back  to  my  Cambridge  home. 

One  night,  having  been  preaching  the  Word  in  a  country  village,  I  was 
walking  home,  all  by  myself,  along  a  lonely  footpath.  I  do  not  know  what  it 
was  that  ailed  me,  but  I  was  prepared  to  be  alarmed  ;  when,  of  a  surety,  I  saw 
something  standing  in  the  hedge, — ghastly,  giant-like,  and  with  outstretched  arms. 
Surely,  I  thought,  for  once  I  have  come  across  the  supernatural  ;  here  is  some 
restless  spirit  performing  its  midnight  march  beneath  the  moon,  or  some  demon  of  the 
pit  wandering  abroad.  I  deliberated  with  myself  a  moment,  and  having  no  faith  in 
ghosts,  I  plucked  up  courage,  and  determined  to  solve  the  mystery.  The  monster 
stood  on  the  other  side  of  a  ditch,  right  in  the  hedge.  I  jumped  the  ditch,  and 
found  myself  grasping  an  old  tree,  which  some  waggish  body  had  taken  pains  to 
cover  with  whitewash,  with  a  view  to  frighten  simpletons.  That  old  tree  has  served 
me  a  good  turn  full  often,  for  I  have  learned  from  it  to  leap  at  difficulties,  and  find 
them  vanish  or  turn  to  triumphs. 

Frequently,  in  those  country  places,  when  preaching  in  a  low-pitched  building 
crowded  with  people,  I  have  seen  the  candles  burn  dimly  for  want  of  air, — a  clear 
indication  that  we  were  killing  ourselves  by  inhaling  an  atmosphere  from  which  the 
vitalizing  principle  had  almost  all  gone.  I  have  been  afraid  of  the  lights  going  out, 
and  have  thought  it  better  to  let  the  congregation  depart  rather  sooner  than  usual. 
On  one  occasion,  having  a  candle  on  each  side  of  me  in  a  small  pulpit,  I  was 
somewhat  vigorous,  and  dashed  one  of  my  luminaries  from  its  place.  It  fell  upon 
the  bald  head  of  a  friend  below,  who  looked  up  with  an  expression  which  I  can  see 
at  this  moment,  and  it  makes  me  smile  still.  I  took  no  more  notice  of  the  accident 
than  to  weave  it  into  what  I  was  saying  ;  and  I  believe  most  of  my  hearers 
considered  it  to  have  been  a  striking  practical  illustration  of  the  remark  which 
accompanied  it,  "  How  soon  is  the  glory  of  life  dashed  down  !  " 

In  my  earlier  days,  I  read,  somewhere  or  other,  in  a  volume  of  Lectures 
upon  Homiletics,  a  statement  which  considerably  alarmed  me  at  the  time  ;  it  was 
something  to  this  effect  : — "  If  any  man  shall  find  a  difficulty  in  selecting  a  text,  he 
had  better  at  once  go  back  to  the  grocer's  shop,  or  to  the  plough,  for  he  evidently 
has  not  the  capacity  required  for  a  minister."  Now,  as  such  had  been  very  frequently 
my  cross  and  burden,  I  enquired  within  myself  whether  I  should  resort  to  some  form 
of  secular  labour,  and  leave  the  ministry  ;  but  I  have  not  done  so,  for  I  still  have  the 
conviction  that,   although  condemned  by  the  sweeping  judgment  of  the  lecturer,  I 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  20/ 

follow  a  call  to  which  God  has  manifestly  set  His  seal.  I  was  so  much  in  trouble  of 
conscience  through  the  aforesaid  severe  remark,  that  I  asked  my  grandfather,  who 
had  been  in  the  ministry  some  fifty  years,  whether  he  was  ever  perplexed  in  choosing^ 
his  theme.  He  told  me  frankly  that  this  had  always  been  his  greatest  trouble, 
compared  with  which,  preaching  in  itself  was  no  an.xiety  at  all.  I  remember  the 
venerable  man's  remark,  "  The  difficulty  is  not  because  there  are  not  enough  texts, 
but  because  there  are  so  many,  that  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  them."  We  are  some- 
thing like  the  lover  of  choice  flowers,  who  finds  himself  surrounded  by  all  the  beauties 
of  the  garden,  with  permission  to  select  but  one.  How  long  he  lingers  between  the 
rose  and  the  lily,  and  how  great  the  difficulty  to  prefer  one  among  ten  thousand 
lovely  blooms !  To  me,  still,  I  must  admit,  my  text-selection  is  a  very  great 
embarrassment, — eiiibarras  dc  i-ichesse,  as  the  French  say, — an  embarrassment  of 
riches,  very  different  from  the  bewilderment  of  poverty, — the  anxiety  of  attending  to 
the  most  pressing  of  so  many  truths,  all  clamouring  for  a  hearing,  so  many  duties  all 
needing  enforcing,  and  so  many  spiritual  needs  of  the  people  all  demanding  supply. 
I  confess  that  I  frequently  sit  hour  after  hour  praying  and  waiting  for  a  subject,  and 
that  this  is  the  main  part  of  my  study  ;  much  hard  labour  have  I  spent  in  manipu- 
lating topics,  ruminating  upon  points  of  doctrine,  making  skeletons  out  of  verses,  and 
then  burying  every  bone  of  them  in  the  catacombs  of  oblivion,  drifting  on  and  on 
over  leagues  of  broken  water,  till  I  see  the  red  lights,  and  make  sail  direct  to  the 
desired  haven.  I  believe  that,  almost  any  Saturday  in  my  life,  I  prepare  enough 
outlines  of  Sermons,  if  I  felt  at  liberty  to  preach  them,  to  last  me  for  a  month,  but 
I  no  more  dare  to  use  them  than  an  honest  mariner  would  run  to  shore  a  careo  of 
contraband  goods. 

I  am  always  sure  to  have  the  most  happy  day  when  I  get  a  good  text  in  the 
morning  from  my  Master.  When  I  have  had  to  preach  two  or  three  sermons 
in  a  day,  I  have  asked  Him  for  the  morning  subject,  and  preached  from  it  ;  and  I 
have  asked  Him  for  the  afternoon's  topic  or  the  evening's  portion,  and  preached 
from  it,  after  meditating  on  it  for  my  own  soul's  comfort, — not  in  the  professional 
style  of  a  regular  sermon-maker,  but  feasting  upon  it  for  myself  Such  simple  food 
has  done  the  people  far  more  good  than  if  I  had  been  a  week  in  manufacturing  a 
sermon,  for  it  has  come  warm  from  the  heart  just  after  it  has  been  received  in  my 
own  soul  ;  and  therefore  it  has  been  well  spoken,  because  well  known,  well  tasted, 
and  well  felt.  Sometimes,  my  texts  have  come  to  me  in  a  very  remarkable  way. 
While  I  was  living  at  Cambridge,  I  had,  as  usual,  to  preach  in  the  evening  at  a 
neighbouring  village,  to  which  I  had  to  walk.  After  reading  and  meditating  all  day, 
I  could  not  meet  with  the  right  text.  Do  what  I  would,  no  response  came  from  the 
sacred  oracle,  no  light  flashed  from  the  Urim  and  Thummim  ;  I  prayed,  I  searched 
the  Scriptures,   I   turned  from  one  verse  to  another,  but  my  mind  would  not  take 


2o8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

hold  of  a  text ;  I  was,  as  Bunyan  would  say,  "  much  tumbled  up  and  down  in  my 
thoughts."  Just  then,  I  walked  to  the  window,  and  looked  out.  On  the  other  side 
of  the  narrow  street  in  which  I  lived,  I  saw  a  poor  solitary  canary  bird  upon  the 
slates,  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  sparrows,  who  were  all  pecking  at  it  as  if  they 
would  tear  it  to  pieces.  At  that  moment  the  verse  came  to  my  mind,  "  Mine 
heritage  is  unto  me  as  a  speckled  bird,  the  birds  round  about  are  against  her." 
I  walked  off  with  the  greatest  possible  composure,  considered  the  passage  during  my 
long  and  lonely  walk,  and  preached  upon  the  peculiar  people,  and  the  persecutions 
of  their  enemies,  with  freedom  and  ease  to  myself,  and  I  believe  with  comfort  to 
my  rustic  audience.  The  te.xt  was  sent  to  me,  and  if  the  ravens  did  not  bring  it, 
certainly  the  sparrows  did. 

While  I  was  living  at  Cambridge,  I  once  heard  Mr.  Jay,  of  Bath,  preach.  His 
text  was,  "  Let  your  conversation  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ."  I 
remember  with  what  dignity  he  preached,  and  yet  how  simply.  He  made  one 
remark  which  deeply  impressed  my  youthful  mind,  and  which  I  have  never  forgotten  ; 
it  was  this,  "  You  do  need  a  Mediator  between  yourselves  and  God,  but  you  do  not 
need  a  Mediator  between  yourselves  and  Christ ;  you  may  come  to  Him  just  as  you 
are."  Another  of  his  striking  sayings  w-K'  this,  "  Popery  is  a  lie,  Puseyism  is  a  lie, 
baptismal  regeneration  is  a  lie."  I  recollect  also  that,  in  the  course  of  his  sermon, 
Mr.  Jay  said  that  ladies  were  sometimes  charged  with  dressing  in  too  cosdy  a 
fashion.  He  told  us  that  he  did  not  himself  know  much  about  that  matter;  but,  if 
they  would  let  him  hear  what  their  income  was,  he  would  tell  them  how  many  yards 
of  silk,  satin,  lace,  or  ribbon,  they  could  afford.  My  recollections  of  Mr.  Jay  were  such 
as  I  would  not  like  to  lose.  It  usually  happens  that,  when  we  listen  to  a  venerable 
patriarch,  such  as  he  then  was,  there  is  all  the  greater  weight  in  his  words  because  of 
his  age.  I  fancy  that,  if  I  had  heard  the  same  sermon  preached  by  a  young  man,  I 
should  not  have  thought  much  of  it  ;  but  there  appeared  all  the  greater  depth  in  it 
because  it  came  from  an  old  man  standing  almost  on  the  borders  of  the  grave. 

In  an  early  part  of  my  ministry,  while  but  a  lad,  I  was  seized  with  an  intense 
desire  to  hear  Mr.  John  Angell  James  ;  and,  though  my  finances  were  somewhat 
meagre,  I  performed  a  pilgrimage  to  Birmingham,  solely  with  that  object  in  view.  I 
heard  him  deliver  a  week-evening  lecture,  in  his  large  vestry,  on  that  precious  text, 
"Ye  are  complete  in  Him."  The  savour  of  that  very  sweet  discourse  abides  with  me 
to  this  day,  and  I  shall  never  read  the  passage  without  associating  therewith  the 
quiet  but  earnest  utterances  of  that  eminent  man  of  God.  Years  afterwards,  on 
being  in  Mr.  James's  company,  I  told  him  that  I  went  all  the  way  from  Cambridge 
to  Birmingham  to  hear  him  preach.  On  my  mentioning  the  text,  he  replied,  "  Ah  ! 
that  was  a  Calvinistic  sermon.  You  would  enjoy  that  ;  but  you  would  not  get  on 
with  me  always."     I  was  glad  also  to  have  the  opportunity  of  thanking  him  for  that 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  209 

precious  book  of  his,  The  Anxious  Enquirer,  which  has  been  the  means  of  bringing 
so  many  sinners  to  the  Saviour,  and  which  I  had  found  exceedingly  helpful  when  I 
was  seeking  the  Lord. 

=)r  *  #  * 

A    Critical    Jun'cture    i\    the    Young    Preacher's    History. 

"  Cambridge, 

"May  15/51. 

"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  .   .  .   .    My  choice  of  return  home  is  easily  made.      I  hope  very  much  you  will 

be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  go  to  the  Exhibition.     Mr.  C ,  who  was  at  Mr.  Lewis's, 

has  just  called  to  see  me I   am  going  to  his  house  to  tea,  he  lodges  with 

Mr.  R .      I  guess  I  feel  no  mercy  for  him  ;    1  mean,  Mr.  R ;    a  cap  and 

gown  are  poor  things  to  sell  one's  principles  for.  Yctt  have  not  ivritten  to  Mr. 
Leedins'.  Where  is  Mr.  Walker  ?  I  cannot  write,  for  I  know  nothing  of  his  where- 
abouts.  We  have  no  minister  yet.  We  have  had  some  excellent  supplies.  I  am 
very  comfortable,  and  I  may  say,  happy.  Were  it  not  for  my  vile  heart,  I  might 
rejoice.  I  am  the  least  of  God's  people,  I  am  sure  I  am  the  worst.  But  yet  I  a7n 
one  ;  I  believe  in  Jesus  and  trust  in  Him,  and  this,  I  take  it,  is  the  evidence  of  life. 
I  can  fall  into  His  arms,  though  I  cannot  rest  on  my  own  merits,  for  I  have  none. 
Jesus  and  Jesus  alone  is  my  defence.  I  know  you  pray  for  me.  I  think  I  have 
felt  the  answer  to  your  earnest  entreaties.  Sometimes,  I  pour  my  heart  out  sweetly, 
freely  ;  at  another  time,  I  can  hardly  bring  up  a  petition.  What  a  contrast,  mixture, 
paradox  I  am  !      I  hope  you  and  dear  Mother  are  well.      Love  to  all. 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 

(The  sentence  In  the  above  letter — "Von  have  not  written  to  Jllr.  Leeding" — 
implies  that  an  important  communication  from  Mr.  John  Spurgeon  was  anxiously 
awaited  at  Cambridge  by  both  tutor  and  pupil.  When  it  arrived,  Mr.  Leeding 
wrote  the  following  reply,  which  was  the  means  of  retaining  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at 
Cambridge,  and  so,  indirectly,  affected  the  whole  of  his  future  life  : — ) 

"  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"June  I  ith,  185  I. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  hasten  to  reply  to  your  note,  which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  have 
received  earlier.      I  did  not  expect  to  part  with  Charles  before  the  end  of  next  week, 

o 


2rO  C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

but  a  few  days  are  of  little  consequence,  and  you  may  rest  assured  of  his  leaving 
Cambridge  by  the  first  train  on  Monday  next. 

"  As  I  conceive  you  have  written  with  candour,  I  shall  think  myself  criminal  if 
I  do  not  reply  in  the  same  spirit  upon  the  subject  of  your  son's  future  career.  I 
have  been  thankful  unceasingly  for  that  merciful  Providential  arrangement  that  first 
brought  him  under  my  roof  as  well  for  the  assistance  he  renders  me,  as  for  the 
wholesome  influence  of  his  piety  and  general  character  ;  it  will  be  a  severe  blow  to 
me  to  lose  him,  on  the  latter  account  especially.  I  will  gladly  give  him  ^5  per  half- 
year  for  the  ne.xt  two  half-years,  when  he  shall  have  a  fair  addition  in  proportion  to 
the  increase  of  the  school  ;  that  increase  is  slow  at  present,  but  I  have  still  good 
hope  of  all  the  success  I  desire  ;  I  have  had  most  malignant  foes  to  contend  with, 
but  their  violence  has  fallen  on  their  own  heads. 

"  With  regard  to  Charles's  improvement,  I  can  speak  with  confidence  as  to  those 
points  which  are  directed  to  his  future  life  as  a  minister  or  a. teacher.  He  has  read 
a  great  deal,  and  has  made  excellent  progress  in  his  facility  in  reading  Latin  authors  ; 
he  has  done  well  in  Greek,  but  he  had  much  more  to  do  in  that  department,  and 
appeared  to  have  done  nothing  of  service  in  that  since  he  left  Mr  Lewis's.  You 
may  rely  on  my  word,  as  a  Christian  man,  that  he  is  in  the  clear  path  of  mental 
improvement  and  eminence.  I  am  positive  he  is  in  as  fair  a  way  of  preparation  for 
the  ministry  as  he  would  be  were  he  in  a  College  with  that  view. 

"  You  may  make  up  your  minds  that  he  is  safe  for  the  ministry,  and  in  a  very 
few  years  ;  he  has  first-rate  abilities,  a  head  adequate  to  the  investigation  of  the 
deepest  points,  accompanied  with  a  fluency  of  utterance.  He  is  considered  a  most 
valuable  help  in  the  Sabbath-school,  and  is  treated  with  the  greatest  kindness  by  one 
gentleman  connected  with  it,  who  often  expresses  the  highest  esteem  for  him,  and 
indeed  makes  him  his  most  intimate  friend.  That  gentleman  is  a  man  of  sound 
judgment  and  genuine  piety,  in  affluent  circumstances,  and  the  father  of  a  family  ; 
whatever  lack  of  honour  Charles  may  experience  'in  his  own  country,'  I  can  tell  you 
he  is  not  without  honour  here.  He  has  also  regularly  served  at  preaching  stations 
connected  with  our  church,  and  is  universally  acceptable.  One  of  the  lay  preachers, 
in  whom  I  place  the  greatest  confidence,  has  expressed  to  me  a  high  opinion  of  him, 
and  has  authorized  me  to  say  that  he  has  no  doubt,  at  seasonable  time,  the  church 
will  properly  estimate  his  talents  for  the  ministry 

"  I  might  add  to  this  ;  but  I  judge  this  is  sufficient  to  convince  you  that  you  will 
consult  his  interests  by  allowing  him  to  remain  here  at  least  another  year.  I  lay 
some  claim  to  disinterestedness  in  this  matter  ;  if  I  considered  his  interests  would  be 
best  served  by  his  seeking  for  a  larger  salary  elsewhere,  I  should  feel  it  my  duty  to 
advise  it.  He  might  get  a  little  more  money,  but  he  would  have  far  less  opportunity 
for  self-improvement.     The  thought  has  several  times  occurred  to  me  that,  as  he  is 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2 1  I 

young,  and  has  some  years  before  him  ere  he  could  enter  the  ministry,  he  might  be 
able  to  pass  through  the  Cambridge  University  course.  This  would  be  of  great 
advantage  to  him  as  a  student,  and  a  good  recommendation  to  him.  He  might 
pursue  the  same  work  that  I  did,  and  pay  his  own  expenses  without  costing  you  a 
shilling  ;  if  my  school  increases  pretty  well,  it  can  be  done  ; — a  year  hence  will  be 
early  enough  to  decide  this. 

"  I  am,  as  you  must  perceive,  anxious  to  retain  him,  as  much  for  his  sake  as  my 
own  ;  but  if  you  are  desirous  of  more  money  than  I  offer  for  the  next  year,  I  must 
yield  to  the  painful  alternative  of  parting  with  him  ;  at  the  same  time,  I  am  sure  you 
will  be  taking  a  wrong  step. 

"  Hoping  yourself,  Mrs.  S.,  and  your  family  are  well, 

"  I  remain, 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"Yours  most  faithfully, 

'•  E.  S.   Leeding." 
"  Mr.  Spurgeon." 

T?  W  ^  Tp 

(The  following  letter  shows  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  his  request  concerning  going 
to  the  Great  Exhibition  granted,  and  it  also  expresses  his  gratitude  that  he  was 
shortly  to  return  to  Cambridge,  though  probably  even  he  scarcely  realized  then  how 
much  was  involved  in  his  father's  decision  : — ) 

"  Colchester, 

"June  25  (1851). 

"  My  Dear  Aunt, 

"I  enclose  this  in  Uncle's  note.  Is  he  better  .-*  I  have  much  enjoyed 
my  three  days  in  London,  and  am  now  happy  at  home.  I  am  very  thankful  that,  if 
spared,  I  am  going  back  to  Cambridge.  Of  my  progress  there,  I  am  not  ashamed  ; 
it  should  and  might  have  been  greater,  but  still  it  is  somewhat.  My  faults  I  have 
not  learned  there,  I  had  the  same  at  Maidstone,  and  I  am  not  at  all  fond  of  having 
blame  thrown  on  the  place  where  Providence  has  placed  me.  I  am  all  fault,  but 
what  God's  grace  has  made  right.  I  am  content  to  be  evil  spoken  of  if  I  can  but 
grow  in  grace  and  serve  God.  Where  I  have  most  opportunity  of  telling  sinners 
the  way  of  salvation,  and  of  preparation  for  a  future  course  of  labour,  I  trust  I  shall 
always  feel  most  happy.  Human  wisdom  I  desire  to  gain,  but  only  in  subservience 
and  as  handmaid  to  spiritual  knowledge  and  Divine  instruction. 

"Grandfather  is  now  with  us;  he  preached  last  night  on  'Cast  thy  burden 
upon  the  Lord,  and  He  shall  sustain  thee  ;   He  shall  never  suffer  the  righteous  to  be 


212  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

moved.'  A  blessed  thing  it  must  be  for  the  new-born  sons  of  God  to  have  such  a 
stay  in  the  hour  of  trouble  ;  and  he  who,  having  left  his  own  righteousness,  trusts 
alone  on  Jesus,  has  a  perfect  right  to  this  promise. 

"  Mother  is  gone  to  old  Mr.  Merchant's  51st  anniversary  at  Layer  Breton.  He 
is  almost  past  preaching,  and  stands  a  monument  of  the  unchanging  love  of  God, 
who,  having  once  loved  a  person,  will  always  love  him.  The  motto  over  his  pulpit 
is,  'We  preach  Christ,  and  Him  crucified.'  I  am  sure  you  need  all  the  comforts 
of  the  gospel  now,  and  I  wish  1  knew  enough  to  be  able  to  give  them  faithfully  and 
successfully  ;  that  is  reserved  for  future  lessons  of  experience.  None  who  rely  on 
Jesus  Christ  will  ever  find  their  troubles  too  heavy;  for  all  those  who  take  Him  as 
their  whole  Saviour,  He  is  a  supporter.  May  God  deal  kindly  with  you,  and 
support  vou  ! 

"  Love  10  oclf  and  Uncle  from  all. 

^'  I  am, 

"•'your  affectionate  nephew, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XX. 


fiist  (Dutlhus  of  Sn-mous,  1S51-1852. 

.MONG  the   many  literary   treasures  so   carefully  preserved  by  Mr. 

Spurgeon,   there   are   two   sets   of  books   containing  his   first  brief 

Outlines  of  Sermons,  and  the  more  lengthy  manuscripts  which  he 

4       used   to   prepare   until   the  claims  of  his    London   pastorate   made 

~^      it  impossible  to  continue  doing  so  any  longer.      Probably,  by  that 

time,  he  also  felt  that  he  did  not  need   to  write  so  fully  as  in  his 

early  preaching  days  ;  and,   shortly   afterwards,    as  he   often   told   his  students,   the 

revision  of  his  printed   Sermons  gave   him   all   the  advantages  that  he  might  have 

derived  from  more  elaborate  preparation  for  the  pulpit. 

The  first  volume  of  Outlines  must  have  been  commenced  very  soon  after 
Mr.  Spurgeon  began  to  preach,  for  the  second  written  in  it  was  only  the  fojwtli 
discourse  delivered  by  the  youthful  evangelist.  The  text  was  Revelation  x.xi.  27, 
and  it  was  preached  at  Barton,  near  Cambridge,  on  February  9th,  185  i.  This  fact 
fixes,  approximately,  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  that  wonderful  world-wide 
ministry  which  the  Lord  so  long  and  so  greatly  blessed,  and  which  He  still  continues 
most  graciously  to  own  and  use.  Such  intense  interest  attaches  to  these  early 
records,  that  t.he  Autobiography  would  be  incomplete  unless  it  included  at  least  a 
few  specimens  of  the  beloved  preacher's  first  homiletic  efforts.  Mr.  Spurgeon  had 
himself  intended,  long  ago,  to  publish  a  selection  from  them  ;  in  the  Preface  to  The 
Nezv  Park  Street  Pulpit  for  1857,  he  announced  that  he  hoped  shortly  to  issue  a 
volume  of  his  earliest  Sermons,  while  Pastor  at  Waterbeach,  but  this  was  prevented 
by  the  pressure  of  his  rapidly-increasing  work.  The  Outlines  are  valuable,  not  only 
because  of  their  intrinsic  merits,  but  also  as  the  first  products  of  the  mind  and  heart 
which  afterwards  yielded  so  many  thousands  of  discourses  to  the  Church  and  the 
world,  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men.  It  must  be  remembered  that 
they  were  made  by  a  youth  of  sixteen  ;  literally,  "  the  boy-preacher."  At  the 
beginning  of  Vol.  I.  is  a  textual  index,  showing  that  the  seventy-seven  Outlines 
were  based  upon  passages  taken  from  fifteen  Books  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
sixteen  in  the  New  Testament  ;  while  at  the  end  is  a  subiect  index,  which  bears  a 


2  14  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHY. 

remarkable  resemblance  to  those  which  set  forth  the  contents  of  every  volume  of  the 
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Ptilpit.  Happy  preacher,  who  commenced,  as  he  continued, 
and  concluded,  the  ministry  he  "  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify  the  gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God."  As  indicating  the  character  of  the  whole  series,  the  first  three 
Sermon- Notes  are  given  in  the  present  work,  together  with  one  Outline  from  each 
of  the  succeeding  volumes,  facsimile  reproductions  of  the  highly-adorned  title-pages 
of  Vols.  I.  and  II.,  and  the  characteristic  inscriptions  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  at 
the  commencement  and  conclusion  of  most  oi  the  volumes. 

Outline  I. — Adoption. 

^'Having  predestinated  us  unto  the  adoption  of  children  by  Jestis  Christ  to 
Himself  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will." — Ephesians  i.  5. 

Meaning  of  the  term.  Common  among  Romans.  Two  instances  in  Scripture, — 
Moses  and  Esther.     Adoption  differs  from  Justification  and  Regeneration. 

I.     The  sense  in  which  believers  are  sons  of  God. 

Not  as  Jesus.      More  so  than  creatures. 

(i)   In  some  things  spiritual  adoption  agrees  with  civil. 

I.  In  name  and  thing.  2.  To  an  inheritance.  3.  Voluntary  on  the  part  of 
the  Adopter.      4.    Taking    the    Adopter's    name.       5.     Received    into    the    Family. 

6.  Considered  as  children  :  food,  protection,  clothing,  education,  attendance  provided. 

7.  Under  the  control  of  the  Father. 

(ii)   In  some  things  they  disagree. 

I.  Civil  adoption  requires  the  consent  of  the  adopted.  2.  Civil  adoption  was 
intended  to  provide  for  childless  persons.  3.  In  civil  adoption,  the  adopted  had 
something  to  recommend  him.  4.  The  nature  of  a  son  could  not  be  given.  5.  The 
children  did  not  inherit  till  their  father's  death.      6.   The  Pontife.x  might  make  it  void. 

II.  The  cause  of  adoption. 

1.  The  Person  :  God.      Father.      Son.      Spirit. 

2.  The  motive.      Free-crrace,  not  works. 

III.  The  objects  of  it. 

Elect  sinners,  not  angels.      All  believers.      Not  all  men,  but  justified  men. 

IV.  The  excellency  of  it. 

I.  It  is  an  act  of  surprising  grace,  (i  John  iii.  i.)  Consider  the  persons. 
2.  It  exceeds  all  others.  3.  It  makes  men  honourable.  4.  Brings  men  into  the 
highest  relations.      5.    Includes  all  things.      6.    Immutable  and  everlasting. 

V.  The  effects  of  it. 

I.   Share  in  the  love,  pity,  and  care  of  God.      2.   Access  with  boldness.      3.  Con- 
formity to  the  image  of  Jesus.     4.   The  Holy  Spirit.      5.    Heirship. 
Encouragement.      Appeal  to  saints  and  sinners. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


215 


^4^t.^^   ^^^tC^ 


t't^-t-tf-t^^AoS 


FACSIMILE   OF   TITLE-rAGE   OF   VOLUME 


2i6  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArilV. 

Outline  II. — Necessity  of  Purity  for  an  Entrance  into  Heaven. 
"And  there  shall   in   no   ivise    enter  into    it    any   thing   that    defilcth,   neither 
whatsoever  worketh  abomination,  or  niaketh  a  lie :  lutt  they  zvhich  are  x^'ritten  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life." — Revelation  xxi.  27. 

I.  The  strictness  of  the  law  ....   "any  thing  that  defileth." 
Satan  cannot.      .Sin  cannot.     What  a  matter  oi"  rejoicing  to  Christians  ! 
How  can  man  enter."* 

Not  by  ceremonies.      Not  by  the  law.      Not  by  sincere  obedience  in  part. 
The  heart  must  be  purified. 
All  past  sin  forgiven.      How  ?      By  free-grace. 
All  present  sin  crucified.      How  ?      By  the  Holy  Spirit. 
All  future  sin  avoided.      How  ?      By  the  Spirit's  help. 

II.  The  impossibility  of  entrance  ....   "  in  no  wise." 

God  has  said  so.      He  will  not  allow  it  ;  nor  will  the  angels  ;  nor  the  redeemed. 
A  wicked  man  would  not  be  happy  in  Heaven. 

No  prayers,   cries,   groans,   strife,   can  get  a  dead,   unholy   sinner  into  Heaven. 
If  a  man  is  not  in,  he  is  out  for  ever,  no  coming  in,  no  change. 
Call  to  enter  in  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Outline   III. — Abraham  Justified  by   Faith. 
"And  he  believed  in  the  LORD  ;   and  He  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness.'" — 
Genesis  xv.  6. 

I.  The   Fact  ....   "he  believed  in  the  Lord." 
Leaving  his  country.      Life  in  Canaan.      Sodom. 
Isaac's  birth.      Promises  to  him.      Isaac's  sacrifice. 
Two  sorts  of  faith       i.    Historical,  or  dead  faith. 

2.    Living  faith,  producing  works. 

II.  The   Result  ....    "  He  counted  it  to  him  for  righteousness." 
I.   Sins  forgiven, — 2.    Righteousness  imputed, — by  faith. 

By  it,  he  gained  God's  favour  and  love.  Heaven,  and  eternal  lite. 
These  bring — Peace.      How  easy  lies  the  head  that  does  no  ill ! 

Love.     When  we  are  pure,  we  love  God. 

Joy.     The  justified  person  has  true  joy. 

Comfort.      All  things  work  together  for  good. 

Security.      None  can  condemn,  nor  destroy. 

III.  As  Abraham  was  saved,  so  must  we  be. 
Not  by  works,  or  Abraham  would  have  been. 

Not  by  ceremonies.      Abram  believed  before  circumcision. 

Reasons  why  sinners  and  Christians  should  believe  God  ;  e.xhortations  to  faith. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOEIOCKAl'UV. 


217 


.f 


\?> 


V 


1 


a>&e^ 


FACSIMILE   OF   TITLE-PAGE   OF   VOLIME    II. 


2i8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Outline  CXXXIII. — Bv  Faith  Jericho  Fell. 

"  By  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down,  after  they  were  compassed  about  seven 
days." — Hebrews  xi.  30. 

Faith  is  the  one  errand  essential  in  salvation.  It  must  be  inwrouijht,  or  else 
there  will  be  no  spiritual  life  at  first.  It  is  necessary  ever  after  in  numberless  ways. 
We  cannot  have  knowledge  of  gospel  doctrines  without  faith,  nor  can  we  lay  hold  on 
the  promises  without  it.  The  graces  are  all  dependent  on  faith.  He  loves  most 
who  believes  most.  He  will  have  most  zeal  who  has  most  faith.  Humility  is 
produced  by  faith,  and  hope  breathes  through  faith.  In  doing  good  to  others,  and 
particularly  in  combat  with  evil,  let  us  have  taith. 

I.      Faith   is  the  grace  to  which  victory  is  given. 

1.  The  other  graces  are  not  decked  with  laurel,  lest  man  should  steal  their  crowns  ; 
but  faith  is  too  tall,  man  cannot  reach  its  head.  Faith  has  less  to  do  with  man,  and 
more  to  do  with  God  than  any  of  the  other  graces  ;  for  faith  is  looking  away  from 
self,  and  trusting  the  Eternal. 

2.  Faith  gains  the  victory  because  she  engages  the  arm  of  the  Almighty  on  her 
behalf      She  has  power  with  Him,  and  therefore  she  prevails. 

3.  That  man  is  most  able  to  bear  with  humility  the  joy  of  victory  who  endured 
the  conflict  by  faith  ;  he  will  give  all  the  glory  to  God. 

4.  Other  graces  do  wonders,  but  faith  does  impossibilities.  She  is  the  only 
grace  that  can  act  in  certain  places,  and  under  certain  circumstances.  She  is 
intended  for  this  very  purpose. 

II.  Faith  wins  her  victories  in  God's  appointed  way. 

1.  She  uses  no  means  of  her  own  contrivance  ;  she  waits  upon  God  for  guidance. 

2.  She  neglects  not  His  appointments  ;  she  is  not  presumptuous. 

3.  When  she  uses  the  means,  she  does  not  despise  them.  She  ungirds  the 
sword, — she  follows  the  ark, — she  hears  the  rams'  horns. 

4.  She  is  laughed  at  for  seeming  folly  ;  but  in  her  turn  she  smiles. 

5.  She  does  her  Maker's  will,  and  she  expects  the  blessing,  but  all  in  an 
orderly  way.  That  is  no  taith  at  all  which  believes  and  does  nothing.  We  may  not 
expect  to  be  saved  by  faith,  unless  that  faith  pushes  us  on  to  run  in  God's  way. 
Whether  we  seek  salvation,  the  good  of  our  friends,  the  stopping  of  evil,  or  the 
destruction  of  our  corruptions,  let  us  seek  it  in  the  Divinely-appointed  \vay. 

III.  Faith  wins  her  victories  in  God's  time. 

1.  She  goes  round  Jericho  thirteen  times  ;  she  expects  the  wall  will  come  down 
at  last,  so  round  and  round  she  goes. 

2.  She  expects  that,  on  the  Lord's  appointed  day,  her  sins  will  all  be  over- 
thrown, and  she  thinks  her  work  well  repaid  when  she  knows  this  will  happen. 
Therefore  is  she  persevering  in  the  conflict. 


C.     H.     SrURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  2ig 

Now  let  us  apply  these  thoughts — 

1.  To  the  pulling  down  of  Jericho  in  our  own  hearts. 

We  want  to  slay  all  the  old  sinful  inhabitants,  but  the  lofty  wall  stands  firm. 
Let  us  have  faith.  Let  us  follow  the  ark.  Let  us  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpets, 
even  though  they  are  only  rams'  horns.  Let  us  go  round  the  wall  all  the  seven 
days, — that  is,  all  the  week, — all  the  days  of  our  life.  Let  us  inwardly  groan, 
but  not  grumble  with  our  lips  ;  and  soon,  when  the  ordained  day  arrives,  the  walls 
will  tremble,  we  shall  shout,  and  our  enemies  will  be  gone. 

2.  To  the  pulling  cioivn  of  Jericho  in  the  world. 

Sin  has  strong  and  lofty  towers.  The  Tower  of  Babel  or  Babylonish  Rome, 
idolatry,  etc., — let  us  yet  believe  that  these  will  tumble  to  the  earth.  Let  us  continue 
our  rounds  as  minister,  Sunday-school  teachers,  and  Christian  workers.  Keep  the 
poor  rams'  horns  going  ;  do  your  duty,  and  one  day  Jesus  shall  reign  universally. 

3.  To  the  pulling  dotvn  of  Jericho  in  this  village. 

Dagon  stands  fast  here  ;  but  the  ark  of  God  is  come.  The  trumpeters  of  God 
have  long  blown  the  trumpet  ,  the  rams'  horns  are  still  sounding  a  loud  rough  blast. 
Many  are  following  the  ark,  but  the  time  for  the  complete  victory  has  not  quite 
come.  Keep  on,  brethren,  and  give  a  great  shout,  all  at  once, — by  faith, — and  down 
will  come  the  mighty  walls. 

The  Lord  help  us  to  believe  His  Word,  and  then  fulfil  to  us  His  promises! 
Amen,   through  JESUS. 

(The  following  poem  was  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  at  the  time  that  he  prepared 
and  preached  the  foregoing  discourse  : — ) 

The  Fall  of  Jericho. 

The  day  is  come,  the  seventh  morn 
Is  usher'd  in  with  blast  of  horn  , 
Tremble,  ye  tow'rs  of  giant  height, 
This  is  the  day  of  Israel's  might. 
Six  days  ye  mock'd  the  silent  band. 
This  hour  their  shout  shall  shake  your  land. 
Old  Jordan's  floods  shall  hear  the  sound. 
Yon  circling  hills  with  fear  shall  bound. 

Thou  palm-tree'd  city,  at  thy  gates 
Death  in  grim  form  this  moment  waits  ; 
See,  hurrying  on  the  howling  blast. 
That  dreaded  hour,  thv  last,  thv  last. 


220  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 

Lo,  at  the  leader's  well-known  sign, 

The  tribes  their  mighty  voices  join, 

With  thund'ring  noise  the  heavens  are  rent, 

Down  falls  the  crumbling  battlement  ; 

Straight  to  the  prey  each  soldier  goes, 

The  sword  devours  his  helpless  foes. 

Now,  impious  !  on  your  idols  call  ; 

Prostrate  at  Baal's  altar  fall. 

In  vain  your  rampart  and  your  pride. 

Which  once  Jehovah's  power  defied. 

Now  Israel,  spare  not,  strike  the  blade 
In  heart  of  man,  and  breast  of  maid  ; 
Spare  not  the  old,  nor  young,  nor  gay, 
Spare  not,  for  Justice  bids  you  slay. 

Who  shall  describe  that  dreadful  cry  ? 
These  ears  shall  hear  it  till  they  die. 
Pale  terror  shrieks  her  hideous  note. 
War  bellows  from  his  brazen  throat. 
Death  tears  his  prey  with  many  a  groan, 
Nor  earth  itself  restrains  a  moan. 

Ho  !   vultures,  to  the  banquet  haste, 
Here  ye  may  feast,  and  glut  your  taste  ; 
Ho  !   monsters  of  the  gloomy  wood. 
Here  cool  your  tongues  in  seas  of  blood. 

But,  no  ;  the  Hames  demand  the  whole, 
In  blazing  sheets  they  upward  roll  ; 
They  fire  the  heavens,  and  cast  their  light 
Where  Gibeon  pales  with  sad  afiright  ; 
A  lurid  glare  o'er  earth  is  cast. 
The  nations  stand,  with  dread  aghast. 
The  shepherd  on  the  distant  plain 
Thinks  of  old  Sodom's  fiery  rain  ; 
He  flies  a  sheltering  hill  to  find, 
Nor  casts  one  lingering  look  behind. 
The  magian  scans  his  mystic  lore, 
Foretells  the  curse  on  Egypt's  shore  ; 


C.      H.      SPUKGEON  S     AUTOniOGRArHV.  22  t 

The  Arab  checks  his  frighted  horse, 
Bends  his  wild  knee,  and  turns  his  course. 
E'en  seas  remote  behold  the  glare, 
And  hardy  sailors  raise  their  prayer. 

Now,  in  dim  smoke,  the  flames  expire 
That  lit  the  city's  fun'ral  fire, 
The  sflowing-  embers  cease  to  burn  : 
Haste,  patriot,  fill  the  golden  urn  ! 
In  crystal  tears  her  dust  embalm, 
In  distant  lands,  in  strife  or  calm. 
Still  press  the  relic  to  thy  heart, 
And  in  the  rapture  lose  the  smart  ! 

It  must  not  be  ;  her  sons  are  dead. 
They  with  their  mother  burned  or  bled  ; 
Not  one  survives  :  the  vip'rish  race 
Have  perish'd  with  their  lodging-place. 
No  more  lascivious  maidens  dance. 
No  youths  with  lustful  step  advance. 
No  drunkard's  bowl,  no  rite  unclean, 
No  idol  mysteries  are  seen. 
A  warrior  stands  in  martial  state. 
And  thus  proclaims  her  changeless  fate  : 
"Accursed  city, .blot  her  name 
From  mind  ol   man,  from  lip  of  fame. 
Curs'd  be  the  man,  and  curs'd  his  race, 
Who  dares  his  house  on  thee  to  place  ; 
He  founds  it  on  his  firstborn's  tomb. 
And  crowns  it  with  the  brother's  doom." 

Thus  God  rewards  the  haughty  foe, 
Great  in  their  sin  and  overthrow. 
He  ever  reigns  immortal  King  ; 
With  Israel's  song  the  mountains  rine. 

Yet  'mid  the  justice  dread,  severe. 
Where  pity  sheds  no  silv'ry  tear, 
A  gleam  of  golden  mercy  strays. 
And  lights  the  scene  with  pleasing  rays. 


222  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


One  house  escapes,  by  faith  secure, 
The  scarlet  thread  a  token  sure, 
Rahab,  whose  seed  in  future  time 
Should  bear  the  virgfin's  Son  sublime. 


& 


Thus,  when  the  Thund'rer  grasps  His  arms, 
And  fills  our  earth  with  just  alarms. 
His  hand  still  shields  the  chosen  race. 
And  'midst  His  wrath  remembers  grace. 


(At  the  end  of  the  hundredth  Outline,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  : — ) 

For  this  loo,  I  bless  the  Lord,  for  the  good  is  His.  May  they  be  the  seed  of 
many  a  plant  of  the  Lord  ! 

(Inscription  inside  front  cov'er  of  V^olume  II  : — ) 

Finis. 

June  19.  My  i8th  birthday.  With  my  stafl  1  crossed  this  Jordan,  and  now 
I  am  become  two  bands. 

Lovingkindness  runs  faster  than  time  ;  it  outstrips  me,  and  then  waits  to 
be  gracious. 

(Inscription  at  the  end  of  Volume  II: — ) 

Better  is  the  end  of  life  than  the  beginaing. 

Better  the  end  of  labour  than  the  starting. 

These  sketches  are  so  many  proofs  of  the  power  of  faith  ....  By  faith  I 
got   them. 

They  are  evidences  of  God's  love, — for  oft  ha\e  they  come  just  at  the  moment 
when,  had  they  tarried,  I  had  been  undone. 

Blessed  be  God  for  making  men  so  much  His  darlings  as  to  let  them  spyak 
His  Word! 

May  it  be  my  topmost  desire  to  live  as  much  to  God's  glory  as  possible  ;  and — 


"When  I  shall  die, 
'Receive  me,'  I'll  cry, 
'  For  Jesus  has  lov'd  me, 
I  cannot  tell  why.'" 

In  health,   contentment,   and  peace,    June    19/52,  only  feeling  the  thorns  of  sin 
and  sin's  effects. 


c.    h.    spurgeons   autobiography.  223 

Outline   CLXXII. — The  Church  at  Antioch. 

''And  it  catne  to  pass,  that  a  ivholc  year  they  assembled  themselves  with  the 
church,  and  taught  much  people.  And  the  disciples  were  called  Christians  first 
in  Antioch." — Acts  xi.  26. 

Kings  are  wont  to  chronicle  their  wars  ;  mighty  men  expect  to  be  made  to  live  ■ 
after  death  in  the  historic  page  ;  but  though  these  matters  have  a  certain  amount  of 
interest,  what  is  it  compared  with  the  interest  attaching  to  this  inspired  Book  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles  ?  The  History  of  England  is  not  so  important  as  this  one 
portion  of  the  Bible.  It  is  a  "  Book  of  Martyrs," — Stephen,  Paul,  and  many  more. 
It  is  a  "Book  of  voyages  and  travels,"  of  thrilling  and  permanent  interest.  It  is 
Vol.  I.  of  "The  Christian  Times."  It  is  a  book  of  debates,  speeches,  addresses, 
sermons,  &c. 

The  church  at  Antioch  has  a  history  so  interesting  that  I  only  pray  that  I  may 
be  helped  to  make  it  so,  as  I  give — 

I.     a  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  the  church  in  antioch. 

Certain  saints,  driven  by  persecution  from  Jerusalem,  fled  to  Antioch,  and 
commenced  there  their  labours  of  love.  Their  names  are  unmentioned,  but  God 
knoweth  them,  and  they  are  now  receiving  their  reward.  Let  my  name  perish,  but 
let  Christ's  name  last  for  ever. 

The  Lord's  hand  helped  them,  and  many  believed,  and  turned  unto  the  Lord. 
These  were  so  pious  that  the  church  in  Jerusalem  heard  of  it,  and  for  their  further 
edification  sent  down  Barnabas  to  labour  among  them.  He  was  full  of  faith  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  under  him  the  church  grew  so  great  that  he  went  after  Paul  to 
assist  him. 

The  saints  at  Antioch  were  a  liberal  people  ;  and,  by  God's  grace,  continuing  to 
increase,  they  soon  had  five  pastors,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  put  it  into  their  minds 
to  send  out,  as  missionaries  elsewhere,  two  who  became  eminently  successful.  Thus, 
Antioch  became  a  mother-church  to  many  surrounding  parts.  Paul  and  Barnabas 
used  to  return  there,  after  their  laborious  missionary  tours.  They  anchored  at. 
Antioch,  as  in  a  haven  of  refuge. 

1.  Let  us  note  that  the  gospel  is  not  of  necessity  a  slowly-progressing  affair. 
The  first  preachers  were  very  successful,  for  it  seems  that  in  about  two  years  the 
church  at  Antioch  was  firmly  established.  That  church  grew  amazingly,  then  why 
should  not  ours,  and  why  should  not  all  others  grow  in  similar  fashion  }  The 
conversion  of  the  world  will  not  always  go  on  at  snail-pa<:e,  and  we  ought  to  pray 
that  it  may  not  in  this  place.      O  God,  grant  it  ! 

2.  Let  us  notice  the  principal  elements  of  success  in  this  case,  believing  them 
to  be  the  same  in  all.      There  were  things  from  God,  the  ministers,  and  the  people. 

God — m  Providence  shielded  this  Gentile  Jerusalem  from  persecution,  and  gave 


224  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

peace  to  the  people.  He  sent  them  faithful  ministers,  and  with  those  ministers  He 
sent  His  Spirit. 

The  ministers — preached  the  Lord  Jesus.  Barnabas  was  a  good,  kind,  faithful, 
Spirit-filled  man.      Paul  also  was  a  mighty  preacher  of  the  Word. 

The  people — must  have  had  much  grace, — a  close  cleaving  to  God  and  to  one 
another, — liberality  and  readiness  to  assist  any  work  of  faith, ^and  abundance  of  that 
jewel  called  "all  prayer." 

II.  A  P"E\V  REMARKS  UPON  THE  TITLE  FIRST  GAINED  BY  THIS  CHURCH  AT 
ANTIOCH, '■  CHRISTIANS." 

Perhaps  the  name  was  given  as  a  designation  by  the  Gentiles,  gladly  adopted 
by  the  disciples,  and  sanctioned  by  Divine  authority.  They  had  hitherto  styled 
themselves  "disciples,"  "the  faithful,"  "the  elect,"  "brethren."  The  Jews  called 
them  Nazarenes,  Galileans,  &c.  The  sect  was  so  small  that,  doubtless,  amone  the 
masses  of  the  heathen,  it  was  nondescript  ;  but,  in  Antioch,  the  talent,  the  zeal,  the 
number,  the  influence,  and  (in  some  cases)  the  wealth  of  the  members  of  the  new 
church  made  it  needful  that  it  should  have  a  name.      The  name  given  is  a  good  one, — 

CHRISTIANS. 

1.  This  intimates  that  there  was  much  unity  among  the  disciples,  so  that  one 
name  would  apply  to  all.  Blessed  time  when  this  unity  shall  return,  and  we  shall  be 
all  gathered  in  one  ! 

2.  This  shows  that  the  conversation,  singing,  worship,  preaching,  &c.,  of  these 
men  and  women  must  have  been  much  about  Christ ;  else,  how  would  the  common 
people  know  their  name  ? 

3.  This  shows  that  their  life  and  conduct  must  have  been  according  to  the 
example  of  Christ  ;  otherwise,  the  more  knowing  members  of  the  coinmunitv  would 
have  denied  their  right  to  the  title. 

But  1  also  am  called  a  Christian. 
How  honourable  a  name  !  Manaen,  the  foster-brother  of  Herod,  was  more 
honoured  in  bearing  this  name  than  by  his  connection  with  an  earthly  prince. 
Paul,  at  one  time  a  learned  doctor  in  the  Pharisaic  school,  owns  this  name  of 
Christian  as  his  highest  title.  .Surely,  'tis  a  titU^vhich  an  angel  might  almost  covet. 
But  what  does  this  name  show  ^ 

1.  That  I  am  a  believer  in  the  Divine  mission  of  Jesus, — a  believer  in  His 
official  name,  "Christ."  Let  me  then  take  care  to  trust  in  Him  most  implicitly,  and 
never  by  my  doubts  dishonour  Him. 

2.  That  1  am  a  professed  imitator  of  the  holv,  harmless,  undefiled,  lovmg, 
generous  Jesus  ;  let  me  then  really  be  so  in  all  things. 

3.  That  I  am  a  lover  o.'"  Jesus  ;  then  let  my  conversation  and  talk  and 
meditation   be   concernino;    Him. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  225 

A  Christian  is  one  who  is  anointed  to  be  a  priest  unto  God,  to  offer  continual 
prayer  and  praise  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  Bearing  the  one  name  which  the  glorious 
army  of  martyrs,  the  great  apostles  of  Christ,  and  the  saints  in  all  ages,  have  borne, 
may  we  honour  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  on  our  shoulder  bear  the  cross  of  Jesus  ! 

'if  -ff  ^  TT 

(Inscription  at  the  end  of  Volume  III  : — ) 

Praise,  praise,  unto  Him  who  causeth  the  river  to  run  on  still, — though,  as 
some  say,  unfed  by  natural  streams. 

God  doeth  good,  and  all  the  good  herein  is  every  atom  His.  Bear  witness,  oh, 
paper,  of  my  thanks  for  these  instances  of  grace  ! 

(Inscription  on  Title-page  of  Volume  IV  : — ) 

In  this  volume,  may  I  have  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer! 

(Inscription  at  the  back  of  Title-page  : — ) 
By  faith,  1  begin  this  volume. 

(Note  at  the  end  of  Outline  No.  200  : — ) 

I  desire  to  record  thanks  for  this  second  100.  May  God  receive  glory  from 
them  as  well  as  fo?-  them  ! 

^  ^  -i?  * 

Outline  CCXII. — Nowise  cast  out. 

"  Ail  thai  the  Father  eiveth  Me  shall  come  to  Me  :  and  him  that  cometh  to  Me 
/  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." — John  vi.  t,"] . 

Upon  reading  this  verse,  one  feels  inclined  to  break  out  with  the  angelic  song, 
"  Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy." 

Here  are  two  sets  of  doctrine,  the  high  and  the  low  conjoined  ;  surely,  this 
passage  will  suit  all,  from  the  "  Hyper"  down  to  the  Primitive. 

I.  The  eternal  "shall" — positive. 

II.  The  eternal  "will" — negative. 

I.  The  positive  eternal  "shall."  "All  that  the  Father  giveth  Me  shall 
come  to  Me." 

These  words  may  be  regarded  as — 

1.  A  prophecy  of  our  Lord,  the  Prophet  of  His  people. 

2.  A  solemn  oath  of  God  the  Son. 

3.  A  triumphant  boast  of  Jesus  the  Conqueror. 

4.  A  challenge  to  death  and  hell. 

In  these  words.  He  speaks  like  one — 

I.  Who  knows  the  number  of  His  people  :    "  all." 


226  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

2.  Who  regards  past  and  present  as  one  :    "  giveth." 

3.  Who  knows  His  rights  are  good  :    "  shall."     And — 

4.  Who  is  convinced  of  His  own  power  to  perform  what  He  has  promised. 
But  this  is  of  no  comfort  to  us  unless  we  can  see — 

1.  That  He  has  given  us  the  Holy  Spirit. 

2.  That  we  have  given  ourselves  to  Him. 

If  we  have  done  so,  then  let  us  glory  in  these  blessed  words,  and  sing  them 
aloud, — 

''A/I  that  the  Father  giveth  Me  shall  come  to  Me." 

II.  The  negative  eternal  "will."  "And  him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out." 

Notice  here  the  Speaker, — our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  Father  has  never 
spoken  thus  in  His  absolute  character  ;  it  were  an  insult  to  try  to  go  to  Him  except 
through  Christ,  when  He  has  made  His  Son  the  only  medium  of  access  to  Him. 

Notice  the  character  addressed, — not  the  Jew  that  cometh,  not  the  king  or  rich 
man  that  cometh,  not  the  good  man  that  cometh,  not  the  young  or  old,  but  "  liiin 
that  cometh"  whosoever  he  may  be. 

Notice  the  words  of  Jesus.  "  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  It  is  very  strong  in 
the  original  ;  Christ  means,  "  I  will  not,  not,  not,"  or,  "  I  will  never,  never,  never 
cast  out  any  who  come  to  Me."     Christ  will  not  cast  them  out— 

1.  Because  of  their  great  sins. 

2.  Because  of  their  long  delays. 

3.  Because  of  their  trying  other  saviours. 

4.  Because  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts. 

5.  Because  of  their  little  faith. 

6.  Because  of  their  poor  and  dull  prayers. 

7.  Because  everyone  else  passes  them  by. 

When  they  are  once  in,  they  are  in  for  ever.     Christ  will  not  cast  them  out — 

1.  Because  of  their  unbeliet. 

2.  Because  of  their  old  corruptions. 

3.  Because  of  their  backslidings. 
Read,  write,  print,  shout, — 

"  Him  that  cometh  to  Me  I  ivill  in  no  wise  cast  out." 

What  is  it  to  come  to  Christ  ?  Men  do  not  know  what  it  is  ;  they  fancy  it  is  to 
reform  themselves,  to  be  moral,  honest,  good,  upright,  &c.,  &c.  But  it  is,  to  trust, 
to  believe  in  Jesus.      "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved." 

Great  Saviour,  I  thank  Thee  for  this  text  ;  help  Thou  me  so  to  preach  from  it 
that  many  may  come  to  Thee,  and  find  eternal  life  ! 


CHAPTER     XXI. 


Cljt  foung  Soul^TOitttttt:  at  Wi^itthmtlj. 


WATERBEACH   CHAPEL,    1S51. 

Coming,  one  Thursday  in  tlie  late  autumn,  from  an  engagement  beyond  DuKvich,  my  way  lay  up 
to  the  top  of  the  Heme  Hill  ridge.  I  came  along  the  level  out  of  which  rises  the  steep  hill  I  had  to 
ascend.  While  I  was  on  the  lower  ground,  riding  in  a  hansom  cab,  I  saw  a  light  before  me,  and  when 
I  came  near  the  hill,  I  marked  that  light  gradually  go  up  the  hill,  leaving  a  train  of  stars  behind  it. 
This  line  of  new-born  stars  remained  in  the  form  of  one  lamp,  and  then  another,  and  another.  It 
reached  from  the  foot  of  the  hill  to  its  summit.  I  did  not  see  the  lamplighter.  I  do  not  know  his  name, 
nor  his  age,  nor  his  residence ;  but  I  saw  the  lights  which  he  had  kindled,  and  these  remained  when  he 
himself  had  gone  his  way.  As  I  rode  along,  I  thought  to  myself,  "  How  earnestly  do  I  wish  that  my  life 
may  be  spent  in  lighting  one  soul  after  another  with  the  sacred  flame  of  eternal  life  1  I  would  myself 
be  as  much  as  possible  unseen  while  at  my  work,  and  would  vanish  into  the  eternal  brilliance  above 
when  my  work  is  done." — C.  H.  S. 

ID   you   ever  walk  through   a  village  notoriou.s   for   its  drunkenness 

and  profanity  ?     Did  you  ever  see  poor  wretched  beings,  that  once 

were   men,    standing,   or  rather  leaning,    against  the  posts  of  the 

ale-house,  or  staggering  along  the  street?      Have  you  ever  looked 

into  the  houses  of  the  people,  and  beheld  them  as  dens  of  iniquity, 

at    which    your    soul    stood    aghast?        Have    you    ever    seen    the 

poverty,    and    degradation,    and    misery    of   the    inhabitants,    and    sighed    over   it  ? 

"Yes,"  you  say,  "we  have."      But  was  it  ever  your  privilege  to  walk  through  that 

village  again,   in  after  years,   when  the  gospel   had    been  preached  there  ?     It  has 


J28  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

been  mine.  I  once  knew  just  such  a  village  as  I  have  pictured, — perhaps,  in  some 
respects,  one  of  the  worst  in  England, — where  many  an  illicit  still  was  yielding  its 
noxious  liquor  to  a  manufacturer  without  payment  of  the  duty  to  the  government, 
and  where,  in  connection  with  that  evil,  all  manner  of  riot  and  iniquity  was  rife. 

There  went  into  that  village  a  lad,  who  had  no  great  scholarship,  but  who  was 
earnest  in  seeking  the  souls  of  men.  He  began  to  preach  there,  and  it  pleased 
God  to  turn  the  whole  place  upside  down.  In  a  short  time,  the  little  thatched 
chapel  was  crammed,  the  biggest  vagabonds  of  the  village  were  weeping  floods  of 
tears,  and  those  who  had  been  the  curse  of  the  parish  became  its  blessing.  Where 
there  had  been  robberies  and  villainies  of  every  kind,  all  round  the  neighbourhood, 
there  were  none,  because  the  men  who  used  to  do  the  mischief  were  themselves 
in  the  house  of  God,  rejoicing  to  hear  of  Jesus  crucified.  I  am  not  telling  an 
exaggerated  story,  nor  a  thing  that  I  do  not  know,  for  it  was  my  delight  to  labour 
for  the  Lord  in  that  village.  It  was  a  pleasant  thing  to  walk  through  that  place, 
when  drunkenness  had  almost  ceased,  when  debauchery  in  the  case  of  many  was 
dead,  when  men  and  women  went  forth  to  labour  with  joyful  hearts,  singing  the 
praises  of  the  ever-living  God  ;  and  when,  at  sunset,  the  humble  cottager  called 
his  children  together,  read  them  some  portion  from  the  Book  of  Truth,  and  then 
together  they  bent  their  knees  in  prayer  to  God.  I  can  say,  with  joy  and  happiness, 
that  almost  from  one  end  of  the  village  to  the  other,  at  the  hour  of  eventide,  one 
might  have  heard  the  voice  of  song  coming  from  nearly  every  roof-tree,  and  echoing 
from  almost  every  heart.  I  do  testify,  to  the  praise  of  God's  grace,  that  it  pleased 
the  Lord  to  work  wonders  in  our  midst.  He  showed  the  power  of  Jesu's  name,  and 
made  me  a  witness  of  that  gospel  which  can  win  souls,  draw  reluctant  hearts,  and 
mould  afresh  the  life  and  conduct  of  sinful  men  and  women. 

(The  village  here  referred  to  is,  of  course,  Waterbeach,  where  Mr.  Spurgeon 
first  preached  in  October,  1S51,  as  the  following  letter  proves  : — ) 

"  No.  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"October  15th  (185  i). 
"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  I  received  your  most  welcome  note,  and  beg  pardon  if  you  think  me 
negligent  in  returning  thanks.  I  have  been  busily  employed  every  Lord's-day  ;  not 
at  home  once  yet,  no.r  do  I  expect  to  be  this  year.  Last  Sunday,  I  went  to  a  place 
called  Waterbeach,  where  there  is  an  old-established  church,  but  not  able  to  support 
a  minister.  I  have  engaged  to  supply  to  the  end  of  the  month.  They  had,  for 
twenty  years,  a  minister  who  went  over  from  Cambridge  in  the  same  way  as  you 
go  to  Tollesbury.     After  that,  they  tried  to  have  a  minister  ;  but  as  they  could  not 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  '  229 

keep  him,  he  has  left,  and  they  will  have  to  do  as  they  used  to  do.     There  is  rail 
there  and  back,  and  it  is  only  six  miles. 

"  I  am  glad  you  have  such  good  congregations.  I  feel  no  doubt  there  is  a  great 
work  doing  there  ; — the  fields  are  ripe  unto  the  harvest,  the  seed  you  have  sown  has 
yielded  plenty  of  green,  let  us  hope  there  will  be  abundance  of  wheat.  Give  my 
love  to  dear  Mother  ;  you  have  indeed  had  trials.  I  always  like  to  see  how  you  bear 
them.  I  think  I  shall  never  forget  that  time  when  Mother  and  all  were  so  ill.  How 
you  were  supported  !      How  cheerful  you  were  !     You  said,  in  a  letter  to  me, — 

"  '  When  troubles,  like  a  gloomy  cloud, 
Have  gathered  thick,  and  thundered  loud, 
He  near  my  side  has  always  stood ; 
His  lovingkindness,  O  how  good!' 

"  I  trust  that  you  are  all  well,  and  that  the  clouds  are  blown  away.  I  am  quite 
well,  I  am  happy  to  say.  Where  is  Aunt?  It  is  four  months  since  I  have  heard 
anything  from  her,  or  about  her.  We  have  no  settled  minister  yet,  nor  do  we  expect 
any.      I  thank  you  much  for  your  sermon  ;  it  will  just  do  for  me. 

"  How  greatly  must  I  admire  the  love  that  could  choose  me  to  speak  the  gospel, 
and  to  be  the  happy  recipient  of  it  !  I  trust  my  greatest  concern  is  to  grow  in  grace, 
and  to  go  onward  in  the  blessed  course.  I  feel  jealous  lest  my  motive  should 
change,  fearing  lest  I  should  be  my  own  servant  instead  of  the  Lord's.  How  soon 
may  we  turn  aside  without  knowing  it,  and  begin  to  seek  objects  below  the  sacred 
office  I 

"  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  are  well,  and  send  their  respects.  Grandfather  has  asked 
me  to  go  to  Stambourne,  but  I  cannot  afford  to  go  his  way.  With  love  to  you, 
dear  Mother,  and  all  at  home, 

"  I  am, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  CuAS.   H.  Spurgeon." 

(The  text  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  /irs/  Sermon  at  Waterbeach  was  Matthew  i.  21. 
This  passage  was  also  the  subject  of  his  /asi  Sermon  as  Pastor  there,  and  ot  his 
^rsi  Sermon  as  Pastor  at  AVw  Park  Street,  though  a  different  discourse  was 
delivered  on  each  occasion.  It  is  delightful  to  notice  that  JESUS  was  the  key- 
note of  his  ministry  both  in  Waterbeach  and  in  London,  and  that  not  one  of  his 
many  thousands  of  Sermons  was  out  of  harmony  with  that  opening  note.  The 
following  is  the  Outline  of  the  first  Sermon  at  Waterbeach  : — ) 

Outline  XXXIII. — Salv.\tion  from  Sin. 

''Thou  shalt  call  His  name  JESUS :  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their 
sins." — Matthew  i.  21. 

The  two  parts  of  this  Salvation  are  Justification  and  Sanetification. 


230  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPIIV. 

I.     Justification,  including  pardon  and  imputation  of  righteousness. 

1.  Pardon, — free,  perfect,  instantaneous,  irreversible,  bringing  with  it  deliverance 
from  the  consequences  of  sin,  which  are — 

God's  just  displeasure. 

The  curse  of  the  law. 

Incapacity  for  Heaven, 

Liability,  yea,  certain  destination  to  eternal  punishment. 

2.  Imputation  of  righteousness,  causing  a  man  to  be  legarded  as  holy,  sinless, 
worthy  of  commendation  and  reward. 

Its  accompaniments  are, — God's  love. 

Blessing  of  the  law. 

Capacity  for  Heaven. 

A  right  and  title,  yea,  certain  possession  of  Heaven. 
This  Jesus  effected.     As  to  the   first,   by  His  sufferings  and  death  ;  as  to  the 
second,  by  His  holy  obedience  to  the  law. 

II.     Sanctific-vtion,  including  deliverance  from  sin,  and  positive  holiness. 

1.  Victory  over — (i)  our  natural  depravity,  (2)  the  habits  of  sin,  (3)  temptations, 
(4)  backslidings. 

2.  Working  in  us  all  holy  affections.  (i)  Holy  nature.  (2)  Holy  habits 
(3)   Desires  for  holiness.      (4)   Progress  in  Divine  grace. 

Sanctification  is  unlike  Justification,  in  that  it  is  gradual,  imperfect,  progressional, 
never  consummated  but  in  Heaxen. 

This  is  the  work  of  Jesus, — (i*)  by  showing  us  His  example  and  commands, 
(2)  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

This  is  the  beauteous  salvation  Jesus  gives,  complete  deliverance  from  the  guilt, 
consequences,  and  effects  of  sin. 

The  choicest  happiness  which  a  mortal  can  know  is  that  of  doing  good  to  a 
fellow-creature.  To  save  a  body  from  death,  almost  gives  us  Heaven  upon  earth. 
Some  men  boast  that  they  have  sent  many  souls  to  perdition,  that  they  have  hurled 
a  great  number  of  their  fellows  out  of  the  world.  We  meet,  now  and  then,  a 
soldier  who  glories  that,  in  battle,  he  struck  down  many  foemen,  that  his  swift 
and  cruel  sword  reached  the  heart  of  a  host  of  his  enemies ;  but  1  count 
not  that  glory.  If  I  thought  I  had  been  the  means  of  the  death  of  a  single 
individual,  I  should  scarcely  rest  at  night,  for  the  spirit  of  that,  murdered  wretch 
would  ever  seem  to  be  starinsf  at  me.  I  should  remember  that  I  had  slain  him, 
and  perhaps  sent  his  soul  unshriven  and  unwashed  into  the  presence  of  his  Maker. 
To  me,  it  is  wonderful  that  men  can  be  found  to  be  soldiers,  I  say  not  if  it  be  right 
or  wrong  ;    still,    I    marvel   that  they  can  follow  such  an  occupation.      I   know  not 


c.    n.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  231 

liow,  after  a  battle,  they  can  wash  the  blood  from  their  hands,  wipe  their  swords, 
and  put  them  by,  and  then  lie  down  to  slumber,  and  their  dreams  be  undisturbed. 
If  I  were  in  their  place,  the  tears  would  fall  hot  and  scalding  on  my  cheek  at 
night,  and  the  shrieks  of  the  dying  and  the  groans  of  those  approaching  eternity 
would  torture  mine  ear.  I  cannot  imagine  how  others  can  endure  it.  To  me, 
it  would  be  the  very  portal  of  hell,  if  I  knew  that  I  had  been  a  destroyer  of  my 
fellow-creatures. 

But  what  bliss  it  is  to  be  the  instrument  of  saving  bodies  from  death  !  Those 
monks  on  Mount  St.  Bernard,  surely  must  feel  happiness  when  they  rescue  men  from 
death.  The  dog  comes  to  the  door,  and  they  know  what  he  means  ;  he  has  dis- 
covered some  poor  weary  traveller  who  has  lain  down  to  sleep  in  the  snow,  and  is  dying 
from  cold  and  exhaustion.  Up  rise  the  monks  from  their  cheerful  fire,  intent  to  act 
the  good  Samaritan  to  the  lost  one.  At  last  they  see  him  ;  they  speak  to  him,  but 
he  answers  not.  They  try  to  discover  if  there  is  breath  in  his  body,  and  they  fear 
he  is  dead.  They  take  him  up,  and  give  him  remedies  ;  hastening  to  their  hostel, 
they  lay  him  by  the  fire,  and  warm  and  chafe  him,  looking  into  his  face  with  kindly 
anxiety,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Poor  creature  !  art  thou  dead  .-"  "  When,  at  last,  they 
perceive  some  heaving  of  the  lungs,  what  joy  is  in  the  breast  of  those  brethren,  as 
they  say,  "His  life  is  not  extinct!"  It  would  be  a  privilege  to  chafe  one  hand  of 
that  poor  man,  and  so  help  to  restore  him.  Or,  suppose  another  case.  A  house 
is  in  flames,  and  in  it  is  a  woman  with  her  children,  who  cannot  by  any  means  escape. 
In  vain  she  attempts  to  come  downstairs  ;  the  flames  prevent  her.  She  has  lost  all 
presence  of  mind,  and  knows  not  how  to  act.  A  strong  man  comes,  and  says, 
"  Make  way  !  make  way  !  I  must  save  that  woman  !  "  And  cooled  by  the  genial 
streams  of  benevolence,  he  marches  through  the  fire.  Though  scorched,  and  almost 
stifled,  he  gropes  his  way.  He  ascends  one  staircase,  then  another  ;  and  though  the 
stairs  totter,  he  places  the  woman  beneath  his  arm,  takes  a  child  on  his  shoulder,  and 
down  he  comes,  twice  a  giant,  having  more  might  than  he  ever  possessed  before. 
He  has  jeopardized  his  life,  and  perhaps  an  arm  may  be  disabled,  or  a  limb  taken 
away,  or  a  sense  lost,  or  an  injury  irretrievably  done  to  his  body  ;  yet  he  claps  his 
hands,  and  says,  "  I  have  saved  lives  from  death  !  "  The  crowd  in  the  street  hail 
him  as  a  man  who  has  been  the  deliverer  of  his  fellow-creatures,  honouring  him 
more  than  the  monarch  who  has  stormed  a  city,  sacked  a  town,  and  murdered 
myriads.  But,  alas !  the  body  which  was  saved  from  death  to-day,  may  die 
to-morrow.  Not  so  the  soul  that  is  saved  from  death  :  it  is  saved  everlastingly.  It 
is  saved  beyond  the  fear  of  destruction.  And  if  there  be  joy  in  the  breast  of  a 
benevolent  man  when  he  saves  a  body  from  death,  how  much  more  blessed  must  he 
be  when  he  is  made  the  means  in  the  hand  of  God  of  saving  "a  soul  from  death," 
and  hiding  a  multitude  of  sins  !      It  was  Richard  Knill,  that  blessed  missionary  of  the 


232  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 

cross  to  whom  I  am  personally  so  deeply  indebted,  who  said  that,  if  there  were  only 
one  unconverted  person  in  the  whole  world,  and  if  that  person  lived  in  the  wilds 
of  Siberia,  and  if  every  Christian  minister  and  every  private  believer  in  the  world 
had  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to  that  spot  before  that  soul  were  brought  to  Christ,  the 
labour  would  be  well  expended  if  that  one  soul  were  so  saved.  This  is  putting  the 
truth  in  a  striking  way,  but  in  a  way  in  which  everyone  who  realizes  the  value  of 
immortal  souls,  will  heartily  concur. 

When  I  began  to  preach  in  the  little  thatched  chapel  at  Waterbeach,  my  first 
concern  was.  Would  God  save  any  souls  through  me  ?  They  called  me  a  ragged- 
headed  boy,  and  I  think  I  was  just  that ;  I  know  I  wore  a  jacket.  After  1  had 
preached  for  some  little  time,  I  thought,  "  This  gospel  has  saved  me,  but  then 
somebody  else  preached  it ;  will  it  save  anybody  else  now  that  I  preach  it  ? "  Some 
Sundays  went  over,  and  I  used  to  say  to  the  deacons,  "  Have  you  heard  of  anybody 
finding  the -Lord  under  my  ministry?  Do  you  know  of  anyone  brought  to  Christ 
through  my  preaching?"  My  good  old  friend  and  deacon  said,  "  I  am  sure  some- 
body must  have  received  the  Saviour;  I  am  quite  certain  it  is  so."  "Oh!"  I 
answered,  "  but  I  want  to  know  it,  I  want  to  prove  that  it  is  so." 

How  my  heart  leaped  for  joy  when  I  heard  tidings  of  my  first  convert !  I 
could  never  be  satisfied  with  a  full  congregation,  and  the  kind  expressions  of  friends  ; 
I  longed  to  hear  that  hearts  had  been  broken,  that  tears  had  been  seen  streaming  from 
the  eyes  of  penitents.  How  I  did  rejoice,  as  one  that  findeth  great  spoil,  one 
Sunday  afternoon,  when  my  good  deacon  said  to  me,  "God  has  set  His  seal  on 
your  ministry  in  this  place,  sir."  Oh,  if  anybody  had  said  to  me,  "Someone  has 
left  you  twenty  thousand  pounds,"  I  should  not  have  given  a  snap  of  my  fingers 
for  it,  compared  with  the  joy  which  I  felt  when  I  was  told  that  God  had  saved  a  soul 
through  my  ministry  !  "  Who  is  it  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Oh,  it  is  a  poor  labouring  man's  wife 
over  at  such-and-such  a  place  !  She  went  home  broken-hearted  by  your  Sermon  two 
or  three  Sundays  ago,  and  she  has  been  in  great  trouble  of  soul,  but  she  has  found 
peace,  and  she  says  she  would  like  to  speak  to  you."  I  said,  "  Will  you  drive  me 
over  there  ?  I  must  go  to  see  her ; "  and  early  on  the  Monday  morning  I  was 
driving  down  to  the  village  my  deacon  had  mentioned,  to  see  my  first  spiritual  child. 
I  have  in  my  eye  now  the  cottage  in  which  she  lived  ;  believe  me,  it  always  appears 
picturesque.  I  felt  like  the  boy  who  has  earned  his  first  guinea,  or  like  a  diver 
who  has  been  down  to  the  depths  of  the  sea,  and  brought  up  a  rare  pearl.  I  prize 
each  one  whom  God  has  given  me,  but  I  prize  that  woman  most.  Since  then,  my 
Lord  has  blessed  me  to  many  thousands  of  souls,  who  have  found  the  Saviour 
by  hearing  or  reading  words  which  have  come  from  my  lips.  I  have  had  a  great 
many  spiritual  children  born  of  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  but   I    still   think  that 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAI'IIY.  233 

woman  was  the  best  of  the  lot.  At  least,  she  did  not  live  long  enough  for  me  to 
find  many  faults  in  her.  After  a  year  or  two  of  faithful  witness-bearing,  she  went 
home,  to  lead  the  way  for  a  goodly  number  who  have  followed  her.  I  remember 
well  her  being  received  into  the  church,  and  dying,  and  going  to  Heaven.  She 
was  the  first  seal  to  my  ministry,  and  a  very  precious  one.  No  mother  was 
ever  more  full  of  happiness  at  the  sight  ot  her  first-born  son.  Then  could  I 
have  sung  the  song  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  for  my  soul  did  magnify  the  Lord  for 
remembering  my  low  estate,  and  giving  me  the  great  honour  to  do  a  work  for  which 
all  generations  should  call  me  blessed,  for  so  I  counted  and  still  count  the  con- 
version of  one  soul.  I  would  rather  be  the  means  of  saving  a  soul  from  death  than 
be  the  greatest  orator  on  earth.  I  would  rather  bring  the  poorest  woman  in  the 
world  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  than  I  would  be  made  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.  I 
would  sooner  pluck  one  single  brand  Irom  the  burning  than  explain  all  mysteries. 
To  win  a  soul  from  going  down  into  the  pit,  is  a  more  glorious  achievement  than 
to  be  crowned  in  the  arena  of  theological  controversy  as  Dr.  Sujficientissiiniis  ,■  to 
have  faithfully  unveiled  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be,  in  the 
final  judgment,  accounted  worthier  service  than  to  have  solved  the  problems  of  the 
religious  Sphin.x,  or  to  have  cut  the  Gordian  knot  of  Apocalyptic  difficulty.  One 
of  my  happiest  thoughts  is  that,  when  I  die,  it  shall  be  my  privilege  to  enter  into 
rest  in  the  bosom  of  Christ,  and  I  know  that  I  shall  not  enjoy  my  Heaven  alone. 
Thousands  have  already  entered  there,  who  have  been  drawn  to  Christ  under  my 
ministry.  Oh  !  what  bliss  it  will  be  to  fiy  to  Heaven,  and  to  have  a  multitude  of 
converts  before  and  behind,  and,  on  entering  the  glory,  to  be  able  to  say,  "  Here  am 
I,  Father,  and  the  children  Thou  hast  given  me." 


A  minister  will  never,  I  should  think,  forget  his  earliest  converts.  He  lives  to 
see  hundreds  begotten  unto  God  by  his  means,  but  of  these  who  were  the  children 
of  his  youth  he  still  treasures  delightful  memories,  for  are  they  not  his  first-born,  his 
might,  and  the  beginning  of  his  strength  }  I  can  recall  an  elderly  woman  who  had 
found  peace  with  God  through  my  youthful  ministry,  and  especially  do  I  recollect 
her  wail  of  woe  as  she  told  of  the  days  of  her  ignorance,  and  the  consequent  godless 
bringing  up  of  her  children.  Her  words  were  somewhat  as  follows,  and  I  write, 
them  down  for  the  good  of  mothers  who  labour  hard  out  of  love  to  their  dear 
ones,  and  provide  them  with  all  necessaries  for  this  life,  but  never  think  of  the 
life  to  come  : — 

"  Oh,  sir  !  "  said  she,  "  I  should  be  quite  happy  now,  only  1  have  one  sore  trouble 
which  keeps  me  very  low.  I  am  so  sad  about  my  dear  children.  I  was  left  with  eight 
of  them,  and  I  worked  hard  at  the  wash-tub,  and  in  other  ways,  morning,  noon,  and 
night,  to  find  bread  for  them.      I  did  feed  and  clothe  them  all,  but  I  am  sure  I  don't 


2  34 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


know  how  I  did  it.  I  had  often  to  deny  myself,  both  in  food  and  clothing  ;  and  times 
were  very  hard  with  me.  Nobody  could  have  slaved  worse  than  I  did,  to  mend,  and 
clean,  and  keep  a  roof  over  our  heads.  I  cannot  blame  myself  for  any  neglect 
about  their  bodies  ;  but  as  to  their  souls,  I  never  cared  about  my  own,  and  of  course 
I  never  thought  of  theirs.  Two  of  them  died.  I  dare  not  think  about  them.  God 
has  forgiven  me,  but  I  can't  forget  my  sin  against  my  poor  children  ;  I  never 
taught  them  a  word  which  could  be  of  any  use  to  them.  The  others  are  all  alive, 
but  there  is  not  one  of  them  in  the  least  religious.  How  could  they  be  when  they 
saw  how  their  mother  lived  ?  It  troubles  me  more  a  good  deal  than  all  the  working 
for  them  ever  did  ;  for  I'm  afraid  they  are  going  down  to  destruction,  and  a//  through 
their  cruel  mother." 

Here  she  burst  into  tears,  and  I  pitied  her  so  much  that  I  said  I  hardly  thought 
she  was  cruel,  for  she  was  in  ignorance,  and  would  never  intentionally  have  neglected 
anything  that  was  for  her  children's  good.  "  Don't  excuse  me,"  said  she,  "  for  it  I  had 
used  my  common  sense,  I  might  have  known  that  my  children  were  not  like  the  sheep 
and  the  horses  which  die,  and  there's  an  end  of  them.  I  never  thought  about  it  at 
all,  or  I  mieht  have  known  better  ;  and  I  feel  that  I  was  a  cruel  mother  never  to 
have  considered  their  souls  at  all.  They  are  all  worldly,  and  none  of  them  go  to  a 
place  of  worship,  year  in  and  year  out.  I  never  took  them  there,  and  how  can  I 
blame  them  ?  As  soon  as  I  was  con\erted,  I  went  down  to  my  eldest  son,  who  has 
a  large  family,  and  I  told  him  what  the  Lord  had  done  for  me,  and  entreated  him  to 
come  here  with  me  to  the  services  ;  but  he  said  he  wondered  what  next,  and  he  had 
no  time.  When  I  pleaded  hard  with  him,  he  said  he  was  sure  I  meant  well,  but 
'  it  was  no  go,' — he  liked  his  Sunday  at  home  too  well  to  go  to  hear  parsons.  You 
know,  sir,  you  can't  bend  a  tree  ;  I  ought  to  have  bent  the  twig  when  I  could  have 
done  it.  Oh,  if  I  had  but  led  him  to  the  house  of  God  when  he  was  little  !  He  would 
have  gone  then,  for  he  loved  his  mother,  and  so  he  does  now,  but  not  enough  to  go 
where  I  want  him.  So,  you  see,  I  can  do  nothing  with  my  son  now.  I  was  a  cruel 
mother,  and  let  the  boy  go  into  the  fields,  or  the  streets,  when  he  should  have  been 
in  the  Sunday-school.  Oh,  that  I  could  have  my  time  back  again,  and  have  all 
m\-  children  around  me  as  little  ones,  that  I  might  teach  them  about  my  blessed 
Saviour  !     They  are  all  beyond  me  now.      What  can  I  do  ?  " 

She  sat  down  and  wept  bitterly,  and  I  heartily  wish  all  unconverted  mothers 
could  have  seen  her,  and  heard  her  lamentations.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  know  that 
she  was  herself  saved,  and  to  see  in  her  very  sorrow  the  evidence  of  her  genuine 
repentance  ;  but,  still,  the  evil  which  she  lamented  was  a  very  terrible  one,  and  might 
well  demand  a  lifetime  of  mourning.  Young  mother,  do  not,  as  you  love  your  babe, 
suffer  it  to  grow  up  without  Divine  instruction.  But  you  cannot  teach  your  child 
if  you  do  not   know   the    Lord    Jesus    yourself.      May  the  good   Lord  lead  you  to 


C.      H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGKAI'HV.  2315 

give  your  heart  to  Christ  at  once,  and  then   help  you   to  train   your  dear  little  ones 
for  Heaven ! 

There  was  one  woman  in  Waterbeach  who  bore  among  her  neighbours  the 
reputation  of  being  a  regular  virago,  and  I  was  told  that,  sooner  or  later,  she  would 
give  me  a  specimen  of  her  tongue-music.  I  said,  "  All  right  ;  but  that's  a  game 
at  which  two  can  play."  I  am  not  sure  whether  anybody  reported  to  her  my 
answer  ;  but,  not  long  afterwards,  I  was  passing  her  gate,  one  morning,  and  there 
stood  the  lady  herself ;  and  I  must  say  that  her  vigorous  mode  of  speech  fully 
justified  all  that  I  had  heard  concerning  her.  The  typical  Billingsgate  fish-woman 
would  have  been  nowhere  in  comparison  with  her.  I  made  up  my  mind  how 
to  act,  so  I  smiled,  and  said,  "  Yes,  thank  you  ;  I  am  quite  well,  I  hope  you  are  the 
same."  Then  came  another  outburst  of  vituperation,  pitched  in  a  still  higher  key,  to 
which  I  replied,  still  smiling,  "  Yes,  it  does  look  rather  as  if  it  is  going  to  rain  ;  I 
think  I  had  better  be  getting  on."  "  Bless  the  man  ! "  she  exclaimed,  "  he's  as  deaf 
as  a  post  ;  what's  the  use  of  storming  at  him  ?  "  So  1  bade  her,  "Good  morning," 
and  I  am  not  sure  whether  she  ever  came  to  the  chapel  to  hear  the  "deaf"  preacher 
who  knew  it  was  no  use  to  give  any  heed  to  her  mad  ravings. 

If  I  could  have  had  a  hope  of  doing  her  any  good,  I  would  have  gone  into  her 
house,  and  talked  with  her,  lor  I  certainly  went  into  some  queer  places  while  I  was 
in  that  region.  I  used  to  think  that,  where  my  Master  went,  I  need  never  be 
ashamed  to  go  ;  and  I  have  gone  into  some  persons'  houses,  before  I  came  to 
London,  that  I  should  have  felt  ashamed  to  enter  if  they  had  not  invited  me  on  a 
Sabbath-day.  As  I  have  stepped  in  there  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  religious 
advice,  some  have  said  to  me,  "What!  going  into  that  house?"  "Yes,  and  quite 
right,  too.  'The  whole  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick.'"  I 
have  gone  after  "  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel,"  and  I  have  won  their  hearts 
because  I  went  there,  and  talked  to  them  of  their  sins.  But  had  I  stayed  away, 
there  would  have  been  something  of  this  spirit,  "  Stand  by,  for  I  am  holier  than 
you  are  ;  I  cannot  enter  your  house,  because  you  are  such  an  outrageous  sinner." 
But  when  I  go  and  talk  to  a  man,  and  lay  my  hand  on  his  shoulder,  and  ask 
him  questions,  he  does  not  mind  telling  out  his  state  of  mind  when  I  am  under  his 
own  roof;  and  when  I  am  gone,  he  savs,  "That  man  is  not  ashamed  to  speak 
to  his  fellows,  I  like  that  kind  of  preacher." 

(On  the  two  following  pages  is  given  a  facstviilc  of  one  of  the  Sermons  preached 
at  Waterbeach  in  the  early  part  of  the  year  1852.) 


23^  C.     11.     SrURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


o-z^^4^ 


■^  '  ^'  ^^  ^   .c'>'4>^  /U.^^^^^^   ^jL^  ^^  ^2^  <^-Z  c^^  ^^ 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOCiKArilV.  237 


Ci^^c6       /■^.<^-*^     ^a-«-oL-  ^^JZ-t-tTT*^     /tX-»---«:^-.-»*-i-«^    -»«,«»/-    cA.,.^A.£*.yC-L^f.-<-cjL- 

^;i-i.  <^  .a-c^-i-j^  cci^^CC-      (/-^-^^.u^.     ,,e-<f^..e-<S'<^ecSCy'      it^-CZ/l^ 

T^^T-XyC-     'j'C.<5t-c-<^     -C^cr-i^    /l.e^.^-K.^  ■^-*.j:>C    oC<..c^-^»^J2-  C^OjL^   —  '2^^^'^'^     i-vCjtjC  -^^Jl^Op 

Q/fo-^^-   -1^/  J-'^-^  '^''^     c^r'^^^-T^c/.    otyU      r  o^-ex^^    o-i^^-e^  ,^>-*^  <?->->-£   '^  <?-v<^  . 

(--'<'~*-'T^'i^-^-^--^£ji-^^     t^^^-x-i^-t-^^-zje.^      C<-^i^J4^^>_y  <;75CLt-'»^   </e-C«-C47  «,-c<^-<a^  , 


238  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

While  I  was  at  Waterbeach,  I  had  one  man  who  caused  me  many  bitter  tears. 
When  I  first  knew  him,  he  was  the  ringleader  in  all  that  was  bad  ;  a  tall,  fine,  big- 
fellow,  and  one  who  could,  perhaps,  drink  more  than  any  man  for  miles  around 
him, — a  man  who  would  curse  and  swear,  and  never  knew  a  thought  of  fear.  He 
was  the  terror  of  the  neighbourhood  ;  there  were  many  incendiary  fires  in  the 
region,  and  most  people  attributed  them  to  him.  .Sometimes,  he  would  be  drunk 
for  two  or  three  weeks  at  a  spell,  and  then  he  raved  and  raged  like  a  madman. 
That  man  came  to  hear  me  ;  1  recollect  the  sensation  that  went  through  the  little 
chapel  when  he  entered.  He  sat  there,  and  fell  in  love  with  me  ;  I  think  that  was 
the  only  conversion  that  he  experienced,  but  he  professed  to  be  converted.  He  had, 
apparently,  been  the  subject  of  genuine  repentance,  and  he  became  outwardly  quite 
a  changed  character  ;  he  gave  up  his  drinking  and  his  swearing,  and  was  in  many 
respects  an  e.xemplary  individual.  All  the  parish  was  astonished.  There  was  old 
Tom  So-and-so  weeping,  and  it  was  rumoured  about  that  he  felt  impressed  ;  he  began 
regularly  to  attend  the  chapel,  and  was  manifestly  an  altered  man.  The  public-house 
lost  an  excellent  customer  ;  he  was  not  seen  in  the  skittle-alley,  nor  was  he  detected 
in  the  drunken  rows  that  were  so  common  in  the  neighbourhood.  After  a  while,  he 
ventured  to  come  forward  at  the  prayer-meeting  ;  he  talked  about  what  he  had 
experienced,  what  he  had  felt  and  known.  I  heard  him  pray  ;  it  was  rough,  rugged 
language,  but  there  was  such  impassioned  earnestness,  I  set  him  down  as  being  a 
bright  jewel  in  the  Redeemer's  crown.  He  held  out  six,  nay,  nine  months  he 
persevered  in  our  midst.  If  there  was  rough  work  to  be  done,  he  would  do  it ;  if 
there  was  a  Sunday-school  to  be  maintained,  six  or  seven  miles  away,  he  would  walk 
there.  At  any  risk,  he  would  be  out  to  help  in  the  Lord's  work  ;  if  he  could  but  be 
of  service  to  the  meanest  member  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  he  rejoiced  gready.  I 
remember  seeing  him  tugging  a  barge,  with  perhaps  a  hundred  people  on  board, 
whom  he  was  drawing  up  to  a  place  where  I  was  going  to  preach  ;  and  he  was 
glorying  in  the  work,  and  singing  as  gladly  and  happily  as  any  one  of  them.  II 
anybody  spoke  a  word  against  the  Lord  or  His  servant,  he  did  not  hesitate  a 
moment,  but  knocked  him  over. 

So  he  went  on  for  a  time  ;  but,  at  last,  the  laughter  to  which  he  was  exposed, 
the  jeers  and  scoffs  of  his  old  companions, — though  at  first  he  bore  them  like  a  man, — 
became  too  much  for  him.  He  began  to  think  he  had  been  a  little  too  fanatical, 
a  litde  too  earnest.  He  slunk  up  to  the  place  of  worship  instead  of  coming  boldly 
in  ;  he  gradually  forsook  the  week-night  service,  and  then  neglected  the  Sabbath- 
day  ;  and,  though  often  warned,  and  often  rebuked,  he  returned  to  his  old  habits,  and 
any  thoughts  of  God  or  godliness  that  he  had  ever  known,  seemed  to  die  away.  He 
could  again  utter  the  blasphemer's  oath  ;  once  more  he  could  act  wickedly  with  the 
profane  ;  and  he — of  whom  we  had  often  boasted,  and  said,,  in  our  prayer-meetings, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  239 

"  Oh  !  how  much  is  God  glorified  by  this  man's  conversion  !  What  cannot  Divine 
grace  do  ? " — to  the  contusion  of  us  all,  was  to  be  seen  sometimes  drunk  in  our 
streets,  and  then  it  was  thrown  in  our  teeth,  "  This  is  one  of  your  Christians,  is  it? — ■ 
one  of  your  converts  gone  back  again,  and  become  as  bad  as  he  was  before?" 
Before  I  left  the  district,  I  was  afraid  that  there  was  no  real  work  of  erace  in  him. 
He  was  a  wild  Red  Indian  sort  of  a  man  ;  I  have  heard  of  him  taking  a  bird, 
plucking  it,  and  eating  it  raw  in  the  field.  That  was  not  the  act  of  a  Christian  man,  it 
was  not  one  of  the  things  that  are  comely,  and  of  good  repute.  After  I  left  the 
neighbourhood,  I  asked  after  him,  and  1  could  hear  nothing  good  of  him  ;  he  became 
worse  than  he  was  before,  if  that  was  possible  ;  certainl) ,  he  was  no  better,'  and 
seemed  to  be  unreachable  by  any  agency. 

Among  my  early  hearers  at  Waterbeach  was  one  good  old  woman  whom  I 
called  "Mrs.  Much-afraid."  I  feel  quite  sure  she  has  been  many  years  in  Heaven, 
but  she  was  always  fearing  that  she  should  never  enter  the  gates  of  glory.  She 
was  very  regular  in  her  attendance  at  the  house  ot  God,  and  was  a  wonderfully  good 
listener.  She  used  to  drink  in  the  gospel  ;  but,  nevertheless,  she  was  always 
doubting,  and  fearing,  and  trembling  about  her  own  spiritual  condition.  She  had 
been  a  believer  in  Christ,  I  should  think,  for  fifty  years,  yet  she  had  always  remained 
in  that  timid,  tearful,  anxious  state.  She  was  a  kind  old  soul,  ever  ready  to  help  her 
neighbours,  or  to  speak  a  word  to  the  unconverted  ;  she  seemed  to  me  to  have 
enough  grace  for  two  people,  yet,  in  her  own  opinion,  she  had  not  half  enough  grace 
for  one. 

One  day,  when  I  was  talking  with  her,  she  told  me  that  she  had  not  any  hope 
at  all  ;  she  had  no  faith  ;  she  believed  that  she  was  a  hypocrite.  I  said,  "  Then 
don't  come  to  the  chapel  any  more  ;  we  don't  want  hypocrites  there.  Why  do  you 
come?"  She  answered,  "  1  come  because  I  can't  stop  away.  I  love  the  people  of 
God  ;  I  love  the  house  of  God  ;  and  I  love  to  worship  God."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "you 
are  an  odd  sort  of  hypocrite  ;  you  are  a  queer  kind  of  unconverted  woman."  "  Ah  !  " 
she  sighed,  "  you  may  say  what  you  please,  but  I  have  not  any  hope  of  being 
saved."  So  I  said  to  her,  "Well,  next  Sunday,  I  will  let  you  go  into  the  pulpit,  that 
you  may  tell  the  people  that  Jesus  Christ  is  a  liar,  and  that  you  cannot  trust  Him." 
"  Oh  !  "  she  cried,  "  I  would  be  torn  in  pieces  before  I  would  say  such  a  thing  as 
that.  Why,  He  cannot  lie!  Every  word  He  says  is  true."  "Then,"  I  asked,  "wh\ 
do  you  not  believe  it?"  She  replied,  "I  do  believe  it;  but,  somehow,  I  do  not 
believe  it  for  myself;  I  am  afraid  whether  it  is  for  me."  "  Have  you  not  anv  hope 
at  all  ?  "  I  asked.  "  No,"  she  answered  ;  so  I  pulled  out  my  purse,  and  I  said  to  her, 
"  Now,  I  have  got  ^5  here,  it  is  all  the  money  I  have  ;  but  1  will  give  you  that  ^5 
for  your   hope    if  you   will    sell    it."      She   looked   at   me,  wondering  what   1    meant. 


240  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"Why!  "  she  exclaimed,  "  I  would  not  sell  it  for  a  thousand  worlds."  She  had  just 
told  me  that  she  had  not  any  hope  of  salvation,  yet  she  would  not  sell  it  for  a 
thousand  worlds  ! 

I  fully  expect  to  see  that  good  old  soul  when  I  get  to  Heaven,  and  1  am  certain 
she  will  say  to  me,  "  Oh,  dear  sir,  how  foolish  I  was  when  I  lived  down  there  at 
Waterbeach  !  I  went  groaning  all  the  way  to  glory  when  I  might  just  as  well  have 
gone  there  singing.  I  was  always  troubled  and  afraid  ;  but  my  dear  Lord  kept  me 
by  His  grace,  and  brought  me  safely  here."  She  died  very  sweetly  ;  it  was  with  her 
as  John  Bunyan  said  it  was  with  Miss  Much-afraid,  Mr.  Despondency's  daughter. 
Mr.  Great-heart  had  much  trouble  with  those  poor  pilgrims  on  the  road  to  the 
Celestial  City  ;  for,  if  there  was  only  a  straw  in  the  way,  they  were  fearful  that  they 
would  stumble  over  it.  Yet  Bunyan  says,  "  When  the  time  was  come  for  them  to 
depart,  they  went  to  the  brink  of  the  river.  The  last  words  of  Mr.  Despondency 
were,  '  Farewell  night,  welcome  day.'  His  daughter  went  through  the  river  singing." 
Our  Lord  often  makes  it  calm  and  peaceful,  or  even  joyous  and  triumphant,  for  His 
departing  timid  ones.  He  puts  some  of  His  greatest  saints  to  bed  in  the  dark,  and 
they  wake  up  in  the  eternal  light  ;  but  He  frequently  keeps  the  candle  burning  for 
Mr.  Little-faith,  Mr.  F"eeble-mind,  Mr.  Ready-to-halt,  Mr.  Despondency,  and  Miss 
Much-afraid.  They  go  to  sleep  in  the  light,  and  they  also  wake  up  in  the  land 
where  the  Lamb  is  all  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 


CHAPTER    XXII, 


mt  iLovti's  fimxii  btljinb  tijc  i^aiti's  iiTistcikt. 

The  life  of  Jonah  cannot  be  written  without  God  ;  take  God  out  of  the  prophet's  history,  and  there 
is' no  history  to  write.  This  is  equally  true  of  each  one  of  us.  Apart  from  God,  there  is  no  life,  nor 
thought,  nor  act,  nor  career  of  any  man,  however  lowly  or  however  high.  Leave  out  God,  and  you 
cannot  write  the  story  of  anyone's  career.  If  you  attempt  it,  it  will  be  so  ill-written  that  it  shall  be 
clearly  perceived  that  you  have  tried  to  make  bricks  without  straw,  and  that  you  have  sought  to  fashion 
a  potter's  vessel  without  clay.  I  believe  that,  in  a  man's  life,  the  great  secret  of  strength,  and  holiness, 
and  righteousness,  is  the  acknowledgment  of  God.  'When  a  man  has  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes, 
there  is  no  wonder  that  he  should  run  to  an  excess  of  meanness,  and  even  to  an  excess  of  riot.  In 
proportion  as  the  thought  of  God  dominates  the  mind,  we  may  expect  to  find  a  life  that  shall  be  true, 
and  really  worth  living  ;  but  in  proportion  as  we  forget  God,  we  shall  play  the  fool.  It  is  the  fool  who 
says  in  his  heart.  "  No  God,''  and  it  is  the  fool  who  lives  and  acts  as  if  there  were  no  God.  In  every 
godly  life  there  is  a  set  time  for  each  event  ;  and  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  ask,  "Why  is  the  white  here 
and  the  black  there ;  why  this  gleam  of  sunlight  and  that  roar  of  tempest ;  why  here  a  marriage  and 
there  a  funeral  ;  why  sometimes  a  liarp  and  at  other  times  a  sackbut?"  God  knows,  and  it  is  a  great 
blessing  for  us  when  we  can  leave  it  all  in  His  hands.— C.  H.  S. 


OON  after  I  had  begun  to  preach  the  Word  in  the  village  of  Water- 
beach,  I  was  strongly  advised  to  enter  Stepney,  now  Regent's 
Park,  College,  to  prepare  more  fully  for  the  ministry.  Knowing 
that  solid  learningr  is  never  an  encumbrance,  and  is  often  a  ereat 
means  of  usefulness,  I  felt  inclined  to  avail  myself  of  the  oppor- 
tunity of  attaining  it :  although  I  hoped  that  I  might  be  useful 
without  a  College  training,  I  consented  to  the  opinion  of  friends  that  I  should  be 
more  useful  with  it.  Dr.  Angus,  the  tutor  of  the  College,  visited  Cambridge,  and  it 
was  arranged  that  we  should  meet  at  the  house  of  Mr.  IMacmillan,  the  publisher. 
Thinking  and  praying  over  the  matter,  I  entered  the  house  exactly  at  the  time 
appointed,  and  was  shown  into  a  room  where  I  waited  patiently  a  couple  of  hours, 
feeling  too  much  impressed  with  my  own  insignificance,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
tutor  from  London,  to  venture  to  ring  the  bell,  and  make  enquiries  as  to  the 
unreasonably  long  delay.  At  last,  patience  having  had  her  perfect  work,  and  my 
school-engagements  requiring  me  to  attend  to  my  duties  as  an  usher,  the  bell  was  set 
in  motion,  and  on  the  arrival  of  the  servant,  the  waiting  young  man  was  informed  that 
the  Doctor  had  tarried  in  another  room  until  he  could  stay  no  longer,  and  had  gone 
off  to  London  by  train.  The  stupid  girl  had  given  no  information  to  the  family  that 
anyone  had  called,  and  had  been  shown  into  the  drawing-room  ;  and,  consequently, 
the  meeting  never  came  about,  although  designed  by  both  parties.     I  was  not  a  little 

Q 


242  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAI'IIY. 

disappointed  at  the  moment,  but  have  a  thousand  times  since  thanked  the  Lord 
very  heartily  for  the  strange  Providence  which  forced  my  steps  into  another  path. 

Still  holding  to  the  idea  of  entering  the  Collegiate  Institution,  I  thought  of 
writing  and  making  an  immediate  application,  but  this  was  not  to  be.  That  after- 
noon, having  to  preach  at  one  of  the  village-stations  of  the  Cambridge  Lay 
Preachers'  Association,  I  walked  slowly,  in  a  meditative  frame  of  mind,  over 
Midsummer  Common  to  the  litde  wooden  bridge  which  leads  to  Chesterton,  and  in 
the  midst  of  the  Common  I  was  starded  by  what  seemed  a  loud  voice,  but  which 
may  have  been  a  singular  illusion.  Whichever  it  was,  the  impression  was  vivid  to 
an  intense  degree  ;  I  seemed  very  distincdy  to  hear  the  words,  "  Seekest  thou  great 
things  for  thyself.'*  seek  them  not!"  This  led  me  to  look  at  my  position  from 
another  point  of  view,  and  to  challenge  my  motives  and  intentions.  1  remembered 
the  poor  but  loving  people  to  whom  I  ministered,  and  the  souls  which  had  been 
given  me  in  my  humble  charge  ;  and,  although  at  that  time  I  anticipated  obscurity 
and  poverty  as  the  result  of  the  resolve,  yet  I  did  there  and  then  solemnly  renounce 
the  offer  of  Collegiate  instruction,  determining  to  abide  for  a  season  at  least  with  my 
people,  and  to  remain  preaching  the  Word  so  long  as  I  had  strength  to  do  it.  Had 
it  not  been  for  those  words,  in  all  probability  I  had  never  been  where  and  what  I 
now  am.  I  was  conscientious  in  my  obedience  to  the  monition,  and  I  have  never 
seen  cause  to  regret  it. 

Waiting  upon  the  Lord  for  direction  will  never  fail  to  afford  us  timely  intima- 
tion of  His  will  ;  for  though  the  ephod  is  no  more  worn  by  a  ministering  priest,  the 
Lord  still  guides  His  people  by  His  wisdom,  and  orders  all  their  paths  in  love  ;  and 
in  times  of  perplexity,  byways  mysterious  and  remarkable.  He  makes  them  to  "hear 
a  voice  behind  them,  saying,  'This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it.'"  Probably,  if  our 
hearts  were  more  tender,  we  might  be  favoured  with  more  of  these  sacred  monitions  ; 
but,  alas  !  instead  thereof,  we  are  like  the  horse  and  the  mule,  which  have  no  under- 
standing, and  therefore  the  bit  and  bridle  of  affliction  take  the  place  of  gentler 
means,  else  might  that  happier  method  be  more  often  used,  to  which  the  psalmist 
alludes  when  he  says,  "  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  Thine  eye." 

(The  following  letters  give  further  particulars  concerning  the  proposed  College 

course  : — ) 

"  Cambridge, 

"  Feb.  24,  1852. 
"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  Mr.  Angus,  the  tutor  of  Stepney  College,  preached  for  us  on  Sunday, 
Feb.  I.  Being  at  my  own  place,  I  had  no  opportunity  of  seeing  him,  and  was  very 
surprised  when,  on  Monday,  I  was  told  that  he  wanted  to  see  me.      I  assure  you,  I 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilV.  1'43 

never  mentioned  myself  to  him,  nor  tp  anyone, — this  came  quite  unexpectedly.  I 
suppose  the  deacons  of  our  church,  hearing  of  my  doings  at  Waterbeach,  had 
thouffht  right  to  mention  me  to  him. 

"  Well,  I  went  to  the  place  of  meeting  ;  but,  by  a  very  singular  occurrence,  we 
missed  each  other  ;  he  waited  in  the  parlour,  while  I  was  shown  into  the  drawing- 
room,  and  the  servant  forgot  to  tell  him  I  had  come.  As  he  was  going  to  London, 
and  could  not  wait,  he  wrote  the  enclosed." 

(On  the  envelope  containing  the  following  letter,  there  is  this  note  in  Mr. 
Spurgeon's  handwriting: — 

"  Sent  to  Mr.  Watts  because  he  is  my  dear  friend,  and  Mr.  A.  knew  he  would 
give  it  to  me.  Mr.  Watts  treats  me  like  a  son  ;  he  is  well  qualified  to  be  a  father  : 
he  will  do  anything  for  me,  I  know.") 

"  College, 

"Tuesday,  Feb.  3,  1852. 
"  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  missed  seeing  Mr.  Spurgeon  yesterday,  and  now 
write,  through  you,  in  the  hope  that  you  will  lay  this  note  before  him.  I  cannot,  of 
course,  in  any  way  pledge  our  Committee  in  the  matter  ;  but  if,  on  prayerfully 
considering  the  whole  case,  he  apply  for  admission  here,  I  can  assure  him  of  a 
candid,  friendly  consideration  of  his  application.  There  is  a  great  need  of  hearty 
devoted  ministers  ;  and  to  form  such,  so  that  they  may  occupy  important  posts,  and 
wear  well,  we  need  to  have  them  thoroughly  furnished,  especially  with  Bible  know- 
ledge. I  should  regret  for  your  friend  to  settle  without  thorough  preparation.  He 
may  be  useful  in  either  case,  but  his  usefulness  will  be  very  much  greater,  it  will  fill 
at  all  events  a  wider  sphere,  with  preparation  than  without  it. 

"  Applications  must  be  sent  to  us  before  May,  our  Session  beginning  in 
September  ;  and  if  Mr.  S.  think  further  of  it,  I  shall  be  glad  in  due  time  to  hear 
from  him. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  Joseph  Angus." 
"  Mr.  Watts, 

"Wood  Merchant,  &c., 

"  Cambridge." 


& 


(Mr.  Spurgeon's  letter  to  his  father  continues  : — ) 

"  I  have  waited  thus  long  because  (i)  I  wanted  to  get  a  little  more  to  tell  you  ; 
[2)   I  do  not   want  to  appear  to  desire  to  go  to  College  at  your  e.xpense.      I  do  not 


244  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

wish  to  go  until  I  can  pay  for  it  with  my  own  money,  or  until  friends  offer  to  help 
because  I  do  not  want  to  burden  you.  It  is  said  by  almost  all  friends  that  I  ought 
to  go  to  College.  I  have  no  very  great  desire  for  it  ;  in  fact,  none  at  all.  Yet  I 
have  made  it  a  matter  of  prayer,  and  I  trust,  yea,  I  am  confident,  God  will  guide  me 

"  Of  course,  you  are  my  only  earthly  director  and  guide  in  these  matters  ;  your 
judgment  always  has  been  best  ;  you  must  know  best.  But  perhaps  you  will  allow 
me  just  to  state  my  own  opinion,  not  because  I  shall  trust  in  it,  but  only  that  you 
may  see  my  inclination.  I  think,  then,  (with  all  deference  to  you,)  that  I  had  better 
not  go  to  College  yet,  at  least  not  just  now,  tor — 

"  I.  Whatever  advantages  are  to  be  derived  from  such  a  course  of  study,  I  snail 
be  more  able  to  improve  when  my  powers  are  more  developed  than  they  are  al 
present.     When  I  know  more,  I  shall  be  more  able  to  learn. 

"  2.  Providence  has  thrown  me  into  a  great  sphere  of  usefulness, — a  congre- 
gation of  often  450,  a  loving  and  praying  church,  and  an  awakened  audience.  Many 
already  own  that  the  preaching  has  been  with  power  from  Heaven.  Now,  ought  I 
to  leave  them  ? 

"3.  In  a  few  years'  time,  I  hope  to  improve  my  financial  position,  so  as  to 
be  at  no  expense  to  you,  or  at  least  not  for  all.  I  should  not  like  to  know  that 
you  were  burdening  yourself  for  me.  I  should  love  to  work  my  own  way  as  much 
as  possible.      I  know  you  like  this  feeling. 

"4.  I  am  not  uneducated.  I  have  many  opportunities  of  improvement  now  ; 
all  I  want  is  more  time  ;  but  even  that,  Mr.  Leeding  would  give  me,  if  it  were  so 
arranged.  I  have  plenty  of  practice  ;  and  do  we  not  learn  to  preach  by  preaching  } 
You  know  what  my  style  is.  I  fancy  it  is  not  very  College-like.  Let  it  be  never  so 
bad,  God  has  blessed  it,  and  I  believe  He  will  yet  more.  All  I  do  right.  He  does  in 
me,  and  the  might  is  of  Him.  I  am  now  well  off;  I  think  as  well  oft  as  anyone  of 
my  age,  and  I  am  sure  quite  as  happy.  If  I  were  in  need,  I  think  the  people  might 
be  able  to  raise  more  for  me.  Now,  shall  I  throw  myself  out,  and  trust  to  Providence 
as  to  whether  I  shall  ever  get  another  place  as  soon  as  I  leave  College  ? 

"  5.  But,  no  ; — I  have  said  enough, — you  are  to  judge,  not  I.  I  leave  it  to 
God  and  yourself;  but,  still,  I  should  like  you  to  decide  in  this  way.  Of  course,  I 
have  a  will,  and  you  now  know  it  ;  but  I  say,  '  Not  mine,  but  your  will,  and 
God's  will.' 

"  I  have  just  acknowledged  the  letter,  and  said  that  I  could  make  no  reply  until 
I  had  consulted  my  friends.  I  think  it  might  be  as  well,  if  you  think  so,  too,  to  let 
Mr.  Angus  know  as  much  as  is  right  of  my  present  position,  that  he  may  be 
favourable  toward  me  at  any  future  time 

"  I  hope  you  will  e.Kcuse  my  scrawl,  for,  believe  me,  I  am  fully  employed.  Last 
night,  I  thought  of  writing  ;  but  was  called  out  to  see  a  dying  man,  and  I   thought  I 


c.    n.    sturgeon's    autobiography.  245 

dare  not  refuse.      The  people  at  W would  not  like  to  get  even  a  hint  of  my 

leavino-  them.  I  do  not  know  why  they  love  me,  but  they  do  ;  it  is  the  Lord's  doing. 
"Give  my  love  and  many  thanks  to  dear  Mother,  Archer,  and  sisters.  If  at 
any  time  you  think  a  letter  from  me  would  be  useful,  just  hint  as  much,  and  I  will 
write  one.  May  God  keep  me,  in  every  place,  from  every  evil,  and  dwell  with  you, 
and  abide  with  you  for  ever  ;  and  with  my  best  love, 

"  I  am, 

"  Dear  Father, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 


(Extract  from  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  letter  to  his  father,  March  9th,  1852  : — ) 
"  I  have  all  along  had  an  aversion  to  College,  and  nothing  but  a  feeling  that  I 
must  not  consult  myself,  but  Jesus,  could  have  made  me  think  of  it.  It  appears  to 
my  friends  at  Cambridge  that  it  is  my  duty  to  remain  with  my  dear  people  at 
Waterbeach  ;  so  says  the  church  there,  unanimously,  and  so  say  three  of  our  deacons 
at  Cambridge." 

*  *  *  * 

(Letter  from  Deacon  King  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  father  : — ) 

"Waterbeach, 

"  March  20,  '52. 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  Having  heard,  with  deep  regret,  of  your  intention  of  placing  your  son 
at  Stepney  College,  I  write  to  say  that,  if  you  were  aware  of  all  the  circumstances 
connected  with  his  ministry  at  Waterbeach,  I  think  you  would  defer  doing  so,  at 
least  for  a  time. 

"  Allow  me  to  say  that,  since  his  coming,  the  congregation  is  very  much 
increased,  the  aisles  and  vestry  being  often  full,  and  many  go  away  for  want  of  room  ; 
there  are  several  cases  of  his  being  made  useful  in  awakening  the  careless  ;  and 
although  we  have  only  known  him  about  five  months,  the  attachment  is  as  strong  as 
if  we  had  been  acquainted  with  him  as  many  years  ;  and  if  he  were  to  leave  us  just 
now,  it  would  be  the  occasion  of  general  '  Lamentation,  Mozirning,  and  If  oc' 
Added  to  which,  he  has  no  wish  to  go,  but  rather  the  reverse  ;  and  his  friends  in 
Cambridge,  who  previously  recommended  his  going,  now  hesitate,  and  feel  disposed 
to  alter  their  opinion.  If  you,  sir,  could  come  over,  and  see  for  yourself,  you  would 
find  that  this  account  is  not  exaggerated,  but  perhaps  would  be  ready  to  exclaim, 
'The  half  was  not  told  me.'     That  we  may  be  Divinely  directed  to  act  as  shall  be 


246  ■  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiogi^piiv. 

most  conducive  to  the  promotion  of  the   Redeemer's  glory,  in  connection  with  the 
best  interests  of  those  around  us,  is  the  sincere  desire  and  earnest  prayer  of — 

"  Yours  respectfully, 
"  C.  King,  on  behalf  of  the  Church  and  Congregation." 

"  P.S. — Our  friends  are  very  anxious  that  Mr.  S.  should  continue  with  us  at 
least  a  year.  Your  acceding  to  this  would  cause  many  devout  thanksgivings  to  God, 
and  we  hope  would  be  attended  with  lasting  benefit  to  many  amongst  us.  A  line  to 
this  effect  would  much  oblige." 


"April  6th,  1852 

"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  I  am  sorry  that  anything  I  said  in  my  letter  should  have  grieved  you. 
It  was  nothing  you  said  that  made  your  letter  a  sad  one  ;  it  was  only  my  thoughts  of 
leaving  the  people  at  'Beach.  I  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  your  very  kind  offer, 
and  also  for  your  assurance  that  I  am  at  perfect  liberty  to  act  as  I  think  it  is  the  will 
of  God  I  should  act.  I  am  sure  I  never  imagined  that  you  would  force  me, — it  was 
only  my  poor  way  of  expressing  myself  that  caused  the  blunder, — and  I  do  now 
most  affectionately  entreat  forgiveness  of  you  if  I  said  anything  that  had  a  shadow 
of  wrong  in  it,  or  if  I  have  thought  in  any  wrong  manner.  I  have  desired,  all  along, 
to  act  the  part  of  a  dutiful  son  to  an  affectionate  parent  ;  and  if  I  fail,  I  feel  sure 
that  you  and  dear  Mother  will  impute  it  rather  to  my  weakness  in  act,  than  to  a  want 
of  love. 

"  With  regard  to  my  decision, — I  have  said  so  much  in  my  last  that  more  would 
be  unnecessary.  I  do  really  think  it  to  be  my  duty  to  continue  in  the  place  which  I 
now  occupy, — for  a  short  time  at  least.  I  have  been  assured  that  never  were  more 
tears  shed  in  Waterbeach,  at  any  time,  than  when  I  only  hinted  at  leaving.  They 
could  not  give  me  stronger  tokens  of  their  affection  than  they  did  give.  One  prayer 
went  up  from  all,  '  Lord,  keep  him  here  ! '  I  am  assured  by  Mr.  King  that  the 
people  have  had  ministers  whom  one  lot  were  very  pleased  with,  but  there  always 
was  a  party  opposed  ;  but  now,  though  he  has  a  good  scope  for  observation,  he  has 
not  heard  one  opinion  contrary  to  me.  The  Lord  gave  me  favour  with  the  people, 
and  I  am  so  young  that  they  look  over  many  faults  ;  I  believe  this  is  one  of  the  facts 
of  the  case.  The  worst  is,  I  am  in  a  dangerous  place  ;  the  pinnacle  is  not  so  safe  as 
the  quiet  vale.  I  know  you  pray  that  I"  may  be  kept  humble,  and  I  know  I  do.  Oh,  if 
the-  clouds  pass  without  rain,  how  sorrowful  I  shall  feel  !  When  I  have  been  thinking 
on  the  many  difficulties  in  preaching  the  Word,  the  doctrine  of  election  has  been  a 
great  comfort  to  me.  I  do  want  men  to  be  saved,  and  it  is  my  consolation  that  a 
multitude  no  man  can  number  are  by  God's  immutable  decree  ordained  to  eternal 


C.     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  247 

life.  So  we  cannot  labour  in  vain,  we  must  have  some ;  the  covenant  renders 
that  secure. 

"  I  shall  always  be  glad  of  some  of  your  skeletons,  for  though  1  do  not  want 
them  to  make  me  lazy,  yet  they  give  some  hints  when  a  passage  does  not  open  at 
once.      It  will  be   too  much   trouble  for   you   to   write  them,  but   I   have   no  doubt 

Archer  will  copy  them  for  me As  to  my  cash,  I   have  bought  a  great  many 

books  lately,  for  my  constant  work  requires  them,  and  you  know  Mr.  L.  would  not 
have  many  of  the  class  of  books  I  want.  Yet  I  calculate  on  having  ^15  in  hand  at 
Midsummer,  or  by  God's  blessing,  more.  I  think  that  (of  course,  I  mean,  if  God 
prosper  me,)  I  shall  be  able  to  save  enough  to  put  myself  to  College,  and  if  not,  if 
I  should  go,  which,  as  you  say,  is  not  very  certain,  why  then  friends  at  Cambridge 

would  help  me  if  I  could  not  manage  it.     Has taken  the  positive  steps  yet  with 

regard  to  joining  the  church  1     If  not,  tell  her,  /  blush  that  she  should  blush  to  own 

her  Lord.      Do   not  forget  me  in  earnest  prayer My  very  best  love  to  my 

dear  Mother.  I  am  sure  she  can  tell  all  the  mothers  in  the  world  that  parents' 
prayers  are  not  forgotten.  I  daresay  you  think  God  saved  the  worst  first ;  if  you<lo 
not,  I  do.  I  believe  I  have  given  you  more  trouble  than  any  of  the  others,  but  I 
did  not  mean  it  ;  and  I  still  believe  that  I  have  given  you  joy,  too,  and  I  hope  the 
trouble,  though  not  repaid,  will  yet  be  recompensed  by  a  comfort  arising  from  seeing 
me  walk  in  the  truth.  Remember  me  to  Emily.  .  .  .  The  litde  ones  are  getting 
big,  I  suppose  ;   my  love   to  them,    I   hope  they  will  be  God's  daughters. 

"1  remain, 

"  Your  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 

^  ^ff  ^  -tP 

(Part  of  undated  letter  from  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to  his  mother;  the  first  portion 
is  missing  : — ) 

"  I  need  your  prayers  doubly  at  this  time.  I  know  I  shall  have  them,  and  I 
believe  I  have  felt  the  blessing  of  them  more  than  once.  The  Lord  visit  you  both, 
and  bear  you  up  in  His  everlasting  arms  !  Troubles  you  have  had,  but  I  believe 
the  comforts  have  always  kept  you  joyful  in  tribulation  ;  cast  down,  but  not  in 
despair. 

"  Bless  the  Lord,  I  must  say,  for  making  me  His  son  ;  'tis  of  His  own  sovereign 
mercy.  Not  one  good  thing  has  failed.  I  have  felt  corruptions  rise,  and  the  old 
man  is  strong, — but  grace  always  comes  in  just  at  the  critical  time,  and  saves  me 
from  myself  The  Lord  keep  me  !  I  have  no  hope  of  going  on  well  but  by  His 
power.  I  know  that  His  almighty  arm  is  all-sufficient.  Get  everyone  you  can 
to  pray  for  me  ;  a  prayer  is  more   precious   than   gold,  it  makes  me  rich.      Lift  up 


248  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

your  arms,  like  Moses  ;  there  is  a  great  battle  both  in  me  and  out  of  me.  Jesus 
intercedes  ;  sweet  thought,  to  one  who  needs  just  such  a  Pleader.  Jehovah-Jesus, 
His  people's  buckler,  is  near  ;  an  ever-present  help  in  time  of  trouble,  not  afar  off. 
We  live  in  Him,  He  is  all  around  us  ;  who  shall  destroy  His  favourites.  His 
darlings  ?  I  have  had  for  one  of  my  sermons,  John  xv.  9  :  '  As  the  Father  hath  loved 
Me,  so  have  I  loved  you  :  continue  ye  in  My  love.'  Here  is  (i.)  Love  without 
beginning.  God  never  began  to  love  Jesus.  (2.)  Love  without  limit.  God  loves 
Jesus  with  an  unbounded  love.  (3.)  Love  without  change.  God  always  loved  Jesus 
alike,  equally.  (4.)  Love  without  end.  When  will  God  leave  off  loving  Jesus  .-*■ 
Even  so  does  Jesus  love  you  and  me 

'■  'The  weakest  saint  sliall  win  the  day, 
Though  death  and  hell  obstruct  the  way.' 

"  How  are  all  Christian  friends?  Love  to  Mr.  Langford,  and  my  best  respects  ;. 
tell  him  I  desire  a  special  interest  in  his  prayers.  I  want  to  feel  '  less  than  nothing,' 
but  this  is  a  very  great  attainment.  Thank  Father  for  his  letter  ;  the  Lord  of  hosts 
prosper  his  labours  abundantly  !  My  very  best  love  to  yourself  I  hope,  if  it  is 
right,  that  your  hands  are  well.  Kiss  the  little  ones,  and  give  them  my  love.  May 
they  learn  of  Jesus  !  I  am  glad  Archer  gets  on  so  well  ;  may  your  ten  thousand 
prayers  for  us  be  answered  by  Him  that  heareth  prayer  !  Emily  is  stronger,  1  hope, 
ask  her  to  think  whether  she  loves  Jesus  with  all  her  heart. 

"  I  should  very  much  like  to  know  where  Aunt  lives.  I  have  asked  several 
times,  but  I  have  not  learned  yet.  I  do  not  expect  man)'  letters  from  home.  Father 
is  so  much  engaged,  that  I  wonder  I  get  so  many.  If  you  want  to  know  any 
points  in  which  I  am  not  quite  explicit  enough,  write  and  ask  at  any  time.  My 
affairs  are  your  affairs.      I  hope  always  to  do  that  which  \ou  would  approve  of 

"  Love  to  all  once  more,^ — 

"  From  vour  affectionate  son, 

"  Charles." 
*  *  *  * 

(Extract  from  letter  from  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to  his  mother,  November,  1852  : — ) 

"  I  am  more  and  more  glad  that  I  never  went  to  College.  God  sends  such  sun- 
shine on  my  path,  such  smiles  of  grace,  that  I  cannot  regret  if  I  have  forfeited  all  my 
prospects  for  it.  I  am  conscious  that  I  held  back  from  love  to  God  and  His  cause, 
and  I  had  rather  be  poor  in  His  sei"vice  than  rich  in  my  own.  I  have  all  that  heart 
can  wish  for  ;  yea,  God  giveth  more  than  my  desire.  My  congregation  is  as  great 
and  lovino;  as  ever.  Durine  all  the  time  that  1  have  been  at  Waterbetich,  I  have 
had  a  different  house  for  my  home  every  Sabbath  day.  Fifty-two  families  have  thus 
taken  me  in  ;  and  I  have  still  six  other  invitations  not  yet  accepted.      Talk  about  the 


C.     11.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArilY. 


249 


people  not  caring  for  me,  because  they  give  me  so  little  !  1  dare  tell  anybody  under 
heaven  'tis  false  !  They  do  all  they  can.  Our  anniversary  passed  off  grandly  :  six 
were  baptized  ;  crowds  on  crowds  stood  by  the  river  ;  the  chapel  was  afterward.s 
crammed,  both  to  the  tea  and  the  sermon." 


mk 


ifi 


)^'^  ^4. 


At  this  anniversary,  (in  1852,)  my  venerable  friend,  Mr.  Cornelius  Elven,  of  Bury 
St.  Edmund's,  as  a  man  of  mark  in  that  region,  was  requested  to  preach,  and  right 
well  do  I  remember  his  hearty  compliance  with  my  request.  I  met  him  at  the 
station  as  he  alicrhted  from  a  third-class  carriage,  which  he  had  selected  in  order  to 


250  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

put  the   friends   to   the   least   possible   expense   for   his  travelling.       His    bulk    was 
stupendous,  and  one  soon  saw  that  his  heart  was  as  large  as  his  body.     There  was  a 
baptismal  service  in  the  river  in  connection  with  the  anniversary,  but  Mr.  Elven  said 
that  he  could  not  go  into  the  water  with  us,  for  if  he  got  wet  through,  there  were  no 
garments  nearer  than   Bury  St.  Edmund's  that  would  fit  him.      He  gave  me  much 
sage  and  holy  advice  during  his  visit,  advice  which  came  to  me  with  much  the  same 
weight  as  Paul's  words  came  to  Timothy.*      He  bade  me  study  hard,  and  mind  and 
keep  abreast  of  the  foremost  Christians  in  our  little  church  ;  "  for,"  said  he,  "  if  these 
men,  either  in  their  knowledge  of  Scripture,   or  their   power   to  edify  the  people, 
once  outstrip  you,    the   temptation   will    arise  among   them   to   be   dissatisfied  with 
your  ministry  ;    and,  however  good  they   are,   they  will   feel   their  superiority,   and 
others  will  perceive  it,   too,   and  then  your  place   in   the   church   will  become  very 
difficult  to  hold."      I    felt  the  common  sense  of  the  observation,   and    he  spur  was 
useful.     The  sermons   of  the  day   were   very   homely  in   style,   and    pre-eminently 
practica'.      I   remember  his  reading   the   narrative  of  Naaman  the  Syrian,   and  his 
pithy  comments  thereon.      He  seemed  to  have  taken  Matthew  Henry  for  his  model, 
and  in  the  course  of  one  of  the  services  he  gave  us  Henry's  inimitable  description 
of   the    Father  receiving  the  prodigal,  which  occurs  in  the  commentator's  exposition 
of  Luke  XV.     With  a  voice  deep-toned  and  graciously  tender,  he  said  : — "  'When  he 
was  yet  a  great  way  off,   his  father  saw  him,' — here  were  eyes  of  mercy  ;  '  and  had 
compassion,' — here   were   do7vc/s  of  mercy  ;    '  and  ran,' — here  were  /eel  of  mercy  ; 
'  and  fell   on  his  neck,' — here  were  arms  of  mercy  ;  '  and  kissed  him,' — here  were 
/i/>s  of  mercy ; — it  was  all  mercy  !  "     But  one  thing  above  all  others  fixed  itself  upon 
my  memory,  and  when  I  heard  of  the  good  man's  departure,  it  came  before  me  with 
great  vividness  ;  he  told  me  anecdotes  of  the  usefulness  of  addressing  individuals  one 
by   one  about   their  souls,    and   urged   the   duty   upon   me   with   great   earnestness, 
quoting  again  and  again  from  the  life  of  a  certain  Harlan  Page.      Being  busy  with  a 
thousand    matters,    I    had   never    looked    up   the    biography  which    he    so  strongly 
recommended  ;  but  my  first  thought,  when  I  learned  of  his  death,  was,  Harlan  Page. 
Cornelius  Elven  completed  an  honourable  ministry  of  fifty  years  in  his  native  town, 
and  passed   away  amid  the  respectful   regrets  of  all  the  inhabitants,  and  the  deep 
afiection  of  his  church.      He  was  a  man  of  large  and  loving  heart,  with  a  vivacious 
rrind,  and  interesting  manner  of  utterance.       He  was    not  only   the   friend   of  my 
youth,  but  he   also   preached   for   me  in   London  in  after  days.      He   used,   with   a 
merry  laugh,  to  tell  the  story  of  a  lady  who  came  to  hear  me  at  New  Park  Street, 


•  Mr.  Elven  delighted  to  tell  the  story  of  this  visit.  In  his  Diary,  that  evening,  he  wrote :— "  Have  preached  to-day  at  Water- 
beach  for  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  He  is  a  rising  star.  He  will  one  day  make  his  mark  upon  the  denomination."  Mr.  Elven  used  to 
say:— "That  day,  I  preached  for  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  he  gave  out  the  hymns  for  me ;  I  should  be  very  glad  to  give  out  the  hymns 
for  him  if  he  woukl  preach  for  me."  This  service  Mr.  Spurgeon  very  cheerfully  rendered  t )  Mr.  Elven  at  Bury  St.  Edmund's  on 
more  than  one  occasica. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOUlOGRArilV.  25 1 

but  putting-  her  head  inside  the  door,  and  seeing  the  vast  form  of  Cornelius  Elven, 
she  retreated,  exclaiming,  "  No,  no  ;  the  man  has  too  much  of  the  flesh  about  him, 
I  cannot  hear  him."  It  was  a  very  unjust  judgment,  for  the  dear  man's  great  bulk 
was  a  sore  affliction  to  him.  Peace  to  his  memory  !  I  weave  no  fading  wreath  for 
his  tomb,  but  I  catch  the  gleaming  of  that  immortal  crown  which  the  Master  has 
placed  upon  his  brow.      He  was  a  good  man,  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost 


(Professor  Everett — see  page  53, — has  preserved  the  following  reminiscence  of 
this  period  : — 

"In  or  about  1852,  I  was  occupying  a  post  in  a  high-class  school, — Mr. 
Thorowgood's,  at  Totteridge,  near  London, — and  there  being  a  vacancy  for  another 
assistant,  I  wrote,  with  Mr.  Thorowgood's  approval,  to  my  old  friend  Spurgeon, 
proposing  that  he  should  com.e  and  fill  it.  He  asked  for  a  few  days  to  decide 
definitely,  and  then  wrote  declining,  chiefly  on  the  ground  that  he  was  unwilling  to 
renounce  the  evangelistic  work  which  he  combined  with  the  position  he  then  held. 
He  stated,  then,  or  in  a  subsequent  letter,  that  he  had  preached  more  than  three 
hundred  times  in  the  previous  twelve  months,  and  that  the  chapel  at  Waterbeach 
was  not  only  full,  but  crowded  with  outside  listeners  at  the  open  windows.") 


CHAPTER   XXIII. 


Ecmittiscnuts  as  a  ^Fillagt  Jlastor. 

My  witness  is,  and  I  speak  it  for  the  honour  of  God,  that  He  is  a  good  Provider.  I  have  been 
cast  upon  the  Providence  of  God  ever  since  I  left  my  father's  house,  and  in  all  cases  He  has  been  my 
Shepherd,  and  I  have  known  no  lack.  My  first  income  as  a  Christian  minister  was  small  enough  in  all 
conscience,  never  exceeding  forty-five  pounds  a  year ;  yet  I  was  as  rich  then  as  I  am  now,  for  I  had 
enough;  and  I  had  no  more  cares,  nay,  not  half  as  many  then  as  I  have  now;  and  when  I  breathed  my 
prayer  to  God  then,  as  I  do  now,  for  all  things  temporal  and  spiritual,  I  iound  Him  ready  to  answer  me 
at  every  pmch, — and  full  many  pinches  I  have  had.  Many  a  pecuniary  trial  have  I  had  in 
connection  with  the  College  work,  which  depends  for  funds  upon  the  Lord's  moving  His  people  to 
liberality:  my  faith  has  been  often  tried,  but  God  has  always  been  faithful,  and  sent  supplies  in  hours 
of  need.  If  any  should  tell  me  that  prayer  to  God  was  a  mere  piece  of  excitement,  and  that  the  idea  of 
God  answering  human  cries  is  absurd,  I  should  laugh  the  statement  to  scorn,  for  my  experience  is  not 
that  of  one  or  two  singular  instances,  but  that  of  hundreds  of  cases,  in  which  the  Lord's  interposition, 
for  the  necessities  of  His  work,  has  been  as  manifest  as  if  He  had  rent  the  clouds,  and  thrust  forth  His 
own  naked  arm  and  bounteous  hand  to  supply  the  needs  of  His  servant. — C.  H.  S. 

HEN  I  became  Pastor  at  Waterbeach,  the  people  could  do  very 
little  for  my  support,  and  therefore  I  was  an  usher  in  a  school  at 
Cambridge  at  the  same  time.  After  a  while,  I  was  obliged  to  grive 
up  the  latter  occupation,  and  was  thrown  on  the  generosity  of  the 
people.  They  gave  me  a  salary  of  ^45  a  year,  but  as  I  had  to  pay 
I2S.  a  week  for  two  rooms  which  I  occupied,  my  income  was  not 
sufficient  to  support  me  ;  but  the  people,  though  they  had  not  mone\ ,  had  produce, 
and  I  do  not  think  there  was  a  pig  killed  by  any  one  of  the  congregation  without  my 
having  some  portion  of  it,  and  one  or  other  of  them,  when  coming  to  the  market  at 
Cambridge,  would  bring  me  bread,  so  that  I  had  enough  bread  and  meat  to  pay  my 
rent  with,  and  I  often  paid  my  landlady  in  that  fashion. 

There  was  one  old  man  at  Waterbeach  who  \vas  a  great  miser.  On  one  of  my 
visits  to  the  place,  after  I  had  removed  to  .London,  I  heard  that,  in  his  last  illness, 
he  had  a  bed  made  up  in  the  sitting-room  downstairs,  and  ordered  his  grave  to  be 
dug  just  outside  the  window,  so  as  to  reduce  the  cost  of  his  funeral  as  much 
as  possible.  One  of  the  friends  who  was  talking  about  him  said,  "He  was  never 
known  to  give  anything  to  anybody."  "  Well,"  I  replied,  "  I  know  better  than  that, 
for,  one  Sunday  afternoon,  he  gave  me  three  half-crowns  ;  and  as  I  was  wanting  a 
new  hat  at  the  time,  I  got  it  with  the  money."  "Well,"  rejoined  the  friend,  "  I  am 
quite  sure  he  never  forgave  himself  for  such  e.xtravagance  as  that,  and  that  he  must 
have  wanted  his  three  half-crowns  back  again."  "Ah,  but  !  "  I  answered,  "you  have 
not  heard  the  whole  of  the  story  yet,  for,  the  following  Sunday,  the  old  man  came  to 


254 


H.      STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


me  again,  and  asked  me  to  pray  for  him  that  ne  might  be  saved  from  the  sin  of 
covetousness,  "  for,"  said  he,  "the  Lord  told  me  to  give  you  half-a-sovereign,  but  I 
kept  back  half-a-crown,  and  I  can't  rest  of  a  night  for  thinking  of  it." 

^Dr.  D.  A.  Doudney,  describing  an  interview  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  at 
"  Westwood,"  wrote  in  The  Gospel  Magazine  for  March,  1892: — "Among  other 
subjects  brought  up  was  that  of  Dr.  Gill's  Comnientaiy.  I  was  asked  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  how  it  was  that  I  was  led  to  reproduce  it.  Its  truthful  character  was 
urged  as  a  reason,  as  well  as  its  great  price  putting  it  beyond  the  power  of  ministers 
in  general  to  possess  it.  My  own  copy — simply  bound  in  plain  canvas  boards — had 
cost  me  ^6  los.  Moreover,  I  was  anxious  to  set  up  an  Industrial  School,  and 
thus  find  occupation  for  the  youths  of  the  parish.  '  In  what  volume,'  asked 
Mr.  Spurgeon,  'did  the  names  of  the  subscribers  appear.-''  I  could  not  recollect, 
but,  withdrawing  for  a  moment  to  his  study,  he  quickly  reappeared  with  the  fourth 
volume  of  the  Old  Testament, — the  last  Issued  upon  the  completion  of  the  work, — 
and,  pointing  to  his  own  name,  said,  '  You  published  it  in  half-crown  parts,  or  else  I 
could  not  have  taken  it  in.'  Here  was  a  fair  specimen  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  character, 
— his  proverbial  simplicity  and  honesty.  How  few,  in  like  manner,  amid  such 
surroundings,  and  having  attained,  as  he  had,  to  such  a  name,  and  such  a  popularity, 
would  have  made  that  frank  statement,  '  You  published  it  in  half-crown  parts,  or  I 
could  not  have  taken  it  in.'  " 

The   following   inscriptions,  in   Mr.  Spurgeon's  handwriting,   are  in  his  set  of 
volumes  of  Dr.  Gill's   Commejitary  : — 

In  Vol.  I. — "  I  subscribed  for  this,  and  took  the  monthly  parts. 

"  C.   H.   Sturgeon,   1852. 
"  To  this  Author's  Pulpit  I  was  permitted  to  succeed  in  1854. 

"  C.  H.  Sturgeon." 
In  Vol.  V. — "  I  subscribed  for  these  vols,  of  Gill  in  monthly  parts,  and  had  them 
bound.      December,    1852. 

"  C.   H.   Sturgeon, 
"  living  in  Cambridge, 
"  Baptist  Minister  of  Waterbeach. 
"  In  April,   1854,  unanimously  elected  Pastor  of  the  same  Church, 
which  once  met  in  Carter  Lane,  under  Dr.  Gill,  and  then  Dr.  Rippon, 
— now  New  Park  Street,  Southwark. 

"  In  the  year  1861,  this  Church  migrated  to  the  Metropolitan 
Tabernacle,  Newington  Butts,  having  far  outgrown  the  space  of  New 
Park  Street  Chapel." 


C.     H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  255 

In  Vol.  VI. — "  Many  sneer  at  Gill,  but  he  is  not  to  be  dispensed  with.    In  some 
respects,  he  has  no  superior.      He  is  always  well  worth  consulting. 

"C.  H.  S.       1886." 
In  Vol.  IV.,  as  stated  by  Dr.    Doudney,    Mr.    Spurgeon's  name  appears  in  the 
list  of  subscribers  to  the  work  : — 

"  Spurgeon,  C,  Union  Road,  Cambridge.") 


Of  late  years,  I  have  heard  a  great  deal  against  deacons,  and  have  read 
discussions  as  to  their  office,  evidently  suggested  by  no  idolatrous  reverence  for  their 
persons.  Many  of  my  brethren  in  the  ministry  bitterly  rate  them,  others  tremble  at  the 
mention  of  their  very  name  ;  and  a  few  put  on  their  armour,  and  prepare  to  do  battle 
with  them  wherever  they  go,  as  if  they  were  the  dragons  of  ministerial  life.  I  have 
been  accused  of  saying  that  "  a  deacon  is  worse  than  a  devil,  for  if  you  resist  the 
devil,  he  will  flee  from  you,  but  if  you  resist  a  deacon,  he  will  fly  at  you."  This 
is  no  saying  of  mine  ;  I  never  had  any  cause  to  speak  so  severely  ;  and  although, 
in  some  cases,  it  may  be  true,  I  have  never  had  any  experimental  proof  that  it  is  so. 
Not  one  in  a  hundred  of  the  sayings  that  are  fathered  upon  me  are  mine  at  all  ; 
and  as  to  this  one,  it  was  in  vogue  before  I  was  born.  I  pardon  the  man  who 
preached  from  James  i.  6  before  that  drunken  Solomon,  James  I.  of  England 
and  VI.  of  Scotland, — the  temptation  was  too  great  to  be  resisted  ;  but  let  the 
wretch  be  for  ever  execrated,  if  such  a  man  really  lived,  who  celebrated  the  decease 
of  a  deacon  by  a  tirade  from  the  words,  "  It  came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died." 
I  forgive  the  liar  who  attributed  such  an  outrage  to  me,  but  I  hope  he  will  not  try 
his  infamous  arts  upon  anyone  else. 

My  observation  of  deacons  leads  me  to  say  that,  as  a  rule,  they  are  quite  as 
good  men  as  the  pastors,  and  the  bad  and  good  in  the  ministry  and  the  diaconate 
are  to  be  found  in  very  much  the  same  proportions.  If  there  be  lordly  deacons, 
are  there  not  lordly  pastors  .''  If  there  be  ignorant,  crotchety  men  among  deacons, 
are  there  not  their  rivals  in  our  pulpits  ?  The  Church  owes  an  immeasurable  debt 
of  gratitude  to  those  thousands  of  godly  men  who  study  her  interests  day  and  night, 
contribute  largely  of  their  substance,  care  for  her  poor,  cheer  her  ministers,  and  in 
times  of  trouble  as  well  as  prosperity,  remain  faithfully  at  their  posts.  Whatever 
there  may  be  here  and  there  of  mistake,  infirmity,  and  even  wrong,  I  am  sure,  from 
wide  and  close  observation,  that  the  most  of  our  deacons  are  an  honour  to  our 
faith,  and  we  may  style  them,  as  the  apostle  did  his  brethren,  "  the  glory  of  Christ." 
The  deacons  of  my  first  village  pastorate  were  in  my  esteem  the  excellent  of  the 
earth,  in  whom  I  took  great  delight.  Hard-working  men  on  the  week-day,  they 
spared  no  toil  for  their  Lord  on  the  Sabbath  ;   I  loved  them  sincerely,  and  do  love 


256  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

them  still.  In  my  opinion,  they  were  as  nearly  the  perfection  of  deacons  of  a 
country  church  as  the  kingdom  could  afford. 

Yet,  good  as  my  deacons  were,  they  were  not  perfect  in  all  respects.  I  proposed 
to  them,  on  one  occasion,  that  I  should  preach  on  the  Sunday  evening  by  the  river 
side,  and  the  remark  was  made  by  one  of  them,  "  Ah  !  I  do  not  like  it,  it  is  imitating 
the  Methodists.'"  To  him,  as  a  sound  Calvinist,  it  was  a  dreadful  thing  to  do 
anything  which  Methodists  were  guilty  of ;  to  me,  however,  that  was  rather  n 
recommendation  than  otherwise,  and  I  was  happy  to  run  the  risk  of  being  Metho- 
distical.  All  over  England,  in  our  cities,  towns,  villages,  and  hamlets,  there  are  tens 
of  thousands  who  never  will  hear  the  gospel  while  open-air  preaching  is  neglected. 
I  rejoice  that  God  alloivs  us.  to- preach  in  churches  and  chapels,  but  I  do  not  pretend 
that  we  have  any  apostolical  precedent  for  it,  certainly  none  for  confining  our 
ministry  to  such  places.  I  believe  that  we  are  permitted,  if  it  promotes  order 
and  edification,  to  set  apart  buildings  for  our  worship  ;  but  there  is  no  warrant 
for  calling  these  places  sanctuaries  and  houses  of  God,  for  all  places  are  alike  holy 
where  holy  men  assemble.  It  is  altogether  a  mischievous  thing  that  we  should 
confine  our  preaching  within  walls.  Our  Lord,  it  is  true,  preached  in  the 
synagogues,  but  He  often  spake  on  the  mountain  side,  or  from  a  boat,  or  in 
the  court  of  a  house,  or  in  the  public  thoroughfares.  To  Him,  an  audience  was 
the  only  necessity.  He  was  a  Fisher  of  souls  of  the  true  sort,  and  not  like 
those  who  sit  still  In  their  houses,  and  expect  the  fish  to  come  to  them  to 
be  caught.  Did  our  Lord  intend  a  minister  to  go  on  preaching  from  his  pulpit 
to  empty  pews,  when,  by  standing  on  a  chair  or  a  table  outside  the  meeting-house, 
he  might  be  heard  by  hundreds  ?  I  believe  not,  and  I  held  the  same  opinion  at  the 
very  beginning  of  my  ministry,  so  I  preached  by  the  river  side,  even  though  my 
good  deacon  thought  that,  by  so  doing,  I  was  imitating  the  Methodists. 

Another  of  those  worthy  brethren,  a  dear  old  Christian  man,  said  to  me,  one 
day,  when  I  was  at  his  house  to  dinner,  "  My  dear  sir,  I  wish  you  would  not  preach 
those  invitation  sermons.  You  are  too  general  in  your  appeals  ;  you  seem  to  press 
the  people  so  much  to  come  to  Christ.  I  do  not  like  it  ;  for  it  is  not  at  all  consistent 
with  my  doctrinal  views."  "Well,"  I  replied,  "what  would  you  have  me  preach?" 
"  Well,  sir,"  he  said,  "  though  I  don't  like  such  preaching,  yet  it  is  evident  that  the 
Lord  does  ;  for  my  son-in-law  was  converted  to  God  under  one  of  those  sermons  ; 
and  when  I  came  home,  the  other  .Sunday,  so  angry  with  you  for  being  such 
a  Fullerite,  there  was  my  daughter  crying  fit  to  break  her  heart  ;  so,"  he  added, 
"don't  you  take  any  notice  of  an  old  man  like  me.  As  long  as  God  blesses  you, 
you  go  on  in  your  own  way."  I  said  to  him,  "  But,  my  dear  brother,  don't  you  think, 
if  God  approves  of  this  kind  of  preaching,  that  you  ought  to  like  it,  too?"  "Well," 
he  answered,  "  perhaps   I   ought ;  but   I   am  an  old  man,   and   I   have  always  been 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  257 

brought  up  in  those  views.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  not  get  out  of  them  ;  but  don't  you 
take  the  slighest  notice  of  what  I  say."  That  was  exactly  what  I  had  determined  in 
my  own  mind  that  I  would  do,  so  we  agreed  after  all. 

One  of  my  Waterbeach  deacons  was  named  King.  He  was  a  very  methodical 
man,  and  kept  the  accounts  and  the  church-books  in  admirable  order.  He  was  a 
calm,  thoughtful,  judicious  brother  ;  but  he  had  a  full  proportion  of  zeal  and  warmth. 
His  wife  was  made  to  match,  and  the  pair  were  second  to  none  in  the  village  for 
grace  and  wisdom.  Mr.  King  was  a  miller  ;  and  in  his  cottage  by  the  mill  I  have 
often  spent  a  happy  night,  and  have  met  his  excellent  son,  who  was  then  the  Pastor 
of  the  Baptist  Church  in  Aldreth,  Cambridgeshire.  I  remember  our  hearty  laugh  at 
the  junior  King,  for  borrowing  a  horse  to  ride  to  a  preaching  engagement,  and  then 
appearing  at  the  place  leading  the  horse,  having  only  ridden  him  a  very  little  way, 
and  walked  with  him  all  the  rest  of  the  road  because  he  seemed  skittish.  The  elder 
Mr.  King  once  gave  me  a  kindly  hint  in  a  very  delicate  manner.  He  did  not 
tell  me  that  I  should  speak  more  guardedly  in  the  pulpit  ;  but  when  I  left  his  house, 
one  Monday  morning,  I  found  a  pin  in  my  Bible,  stuck  through  Titus  ii.  8  :  "  Sound 
speech,  that  cannot  be  condemned  ;  that  he  that  is  of  the  contrary  part  may  be 
ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of  you."  Nothing  could  have  been  in  better  taste. 
The  wise  rebuke  was  well  deserved  and  lovingly  taken.  It  was  so  deftly  given  that 
its  value  was  thereby  increased  indefinitely.  Mr.  King  was  a  deacon  of  deacons  to 
me,  and  to  the  Waterbeach  Church  ;  and  his  son  was  worthy  of  such  a  father. 

On  one  occasion,  there  had  been  a  meeting  to  raise  money  for  home-mission 
work  ;  the  collection  had  just  been  made,  and  the  deacons  had  brought  all  the  plates 
to  the  table-pew,  when  an  old  gentleman  entered.  He  could  not  help  being  late  at 
the  meeting,  though  his  heart  was  there  all  the  time.  His  feet  would  have  carried 
him  down  to  the  chapel  two  hours  before,  only  duty  forbade.  As  soon,  however,  as 
he  had  concluded  his  business,  off  he  walked,  saying  to  himself  "I'm  afraid  I 
shall  be  too  late,  but  I  shall  at  least  hear  how  they  have  got  on.  The  Lord  grant  a 
blessing  on  the  meeting,  and  on  the  good  work  in  hand  !  "  It  was  Father  Sewell, — 
an  Israelite  indeed, — the  very  image  of  Old  Mr.  Honest  in  Bunyan's  Pilgrim's 
Progress.  As  soon  as  I  caught  sight  of  my  aged  friend,  I  said,  "  Our  brother  who 
has  just  come  in  will,  I  am  sure,  close  the  meeting  by  offering  prayer  for  God's 
blessing  on  the  proceedings  of  this  evening."  He  stood  up,  but  he  did  not  pray. 
He  did  not  shut  his  eyes  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  seemed  to  be  looking  for 
something.  He  did  not  clasp  his  hands,  but  put  them  into  his  pockets,  and  fumbled 
there  with  much  perseverance.  "  I  am  afraid,"  I  said,  "  that  my  brother  did  not 
understand  me.  Friend  Sewell,  I  did  not  ask  you  to  give,  but  to  pray."  "  Ay, 
ay  !  "  replied  the  straightforward,  bluff  old  saint,  "  but  I  could  not  pray  till  I  had 
given  ;  it  would  be  hypocrisy  to  ask  a  blessing  on  that  which  I  did  not  think  worth 

R 


258  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

giving  to."  There  was  not  the  least  ostentation  in  the  good  man  ;  it  was  his  honest 
heart  pouring  out  its  true  feeHngs  ;  and,  odd  as  his  behaviour  seemed,  his  conduct 
preached  the  whole  congregation  such  a  sermon  as  they  would  not  readily  forget. 

^  tF  •)?  w 

In  my  first  pastorate,  I  had  often  to  battle  with  Antinomians, — that  is,  people 
who  held  that,  because  they  believed  themselves  to  be  elect,  they  might  live  as  they 
liked.  I  hope  that  heresy  has  to  a  great  extent  died  out,  but  it  was  sadly  prevalent 
in  my  early  ministerial  days.  I  knew  one  man,  who  stood  on  the  table  of  a  public- 
house,  and  held  a  glass  of  gin  in  his  hand,  declaring  all  the  while  that  he  was  one  of 
the  chosen  people  of  God.  They  kicked  him  out  of  the  public-house,  and  when 
I  heard  of  it,  I  felt  that  it  served  him  right.  Even  those  ungodly  men  said  that  they 
did  not  want  any  such  "  elect"  people  there.  There  is  no  one  who  can  live  in  sin, — ■ 
drinking,  swearing,  lying,  and  so  on, — who  can  truly  declare  that  he  is  one  of  the 
Lord's  chosen  people.  I  recollect  one  such  man, — and  he  was  a  very  bad  fellow, — 
yet  he  had  the  hardihood  to  say,  "  I  know  that  I  am  one  of  God's  dear  people." 
"  So  you  are,"  said  I  ;  "  dear  at  any  price,  either  to  be  given  or  thrown  away  !  " 
He  did  not  like  my  plain  speaking,  but  it  was  true  ;  for  that  was  the  only  sense 
in  which  he  was  one  of  God's  dear  people.  From  my  very  soul,  I  detest  everything 
that  in  the  least  savours  of  the  Antinomianism  which  leads  people  to  prate  about 
being  secure  in  Christ  while  they  are  living  in  sin.  We  cannot  be  saved  by  or  for 
our  good  works,  neither  can  we  be  saved  without  good  works.  Christ  never  will 
save  any  of  His  people  in  their  sins  ;  He  saves  His  people  from  their  sins.  If 
a  man  is  not  desiring  to  live  a  holy  life  in  the  sight  of  God,  with  the  help  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  he  is  still  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity."  I 
used  to  know  a  man  of  this  class,  who  talked  a  great  deal  about  ""  saving  faith.'' 
He  was  notorious  for  his  evil  life,  so  I  could  not  make  out  what  he  meant  by  saving 
faith,  until  the  collection  was  taken,  and  I  noticed  how  carefully  he  put  his  finger- 
nail round  a  threepenny  piece  for  fear  lest  it  should  be  a  fourpenny  ;  then  I 
understood  his  meaning.  But  the  idea  of  "  saving  faith  "  apart  from  good  works,  is 
ridiculous.  The  saved  man  is  not  a  perfect  man  ;  but  his  heart's  desire  is  to  become 
perfect,  he  is  always  panting  after  perfection,  and  the  day  will  come  when  he 
will  be  perfected,  after  the  image  of  his  once  crucified  and  now  glorified  Saviour,  in 
knowledge  and  true  holiness. 

While  I  was  minister  at  Waterbeach,  I  used  to  have  a  man  sitting  in  front  of 
the  gallery,  who  would  always  nod  his  head  when  I  was  preaching  what  he  con- 
sidered sound  doctrine,  although  he  was  about  as  bad  an  old  hypocrite  as  ever  lived. 
When  I  talked  about  justification,  down  went  his  head  ;  when  I  preached  about 
imputed  righteousness,  down  it  went  again.  I  was  a  dear  good  man  in  his  estimation, 
without  doubt.      So  I   thought   I   wouid  cure  him  of  nodding,   or  at  least  make  his 


C.     II.     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOUKArHY.  259 

head  keep  still  for  once  ;  so  I  remarked,  "  There  is  a  great  deal  of  difference 
between  God  electing  you,  and  your  electing  yourself ;  a  vast  deal  of  difference 
between  God  justifying  you  by  His  Spirit,  and  your  justifying  yourself  by  a  false 
belief,  or  presumption  ;  this  is  the  difference,"  said  I, — and  the  old  man  at  once  put 
me  down  as  a  rank  Arminian, — "  you  who  have  elected  yourselves,  and  justified 
yourselves,  have  no  marks  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  you  have  no  evidence  of  genuine 
piety,  you  are  not  holy  men  and  women,  you  can  live  in  sin,  you  can  walk  as  sinners 
walk,  you  have  the  image  of  the  devil  upon  you,  and  yet  you  call  yourselves  the 
children  of  God.  One  of  the  first  evidences  that  anyone  is  a  child  of  God  is  that  he 
hates  sin  with  a  perfect  hatred,  and  seeks  to  live  a  holy.  Christlike  life."  The  old 
Antinomian  did  not  approve  of  that  doctrine  ;  but  I  knew  that  1  was  preaching  what 
was  revealed  in  the  Word  of  God. 

There  was  another  man,  of  that  sort,  who  at  one  time  frequently  walked  out 
with  me  into  the  villages  where  I  was  going  to  preach.  I  was  glad  of  his  company 
.  till  1  found  out  certain  facts  as  to  his  manner  of  life,  and  then  I  shook  him  off,  and  I 
believe  he  hooked  himself  on  to  somebody  else,  for  he  must  needs  be  gadding  abroad 
every  evening  of  the  week.  He  had  many  children,  and  they  grew  up  to  be  wicked 
men  and  women  ;  and  the  reason  was,  that  the  father,  while  he  was  constantly  busy 
at  this  meeting  and  that,  never  tried  to  bring  his  own  boys  and  girls  to  the  Saviour. 
He  said  to  me,  one  day,  "  I  never  laid  my  hand  upon  my  children  ;  "  so  I  answered, 
"  Then  I  think  it  is  very  likely  that  God  will  lay  His  hand  upon  you."  "  Oh  !  "  he 
said,  "  I  have  not  even  spoken  sharply  to  them."  "  Then,"  I  replied,  "  it  is  highly 
probable  that  God  will  speak  very  sharply  to  you  ;  for  it  is  not  His  will  that  parents 
should  leave  their  children  unrestrained  in  their  sin." 

I  knew  another  man,  in  those  early  days,  who  used  to  travel  a  long  distance 
every  Sabbath  to  hear  what  he  called  "  the  truth."  Neither  his  wife  nor  any  of  his 
children  went  to  any  place  of  worship,  and  when  I  talked  to  him  very  seriously  about 
them,  he  told  me  that  "  the  Lord  would  save  His  own  ;"  to  which  I  could  not  help 
replying  that  the  Lord  would  not  "  own  "  him.  He  demanded  my  authority  for  that 
statement,  so  I  gave  him  this  proof-text,  "  If  any  provide  not  for  his  own,  and 
specially  for  those  of  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an 
infidel."  One  of  his  companions  said  to  me,  one  day,  that  he  knew  how  many 
children  of  God  there  were  in  the  parish  were  he  lived  ;  there  were  exactly  yfj'r.  I 
was  curious  to  learn  their  names,  so  I  asked  him  who  the  five  were,  and  much  to  mv 
amusement  he  began  by  saying,  "There  is  myself."  I  stopped  him  at  this  point,  with 
the  query  whether  he  was  quite  sure  about  the  ^rst  one.  Since  then,  his  character 
has  gone  I  know  not  where,  but  certainly  he  will  get  on  better  without  it  than  with 
it  ;  yet  he  was  the  first  on  his  own  list,  and  a  few  others  of  the  same  black  sort  made 
up  the  five.     There  were,  in  the   other  places  of  worship  to   which  he  did  not  go. 


26o  ■  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

men,  whose  characters  for  integrity  and  uprightness,  ay,  and  for  spirituality  and 
prayerfuhiess,  would  have  been  degraded  by  being  put  into  comparison  with  his  ; 
yet  he  set  himself  up  as  judge  in  Israel,  and  pretended  to  know  exactly  how  many 
people  of  God  were  in  the  village.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  I 
bless  God  that  I  have  learned  to  have  very  little  respect  for  the  vision  of  the  man 
with  the  measuring  line.  When  I  see  an  angel  with  it,  I  am  okd  enough  ;  but  when 
I  see  a  man  with  it,  I  tell  him  that  he  must  give  me  a  warrant  from  God,  and  show 
me  how  he  is  to  know  the  elect  by  any  other  method  than  that  laid  down  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  :   "  By  their  fruits  shall  ye  know  them." 

I  have  sometimes  been  greatly  obliged  to  a  wicked  world  for  what  it  has  done 
to  inconsistent  professors  of  religion.  While  I  Vvas  Pastor  at  Waterbeach,  a  certain 
young  man  joined  the  church.  We  thought  he  was  a  changed  character,  but  there 
used  to  be  in  the  village,  once  a  year,  a  great  temptation  in  the  form  of  a  feast  ;  and 
when  the  feast  came  round,  this  foolish  fellow  was  there  in  very  evil  company.  He 
was  in  the  long  room  of  a  public-house,  in  the  evening,  and  when  I  heard  what 
happened,  I  really  felt  intense  gratitude  to  the  landlady  of  that  place.  When  she 
came  in,  and  saw  him  there,  she  said,  "  Halloa,  Jack  So-and-so,  are  you  here  ? 
Why,  you  are  one  of  Spurgeon's  lot,  yet  you  are  here  ;  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of 
yourself.  This  is  not  fit  company  for  you.  Put  him  out  of  the  window,  boys."  And 
they  did  put  him  out  of  the  window  on  the  Friday  night,  and  we  put  him  out  of  the 
door  on  the  Sunday,  for  we  removed  his  name  from  our  church-book.  Where  was  he 
to  go  to  }  The  world  would  not  have  him,  and  the  church  would  not  have  him  ;  if  he 
had  been  all  for  the  world,  the  world  would  have  made  something  of  him  ;  and  if  he 
had  been  all  for  Christ,  Christ  would  have  made  something  of  him.  But  as  he  tried 
to  be  a  little  for  each,  and  so  nothing  to  either,  his  life  became  a  wretched  one  ;  as  he 
walked  the  streets,  people  pointed  at  him  with  scorn.  The  Christians  turned  away, 
thinking  him  a  hypocrite,  as  I  fear  he  was  ;  and  the  worldlings  called  him  one,  and 
made  his  name  a  by-word  and  a  proverb. 

In  those  early  days,  I  had  sometimes  to  contend  with  the  Antinominian 
preachers  as  well  as  with  their  people.  I  once  found  myself  in  the  midst  of  a 
company  of  ministers  and  friends,  who  were  disputing  whether  it  was  a  sin  in  men 
that  they  did  not  believe  the  gospel.  Whilst  they  were  discussing,  I  said, 
"  Gentlemen,  am  I  in  the  presence  of  Christians  ?  Are  you  believers  in  the  Bible, 
or  are  you  not  .-^ "  They  said,  "We  are  Christians,  of  course."  "Then,"  said  I, 
"does  not  the  Scripture  say,  'of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  Me'.''  And  is  it 
not  the  damning  sin  of  men,  that  they  do  not  believe  on  Christ  .■* "  I  should  not 
have  imagined,  if  I  had  not  myself  heard  them,  that  any  persons  would  be  so  wicked 
as  to  venture  to  assert  that  "  it  is  no  sin  for  a  sinner  not  to  believe  on  Christ."      I 


c.    H.    spukgeon's   AUTOBiOGRArav.  261 

should  have  thought  that,  however  far  they  might  wish  to  push  their  sentiments, 
they  would  not  tell  a  lie  to  uphold  the  truth  ;  and,  in  my  opinion,  this  is  what  such 
men  really  do.  Truth  is  a  strong  tower,  and  never  requires  to  be  buttressed  with 
error.  God's  Word  will  stand  against  all  man's  devices.  I  would  never  invent 
a  sophism  to  prove  that  it  is  no  sin  on  the  part  of  the  ungodly  not  to  believe,  for  I 
am  sure  it  is.  When  I  am  taught  in  the  Scriptures  that  "  this  is  the  condemnation, 
that  light  is  come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  light," 
and  when  I  reati,  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not 
believed  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,"  I  affirm,  and  the  Word 
declares  it,  unbelief  is  a  sin.  Surely,  with  rational  and  unprejudiced  persons,  it 
cannot  require  any  reasoning  to  prove  it.  Is  it  not  a  sin  for  a  creature  to  doubt  the 
Word  of  its  Maker?  Is  it  not  a  crime  and  an  insult  to  the  Deity,  for  me,  an  atom, 
a  particle  of  dust,  to  dare  to  deny  His  Words  ?  Is  it  not  the  very  summit  of 
arrogance  and  the  height  of  pride  for  a  son  of  Adam  to  say,  even  in  his  heart,  "  God, 
I  doubt  Thy  grace  ;  God,  I  doubt  Thy  love  ;  God,  I  doubt  Thy  power "  ?  I  feel 
that,  could  we  roll  all  sins  into  one  mass, — could  we  take  murder,  blasphemy,  lust, 
adultery,  fornication,  and  everything  that  is  vile,  and  unite  them  all  into  one  vast 
globe  of  black  corruption, — they  would  not  even  then  equal  the  sin  of  unbelief  This 
is  the  monarch  sin,  the  quintessence  of  guilt,  the  mixture  of  the  venom  of  all  crimes, 
the  dregs  of  the  wine  of  Gomorrah  ;  it  is  the  Al  sin,  the  masterpiece  of  Satan,  the 
chief  work  of  the  devil.  Unbelief  hardened  the  heart  of  Pharaoh, — it  gave  license 
to  the  tongue  of  blaspheming  Rabshakeh, — yea,  it  became  a  deicide,  and  murdered 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Unbelief!  it  has  mixed  many  a  cup  of  poison  ;  it  has 
brought  thousands  to  the  gallows,  and  many  to  a  shameful  grave,  who  have 
murdered  themselves,  and  rushed  with  bloody  hands  before  their  Creator's  tribunal, 
because  of  unbelief  Give  me  an  unbeliever, — let  me  know  that  he  doubts  God's 
Word, — let  me  know  that  he  distrusts  His  promise  and  His  threatening;  and  with 
that  for  a  premise,  I  will  conclude  that  the  man  shall,  by-and-by,  unless  there 
is  amazing  restraining  power  exerted  upon  him,  be  guilty  of  the  foulest  and  blackest 
crimes.  Unbelief  is  a  Beelzebub  sin  ;  like  Beelzebub,  it  is  the  leader  of  all  evil 
spirits.  It  is  said  of  Jeroboam  that  he  sinned,  and  made  Israel  to  sin  ;  and  it  may 
be  said  of  unbelief  that  it  not  onlv  itself  sins,  but  it  makes  others  sin  ;  it  is  the  eCT?  of 
all  crime,  the  seed  of  every  offence  ;  in  fact,  everything  that  is  evil  and  vile  lies 
couched  in  that  one  word — unbelief 

In  striking  contrast  to  those  apologists  for  sin,  I  met  in  my  first  pastorate,  as 
I  have  often  done  since,  a  number  of  persons  who  professed  to  be  perfect,  and  who 
said  that  they  had  lived  so  many  months  or  years  without  sinning  against  God. 
One  man,  who  told  me  that  he  was  perfect,  was  hump-backed  ;  and  when  I  remarked 


262  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

that  I  thought,  if  he  were  a  perfect  man,  he  ought  to  have  a  perfect  body,  he  became 
so  anory  that  I  said  to  him,  "Well,  my  friend,  \{  rou  are  perfect,  there  are  a  great 
many  more  as  near  perfection  as  you  are."  "  Oh  !  "  he  exclaimed,  "  I  shall  feel  it  for 
having  been  betrayed  into  anger."  He  said  that  he  had  not  been  angry  for  many  years  ; 
I  had  brouo-ht  him  back  to  his  old  state  of  infirmity,  and  painful  as  it  might  be  for  him, 
I  have  no  doubt  that  it  did  him  good  to  see  himself  as  he  really  was.  When  a  man 
thinks  that  he  is  a  full-grown  Christian,  he  reminds  me  of  a  poor  boy  whom  I  used 
to  see.  He  had  such  a  splendid  head  for  his  body  that  he  had  often  to  lay  it  on  a 
pillow,  for  it  was  too  weighty  for  his  shoulders  to  carry,  and  his  mother  told  me  that, 
when  he  tried  to  stand  up,  he  often  tumbled  down,  overbalanced  by  his  heavy  head. 
There  are  some  people  who  appear  to  grow  very  fast,  but  they  have  water  on  the 
brain,  and  are  out  of  due  proportion  ;  but  he  who  truly  grows  in  grace  does  not  say, 
"  Dear  me  !  I  can  feel  that  I  am  growing  ;  bless  the  Lord  !  Let's  sing  a  hymn,  '  I'm 
a  growing  !  I'm  a  growing  !  '  "  1  have  often  felt  that  I  was  growing  smaller  ;  I  think 
that  is  very  probable,  and  a  good  thing,  too.  If  we  are  very  great  in  our  own 
estimation,  it  is  because  we  have  a  number  of  cancers,  or  foul  gatherings,  that  need 
to  be  lanced,  so  as  to  let  out  the  bad  matter  that  causes  us  to  boast  of  our  bigness. 

Our  Wesleyan  brethren  have  a  notion  that  they  are  going  to  be  perfect  here  on 
earth.  I  should  be  very  glad  to  see  them  when  they  are  perfect  ;  and  if  any  of  them 
happen  to  be  in  the  position  of  servants,  wanting  situations,  I  would  be  happy  to 
give  them  any  amount  of  wages  I  could  spare,  for  I  should  feel  myself  highly 
honoured  and  greatly  blessed  in  having  perfect  servants  ;  and  what  is  more,  if  any  of 
them  are  masters,  and  need  servants,  I  would  undertake  to  come  and  serve  them 
without  any  wages  at  all  if  I  could  but  find  a  perfect  master.  I  have  had  one  perfect 
Master  ever  since  I  first  knew  the  Lord,  and  if  I  could  be  sure  that  there  is  another 
perfect  master,  I  should  be  greatly  pleased  to  have  him  as  an  under-master,  while  the 
great  Supreme  must  ever  be  chief  of  all.  One  man,  who  said  he  was  perfect,  called 
upon  me  once,  and  asked  me  to  go  and  see  him,  for  I  should  receive  valuable 
instruction  from  him  if  I  did.  I  said,  "  I  have  no  doubt  it  would  be  so  ;  but  I  should 
not  like  to  go  to  your  house,  I  think  I  should  hardly  be  able  to  get  into  one  of  your 
rooms."  "  How  is  that  ?  "  he  enquired.  "Well,  "  1  replied,  "  I  suppose  that  your 
house  would  be  so  full  of  angels  that  there  would  be  no  room  for  me."  He  did 
not  like  that  remark  ;  and  when  I  made  one  or  two  other  playful  observations,  he 
went  into  a  towering  rage.  "  Well,  friend,"  I  said  to  him,  "  I  think,  after  all,  I  am  as 
perfect  as  you  are  ;  but  do /'^;yvrf /"  7nen  ever  get  angry?"  He  denied  that  he  was 
angry,  although  there  was  a  peculiar  redness  about  his  cheeks,  and  a  fiery  flash  in 
his  eyes,  that  is  very  common  to  persons  when  they  are  in  a  passion.  At  any  rate,  I 
think  I  rather  .spoiled  his  perfection,  for  he  evidendy  went  home  much  less  satisfied 
with  himself  than  when  he  came  out.      I   met  another  man  who  considered  himself 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAniV.  263 

perfect,  but  he  was  thoroughly  mad  ;  and  I  do  not  beUeve  that  any  of  the  pretenders 
to  perfection  are  better  than  good  maniacs,  a  superior  kind  of  Bedlamites  ;  for,  while 
a  man  has  got  a  spark  of  reason  left  in  him,  he  cannot,  unless  he  is  the  most 
impudent  of  impostors,  talk  about  being  perfect.  He  who  imagines  such  a  thing 
must  be  insane  ;  for  any  man  who  examines  himself  for  five  minutes,  in  the  light  of 
God's  Word,  will  find  enough  in  his  own  heart  to  drive  from  him  any  shadow  of  a 
thought  about  being  perfect  in  this  world.  I  have  little  patience  with  such  wilfully 
blind  people,  and  when  I  hear  of  some  who  are  said  to  be  perfecdy  holy,  and  of 
others  who  are  utterly  foolish,  I  think  the  two  classes  are  wonderfully  alike.  I  have 
met  with  a  few  people  who  seemed  to  me  almost  perfect,  but  they  have  been  the 
very  ones  who  have  groaned  most  over  their  own  imperfections  ;  while  those  with 
whom  I  have  come  into  contact,  who  have  professed  to  be  holy  and  without  blemish, 
have  been  the  most  imperfect  individuals  I  have  ever  known. 

My  own  experience  is  a  daily  struggle  with  the  evil  within.  I  wish  I  could 
find  in  myself  something  friendly  to  grace  ;  but,  hitherto,  I  have  searched  my  nature 
through,  and  have  found  everything  in  rebellion  against  God.  At  one  time,  there 
comes  the  torpor  of  sloth,  when  one  ought  to  be  active  every  moment,  having  so 
much  to  do  for  God,  and  for  the  souls  of  men,  and  so  little  time  in  which  to  do  it. 
At  another  time,  there  comes  the  quickness  of  passion  ;  when  one  should  be  calm 
and  cool,  and  play  the  Christian,  bearing  with  patience  whatever  has  to  be  endured, 
there  come  the  unadvised  word  and  the  rash  expression.  Anon,  I  am  troubled  with 
conceit,  the  devilish  whisper, — I  can  call  it  no  less, — -"  How  well  thou  hast  done  ! 
How  nobly  thou  hast  played  thy  part!"  Then  crawls  out  distrust, — foul  and 
faithless, — suggesting  that  God  does  not  regard  the  affairs  of  men,  and  will  not  inter- 
pose on  my  behalf  Yet,  what  would  I  not  give  if  I  might  but  be  perfect  !  Some- 
times, I  think  that,  if  God's  people  mentioned  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  had 
all  been  perfect,  I  should  have  despaired  ;  but,  because  they  seem  to  have  had  just 
the  kind  of  faults  I  grieve  over  in  myself,  I  do  not  feel  any  more  lenient  toward  my 
faults,  but  I  do  rejoice  that  I  also  may  say  with  each  of  them,  "The  Lord  v^'iW  perfect 
that  which  concerneth  me."  He  will  most  assuredly,  beyond  a  doubt,  bring  to 
perfection  my  faith,  my  love,  my  hope,  and  every  grace.  He  will  perfect  His  own 
purposes  ;  He  will  perfect  His  promises,  He  will  perfect  my  body,  and  perfect  my 
soul.  While  I  am  fully  persuaded  that  perfection  is  absolutely  impossible  to  any 
man  beneath  the  sky,  I  feel  equally  sure  that,  to  every  believer,  future  perfection  is 
certain  beyond  a  doubt.  The  day  shall  come  when  the  Lord  shall  not  only  make  us 
better,  but  shall  make  us  perfectly  pure  and  holy  ;  when  He  shall  not  merely  subdue 
our  lusts,  but  when  He  shall  cast  the  demons  out  altogether  ;  when  He  shall  make  us 
holy,  and  unblameable,  and  unreprovable  in  His  sight.  That  day,  however,  I 
believe,  shall  not  come   until  we  enter  into  the  joy  of  our   Lord,  and  are  glorified 


264  C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAniY. 

together  with   Christ   in    Heaven.      Then,   but    not   till   then,    shall    He  present  us 
"faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with  exceeding  joy." 

*  *  *  * 

While  I  was  going  about  the  Cambridgeshire  villages,  preaching  and  visiting, 
it  often  saddened  me  to  see,  especially  in  the  houses  of  the  poor,  Roman  Catholic 
pictures  hanging  on  the  walls, — I  suppose,  because  they  happened  to  be  rather 
pretty,  and  very  cheap.  Popish  publishers  have  very  cleverly  managed  to  get  up 
pictures  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  the  lying  fable  of  her  assumption  to  Heaven,  and 
all  sorts  of  legends  of  saints  and  saintesses  ;  and  being  brightly  coloured,  and  sold 
at  a  low  price,  these  vile  productions  have  been  introduced  into  thousands  of 
houses.  I  have  seen,  to  my  horror,  a  picture  of  God  the  Father  represented  as 
an  old  man, — a  conception  almost  too  hideous  to  mention, — yet  the  picture  is 
hung  up  in  the  cottages  of  England  ;  whereas  the  Lord  has  expressly  commanded 
us  not  to  make  any  likeness  or  image  of  Him,  or  to  try  to  represent  His  appearance 
in  any  way,  and  any  attempt  to  do  so  is  disobedient  and  even  blasphemous. 

It  was  grievous  also  to  find  what  gross  ignorance  prevailed  among  many  of  the 
villagers  concerning  the  way  of  salvation.  They  seemed,  somehow,  to  have  got  into 
their  heads  the  notion  that  they  could  not  be  saved  because  they  could  not  read,  and 
did  not  know  much.  Frequently,  when  I  asked  anything  about  personal  salvation,  I 
received  the  answer,  "  Oh,  sir,  I  never  had  any  learning  !  "  and  that  was  suppQsed  to 
be  a  sufficient  excuse  for  not  having  repented  of  sin,  and  trusted  in  the  Saviour. 
Yet  the  unlearned  need  not  stay  away  from  Christ.  It  was  said  ot  an  old  Greek 
philosopher,  that  he  wrote  over  his  door,  "  None  but  the  learned  may  enter  here  ;  '* 
but  Christ,  on  the  contrary,  writes  over  His  door,  "  He  that  is  simple,  let  him  tura 
in  hither."  I  can  testify  that  great  numbers  of  those  humble  country  folk  accepted 
the  Saviour's  invitation,  and  it  was  delightful  to  see  what  a  firm  grip  they  afterwards 
had  of  the  verities  of  the  faith  ;  many  of  them  became  perfect  masters  in  divinity. 
I  used  to  think,  sometimes,  that  if  they  had  degrees  who  deserved  them,  diplomas 
would  often  be  transferred,  and  given  to  those  who  hold  the  plough-handle  or  work 
at  the  carpenter's  bench  ;  for  there  is  often  more  divinity  in  the  little  finger  of  a 
ploughman  than  there  is  in  the  whole  body  of  some  of  our  modern  divines.  "  Don't 
they  understand  divinity.^"  someone  asks.  Yes,  in  the  letter  of  it;  but  as  to  the 
spirit  and  life  of  it,  D.  D.  often  means  Doubly  Destitute. 

An  incident  that  I  once  witnessed  at  Waterbeach  furnished  me  with  an 
illustration  concerning  death.  A  company  of  villagers,  the  younger  branches  of  a 
family,  were  about  to  emigrate  to  another  land.  The  aged  mother,  who  had  not 
for  some  years  left  her  cottage  fireside,  came  to  the  railway-station  from  which  they 
must  start.  I  stood  among  the  sorrowful  group  as  their  friend  and  minister.  I  think 
I  see  the  many  embraces  which  the  fond  mother  gave  to  her  son  and  daughter,  and 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRAI'lIV.  265 

her  little  grandchildren  ;  I  can  picture  them  folding  their  arms  about  her  aged  neck, 
and  then  saying  farewell  to  all  the  friends  in  the  village  who  had  come  to  bid  them 
adieu.  A  shrill  sound  is  heard  ;  it  sends  a  pang  through  all  hearts,  as  if  it  were  the 
messenger  of  death  to  her  who  is  about  to  lose  the  props  of  her  household.  In 
great  haste,  at  the  small  village  station,  the  passengers  are  hurried  to  their  seats  ; 
they  thrust  their  heads  out  of  the  carriage  window  ;  the  aged  parent  stands  on  the 
very  edge  of  the  platform  that  she  may  take  her  last  look  at  them.  There  is  a 
whistle  from  the  engine,  and  away  goes  the  train.  In  an  instant,  the  poor  woman, 
jumping  from  the  platform,  rushes  along  the  railway,  with  all  her  might  crying,  "  My 
children  !  My  children  !  My  children  !  They  are  gone,  and  I  shall  never  see  them 
again."  The  illustration  may  not  be  classical  ;  but,  nevertheless,  I  have  been 
reminded  of  it  by  many  a  death,  when  I  have  seen  the  godly  suddenly  snatched 
away.  They  have  gone  from  us,  swifdy  as  the  wind  itself  could  bear  them,  or  as  the 
hasty  waves  of  the  sea  could  bury  them  out  of  our  sight.  It  is  our  affliction  and 
trouble  that  we  must  remain  behind  and  weep,  for  they  are  gone  beyond  recall  ; 
yet  there  is  something  pleasant  in  the  picture.  It  is  but  a  departure  ; — they  are  not 
destroyed  ;  they  are  not  blown  to  atoms  ;  they  are  not  taken  away  to  prison  ; — 'tis 
but  a  departure  from  one  place  to  another.  They  still  live  ;  they  still  are  blessed. 
While  we  weep,  they  are  rejoicing  ;  while  we  mourn,  they  are  singing  psalms  of 
praise  ;  and,  by-and-by,  in  God's  good  time,  we  shall  meet  them  again,  to  be  parted 
no  more  for  ever. 

*  *  i'f  # 

There  was  an  amusing  incident  in  my  early  Waterbeach  ministry  which  I  have 
never  forgotten.  One  day,  a  gentleman,  who  was  then  mayor  of  Cambridge,  and 
who  had  more  than  once  tried  to  correct  my  youthful  mistakes,  asked  me  if  I  really 
had  told  my  congregation  that,  if  a  thief  got  into  Heaven,  he  would  begin  picking 
the  angels'  pockets.  "Yes,  sir,"  I  replied,  "  I  told  them  that,  if  it  .were  possible  for 
an  ungodly  man  to  go  to  Heaven  without  having  his  nature  changed,  he  would  be 
none  the  better  for  being  there  ;  and  then,  by  way  of  illustration,  I  said  that,  were  a 
thief  to  get  in  among  the  glorified,  he  would  remain  a  thief  still,  and  he  would  go 
round  the  place  picking  the  angels'  pockets  !  "  "  But,  my  dear  young  friend," 
asked  Mr.  Brimley,  very  seriously,  "  don't  you  know  that  the  angels  haven't  any 
pockets  ?  "  "  No,  sir,"  I  replied,  with  equal  gravity,  "  I  did  not  know  that  ;  but  I 
am  glad  to  be  assured  of  the  fact  from  a  gentleman  who  does  know.  I  will  take 
care  to  put  it  all  right  the  first  opportunity  I  get."  The  following  Monday  morning, 
I  walked  into  Mr.  Brimley's  shop,  and  said  to  him,  "  I  set  that  matter  right  yester- 
day, sir,"  "What  matter?"  he  enquired.  "Why,  about  the  angels'  pockets!" 
"  What  did  you  say  ?  "  he  asked,  in  a  tone  almost  of  despair  at  what  he  might  hear 
next.      "Oh,  sir,  I  just  told  the  people  I  was  sorry  to  say  that  1  had  made  a  mistake 


266  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  last  time  I  preached  to  them  ;  but  that  I  had  met  a  gentleman — the  mayor  of 
Cambridge, — who  had  assured  me  that  the  angels  had  no  pockets,  so  I  must  correct 
what  I  had  said,  as  I  did  not  want  anybody  to  go  away  with  a  false  notion  about 
Heaven.  I  would  therefore  say  that,  if  a  thief  got  among  the  angels  without  having 
his  nature  changed,  he  would  try  to  steal  the  feathers  out  of  their  wings  !  "  "  Surely, 
you  did  not  say  that  ?  "  said  Mr.  Brimley.  "  I  did,  though,"  I  replied.  "  Then," 
he  exclaimed,  "  I'll  never  try  to  set  you  right  again,"  which  was  just  exactly  what  I 
wanted  him  to  say. 

Once,  while  I  was  at  Waterbeach,  I  had  a  sleepy  congregation.  It  was  on 
a  Sabbath  afternoon  ; — those  afternoon  services  in  our  English  villages  are  usually  a 
doleful  waste  of  effort.  Roast  beef  and  pudding  lie  heavy  on  the  hearers'  souls,  and 
the  preacher  himself  is  deadened  in  his  mental  processes  while  digestion  claims  the 
mastery  of  the  hour.  The  people  had  been  eating  too  much  dinner,  so  they  came  to 
chapel  heavy  and  dull,  and  belore  long  many  of  them  were  nodding.  So  I  tried  an 
old  expedient  to  rouse  them.  I  shouted  with  all  my  might,  "  Fire  !  Fire  !  Fire  !  " 
When,  starting  from  their  seats,  some  of  my  hearers  asked  where  it  was,  I  answered, 
as  other  preachers  had  done  in  similar  circumstances,  "  In  hell,  for  sinners  who  will 
not  accept  the  Saviour." 

On  another  occasion,  I  had  a  trouble  of  quite  a  different  character.  I  had 
preached  on  the  Sunday  morning,  and  gone  home  to  dinner,  as  was  my  wont,  with 
one  of  the  congregation.  The  afternoon  sermon  came  so  close  behind  the  morning 
one,  that  it  was  difficult  to  prepare  the  soul,  especially  as  the  dinner  was  a  necessary 
but  serious  inconvenience  where  a  clear  brain  was  required.  By  a  careful  measuring 
of  diet,  I  remained  in  an  earnest,  lively  condition  ;  but,  to  my  dismay,  I  found  that 
the  pre-arranged  line  of  thought  was  gone  from  me.  I  could  not  find  the  trail 
of  my  prepared  sermon  ;  and  press  my  forehead  as  I  might,  the  missing  topic  would 
not  come.  Time  was  brief,  the  hour  was  striking,  and  in  some  alarm  I  told  the 
honest  farmer  that  I  could  not  for  the  life  of  me  recollect  what  I  had  intended 
to  preach  about.  "  Oh  !"  he  said,  "never  mind  ;  you  will  be  sure  to  have  a  good 
word  for  us."  Just  at  that  moment,  a  blazing  block  of  wood  fell  out  of  the  fire  upon 
the  hearth  at  my  feet,  smoking  into  my  eyes  and  nose  at  a  great  rate.  "There," 
said  the  farmer,  "  there's  a  text  for  you,  sir,—'  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the 
fire  ?  '"  "  No,"  I  thought,  "  it  was  not  plucked  out,  for  it  fell  out  of  itself."  Here, 
however,  was  a  text,  an  illustration,  and  a  leading  thought  as  a  nest-egg  for  more. 
Further  light  came,  and  the  discourse  was  certainly  not  worse  than  my  more 
prepared  effusions  ;  it  was  better  in  the  best  sense,  for  one  or  two  came  forward 
declaring  themselves  to  have  been  aroused  and  converted  through  that  afternoon's 
sermon.  I  have  always  considered  that  it  was  a  happy  circumstance  that  I  had 
forgotten  the  text  from  which  I  had  intended  to  preach. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  267 

(The  following  is  a  facsimile  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Outline  of  the  discourse  that 
came  to  him  in  this  singular  manner.  In  this  instance,  the  notes  must  have  been 
written  out  afterwards.  The  numbers  at  the  foot  of  the  Outline  mean  that  the 
service  at  Waterbeach,  that  Sabbath  afternoon,  was  the  412th  time  that  Mr.  Spurgeon 
had  preached, — although  he  was  then  only  eighteen  years  of  age, — and  that  he  took 
the  same  subject  again  at  si.x  other  places.) 


^^^^'^V^'^%''^*''^  —  ^?i^^t^^^tz^  fl^'?^.^^  ^^t^:^^Ct^-t.c^ /^    ^^^e<a^.?^^i>**^^ 


/        f/  ^  ^^  /"         j^         /  "^^^^ 

^  •   f-^if  /^^^^  ^^^^    r^^^^ /J^c^Z^c/ ^^-^^^ 
^2.  /i/r  ^//,  ^//^.  ^3f.  Stff  Jg^, 


CHAPTER    XXIV. 


JHtmorablt  Seiticts  aiuau  from  TOatctbtacij. 


^iFTER  I  had  been  preaching  at  Waterbeach  for  about  a  year  or  so, 
I  was  invited  to  conduct  anniversary  and  other  special  services  in 
various  places.  On  several  occasions,  I  had  very  curious  ex- 
periences. One  eccentric  individual,  whose  acquaintance  I  made 
in  those  early  days,  was  Mr.  Potto  Brown,  "the  miller  of 
Houghton."  He  asked  me  over  to  preach  in-  his  chapel,  and 
from  Saturday  night  to  Monday  morning  I  had  the  felicitous  misery  of  being  his 
guest, — I  can  use  no  other  term  to  describe  the  strange  mixture  of  emotions  that  I 
felt  while  under  his  roof.  Nothing  of  special  interest  occurred  the  first  night,  but 
when  I  came  downstairs,  the  following  morning,  Mr.  Brown  said  to  me,  "  We  always 
provide  two  eggs  for  the  minister's  breakfast  on  Sunday  morning  ;  the  phosphorus 
i-i  them  feeds  the  brain,  and  it  looks  as  though  you  will  need  plenty  of  mental 
nourishment  to-day."  I  made  no  reply  to  this  remark,  thinking  it  was  better  to  bide 
my  time,  and  when  I  did  open  fire,  to  give  him  such  a  broadside  as  he  did  not 
expect.  There  were  three  services  during  the  day  ;  Mr.  Brown  preached  in 
the  morning,  a  neighbouring  minister  in  the  afternoon,  and  myself  at  night.  After 
we  had  returned  to  my  host's  house,  and  had  taken  supper,  the  good  man  leaned 
back  in  his  easy  chair,  with  his  eyes  closed  and  the  fingertips  of  each  hand  touching, 
and  began  to  soliloquize  aloud: — "O  Lord,  we  thank  Thee  for  a  good  day  all 
through  !  In  the  morning,  Lord,  Thy  unworthy  ser\'ant  was  privileged  to  speak  in 
Thy  name, — with  some  degree  of  liberty,  and  he  hopes  also  with  some  measure  of 
acceptance  to  the  people.  In  the  afternoon,  a  worthy  brother  preached  a  good, 
sound,  solid,  gospel  sermon  ; — nothing  very  brilliant  ;  but,  still,  likely  to  be  useful. 
In  the  evening.  Lord,  we  had  a  regular  steam-engine, — ran  over  everything  and 
everybody."  Then,  opening  his  eyes,  and  looking  across  at  me,  he  began  a  dialogue 
which,  as  nearlv  as  I  can  recollect  it,  ran  as  follows  : — 


Brown. — Young  man,  whoever  persuaded  you  that  you  could  preach  ? 
Spurgeon. —  I    believe,   sir,  that  the   Lord  called  me  to  this  work,  and   I   have 
found  a  good  many  people  who  are  of  the  same  opinion. 
B. — How  longf  have  vou  been  a  minister  ? 
S. — A  little  more  than  twelve  months. 


270  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

B. — How  many  souls  did  you  save,  last  year  ? 

S. — None,  sir. 

B. — None  ?  You  have  been  a  minister  twelve  months,  and  yet  there  have  been 
no  souls  saved.  You  ought  to  be  ashamed  to  confess  it  ;  though,  if  you  have 
preached  the  same  doctrines  as  you  gave  us  to-night,  I  am  not  surprised  to  hear  that 
no  souls  have  been  saved. 

S. — I  did  not  say  that  souls  had  not  been  saved  ;  I  said  that  I  did  not  save  any. 
I  am  happy  to  know  that  the  Lord  has  saved  some  through  my  instrumentality. 

B. — Most  of  your  brethren  would  have  said,  ''humble  instrumentality,"  when,  all 
the  while,  they  were  as  proud  as  Lucifer.  But  that  is  only  the  common  ministerial 
cant  ;  you  knew  well  enough  what  I  meant.      Well,  how  many  were  converted  .-^ 

S. — Twenty-one,  I   believe,  sir. 

B. — How  often  do  you  preach  ? 

S. — Three  times  on  the  Sunday,  and  once  in  the  week,  at  Waterbeach  ;  and 
nearly  every  night  in  the  week  somewhere  else. 

B. — We  will  onlv  reckon  the  Sunday  morning  and  evening  sermons  ;  afternoon 
services  never  save  anybody,  the  people  are  too  sleepy  to  listen  after  dinner.  So, 
let  us  say,  a  hundred  and  four  sermons,  and  twenty-one  souls  saved  ;  that  is  eighty- 
three  sermons  wasted  !  Indeed,  we  might  say,  a  hundred  and  three,  for  the  whole 
twenty-one  souls  might  just  as  well  have  been  saved  under  one  sermon.  Do  you 
live  at  Waterbeach  ? 

S. — No,  sir  ;   I  live  at  Cambridge,  where  I  teach  in  a  school. 

B. — Oh,  then  ;  you  are  only  an  apprentice  boy  at  present,  just  trying  your  hand 
at  preaching  !  Your  ministry  is  a  sort  of  oft-hand  farm,  to  be  cultivated  at  odd 
times.     What  salary  do  your  people  give  you  .^ 

S.— ^45  a  year. 

B. — Oh,  that  accounts  for  everything  !  Souls  can't  be  saved  under  ^100  a 
year  ;  that  is,  of  course,  where  the  people  can  afford  to  pay  it,  and  that  amount 
is  little  enough  for  any  minister.  W^ell,  now,  my  young  friend,  let  me  give  you  a  bit 
of  good  advice.  You'll  never  make  a  preacher  ;  so  just  give  it  up,  and  stick  to  your 
teaching. 

When,  in  after  years,  I  reminded  him  of  his  advice  and  prophecy,  he  used 
waggishly  to  say,  "  Ah  !  there's  no  knowing  how  much  good  a  man  may  do  by  a 
little  timely  correction  ;  no  doubt  my  sharp  speech  put  you  on  your  mettle."  That 
was  really  the  case,  though  not  in  the  sense  he  meant.  I  soon  discovered  that  he 
was  a  rank  Arminian,  and  when  he  attacked  the  Calvinism  that  was  so  dear  to  me, 
I  denounced  his  system  of  doctrine  as  being  worthless  theology.  I  found  that  he 
used  to  give  his  money  to  different  Missionary  Societies  according  to  the  proportion 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUT(  JiUOCiKAI'l  lY.  2^1 

of  converts  they  reported  as  brought  to  the  Lord  at  the  lowest  possible  cost  !  He 
would  take  the  various  Annual  Reports,  divide  the  amount  expended  by  the  number 
of  additions  to  the  churches,  and  then  subscribe  the  most  where  the  amount  per 
head  was  the  least !  There  was  a  modicum  of  truth  at  the  back  of  what  he  said  ; 
but  I  was  really  shocked  by  the  way  he  talked  about  conversions  being  dependent 
upon  the  money  contributed,  so  I  spoke  out  my  opinion  as  freely  as  he  did  his,  and 
gave  him  a  Roland  for  his  Oliver  without  the  slightest  compunction.  It  was  a  battle 
royal,  and  both  the  old  gentleman  and  the  'prentice  boy  grew  sufficiently  warm  ;  but 
no  scars  remained  on  either  combatant.  On,  the  Monday  morning,  Mr.  Brown  walked 
to  Huntingdon  with  me  in  loving  conversation,  and  afterwards  sent  me  Haldane's 
"  Life"  as  a  present,  with  his  sincere  regards  ;  and  I,  whom  he  had  horrified  with  his 
doctrinal  statements,  felt  an  inward  drawing  towards  the  bluff  heretic.  No  doubt  he 
purposely  put  forward  his  most  oi/h't'  views  of  doctrine  on  that  occasion  to  draw  out 
the  youthful  preacher,  probably  intending  to  set  him  right  on  many  points  ;  but  he 
had  an  unpromising  pupil  to  deal  with,  one  who  had  no  tear  of  Potto  Brown, 
or  Professor  Finney,  or  any  other  Arminian,  before  his  eyes,  but  held  his  own 
opinion  with  a  firmness  which  interested  and  did  not  displease  the  good  but 
eccentric  miller,  who  had  usually  dealt  with  softer  material  when  criticizing  the 
young  gentlemen  who  preached  in  his  chapel  on  Sundays. 


Another  singular  character  with  whom  I  became  acquainted  early  in  my 
ministry,  was  old  Mr.  Sutton,  of  Cottenham.  He  had  never  seen  me,  but  he 
heard  that  I  was  a  popular  young  minister,  so  he  invited  me  over  to  preach  his 
anniversary  sermons.  I  was  in  the  vestry  of  the  chapel  before  the  morning  service, 
and  when  the  aged  man  came  in,  and  saw  me,  he  seemed  greatly  surprised  to  find 
that  I  was  so  young.  After  gruffly  exchanging  the  usual  greetings,  he  remarked, 
"  I  shouldn't  have  asked  you  here,  had  I  known  you  were  such  a  bit  ot  a  boy. 
Why,  the  people  have  been  pouring  into  the  place  all  the  morning  in  waggons,  and 
dickey-carts,  and  all  kinds  of  vehicles!  More  fools  they!"  he  added.  I  said, 
"  Well,  sir,  I  suppose  it  will  be  so  much  the  better  for  your  anniversary;  still,  I  can 
go  back  as  easily  as  I  came,  and  my  people  at  Waterbeach  will  be  very  glad  to  see 
me."  "  No,  no,"  said  the  old  pastor  ;  "  now  you  are  here,  you  must  do  the  best  you 
can.  There  is  a  young  fellow  over  from  Cambridge,  who  will  help  you  ;  and  we 
shan't  expect  much  from  you  ;  "  and  thereupon  he  paced  the  room,  moaning  out, 
"  Oh,  dear  !  what  a  pass  the  world  is  coming  to  when  we  get  as  preachers  a  parcel 
of  boys  who  have  not  got  their  mother's  milk  out  of  their  mouths  !  " 

I  was  in  due  time  conducted  to  the  pulpit,  and  the  old  minister  sat  upon 
the  stairs, — I   suppose,  ready  to  go  on  with  the  service  in  case  I  should  break  down. 


272  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

After  prayer  and  singing,  I  read,  from  the  Book  of  Proverbs,  the  chapter  containing 
the  words,  "The  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory."  When  I  had  gone  so  far,  I 
stopped,  and  remarked,  "  I  doubt  it,  for,  this  very  morning,  I  met  with  a  man 
who  has  a  hoary  head,  yet  he  has  not  learnt  common  civility  to  his  fellow-men." 
Proceeding  with  the  reading,  I  finished  the  verse, — "  if  it  be  found  in  the  way 
of  righteousness."  "  Ah  !  "  I  said,  "that's  another  thing  ;  a  hoary  head  would  then 
be  a  crown  of  glory,  and,  ior  the  matter  of  that,  so  would  a  red  head,  or  a  head  of 
any  other  colour."  I  went  on  with  the  service,  and  preached  as  best  I  could,  and  as 
I  came  down  from  the  pulpit,  Mr.  Sutton  slapped  me  on  the  back,  and  e.xclaimed, 
"  Bless  your  heart !  I  have  been  a  minister  nearly  forty  years,  and  I  was  never 
better  pleased  with  a  sermon  in  all  my  life  ;  but  you  are  the  sauciest  dog  that  ever 
barked  in  a  pulpit."  All  the  way  home  from  the  chapel,  he  kept  on  going  across 
the  road  to  speak  to  little  groups  of  people  who  were  discussing  the  service.  I 
heard  him  say,  "  I  never  knew  anything  like  it  in  all  my  life  ;  and  to  think  that 
I  should  have  talked  to  him  as  I  did  !  "  We  had  a  good  time  for  the  rest  of  the 
day,  the  Lord  blessed  the  Word,  and  Mr.  Sutton  and  I  were  ever  afterwards  the  best 
of  friends.* 

I  shall  never  forget  Mr.  Sutton's  description  of  a  sermon  he  had  preached  ;  I 
had  the  notes  of  the  discourse  from  his  own  lips,  and  I  trust  they  will  remain  as 
notes,  and  never  be  preached  from  again  in  this  world.  The  text  was,  "  The  night- 
hawk,  the  owl,  and  the  cuckoo."  That  might  not  strike  anyone  as  being  exceedingly 
rich  in  matter;  it  did  not  so  strike  me,  and  therefore  I  innocently  enquired,  "And 
what  were  the  heads.-*"  He  replied  most  archly,  "  Heads?  why,  wring  the  birds' 
necks,  and  there  are  three  directly,  '  the  night-hawk,  the  owl,  and  the  cuckoo.'  "  He 
showed  that  these  birds  were  all  unclean  under  the  law,  and  were  plain  types  of 
unclean  sinners.  Night-hawks  were  persons  who  pilfered  on  the  sly,  also  people 
who  adulterated  their  goods,  and  cheated  their  neighbours  in  an  underhand  way 
without  being  suspected  to  be  rogues.  As  for  the  owls,  they  typified  drunkards, 
who  are  always  liveliest  at  night,  while  by  day  they  will  almost  knock  their  heads 
against  a  post  because  they  are  so  sleepy.  There  were  owls  also  among  professors. 
The  owl  is  a  very  small  bird  when  he  is  plucked  ;  he  only  looks  big  because  he 
wears  so  many  feathers  ;  so,  many  professors  are  all  feathers,  and  if  you  could  take 
away  their  boastful  professions,  there  would  be  very  little  left  of  them.  Then  the 
cuckoos  were  the  church  clergy,  who  always  utter  the  same  note  whenever  they  open 
their  mouths  in  the  church,  and  live  on  other  birds'  eegfs  with  their  church-rates  and 
tithes.     The  cuckoos  were  also,  I   think,  the  free-willers,  who  were  always  saying, 

*  In  Mr.  Spurgeon's  second  volume  of  Outlines,  there  is  the  following  note  evidently  referring  to  this  day's  services  : — "  Three 
joined  the  church  at  Cottenham  through  the  serujons  on  Sabbath  179." 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGKAl'HY. 


273 


"  Do-do-do-do."     Was  not  this  rather  too  much   of  a  good  thing  ?     Yet,  from  the 
man  who  deHvered  it,  the  discourse  would  not  seem  at  all  remarkable  or  odd. 

The  same  venerable  brother  preached  a  sermon  equally  singular,  but  far  more 
original  and  useful  ;  those  who  heard  it  will  remember  it  to  their  dying  day.  It  was 
from  this  text  :  "The  slothful  man  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in  hunting."  The 
good  old  man  leaned  upon  the  top  of  the  pulpit,  and  said,  "  Then,  my  brethren,  he 
was  a  lazy  fellow  1"  That  was  the  exordium  ;  and  then  he  went  on  to  say,  "  He 
went  out  a-hunting,  and  after  much  trouble  he  caught  his  hare,  and  then  was  too  idle 
to  roast  it.  He  was  a  lazy  fellow  indeed  !  "  The  preacher  made  us  all  feel  how- 
ridiculous  such  idleness  was,  and  then  he  said,  "  But,  then,  you  are  very  likely  quite 
as  much  to  blame  as  this  man,  ior  you  do  just  the  same.  You  hear  of  a  popular 
minister  coming  down  from  London,  and  you  put  the  horse  in  the  cart,  and  drive  ten 
or  twenty  miles  to  hear  him  ;  and,  then,  when  you  have  heard  the  sermon,  you  forget 
to  profit  by  it.  You  catch  the  hare,  and  do  not  roast  it  ;  you  go  hunting  after  the 
truth,  and  then  you  do  not  receive  it."  Then  he  went  on  to  show  that,  just  as  meat 
needs  cooking  to  prepare  it  for  assimilation  in  the  bodily  system, — I  do  not  think  he 
used  that  word,  though, — so  the  truth  needs  to  go  through  a  certain  process  before 
it  can  be  received  into  the  mind,  that  we  may  feed  thereon  and  grow.  He  said  he 
should  show  us  how  to  cook  a  sermon,  and  he  did  so  most  instructively.  He  began 
as  the  cookery  books  do, — "  First,  catch  your  hare."  "So,"  he  said,  "first,  get  a 
gospel  sermon."  Then  he  declared  that  a  great  many  sermons  were  not  worth  hunting 
for,  and  that  good  sermons  were  mournfully  scarce,  and  it  was  worth  while  to  go  any 
distance  to  hear  a  solid,  old-fashioned,  Calvinistic  discourse.  Then,  after  the  sermon 
had  been  caught,  there  was  much  about  it  which  might  be  necessary  because  of  the 
preacher's  infirmity,  but  which  was  not  profitable,  and  must  be  put  away.  Here  he 
enlarged  upon  discerning  and  judging  what  we  heard,  and  not  believing  every  word 
of  any  man.  Then  followed  directions  as  to  roasting  a  sermon  ; — run  the  spit  of 
memory  through  it  from  end  to  end,  turn  it  round  upon  the  roasting-jack  of 
meditation,  before  the  fire  of  a  really  warm  and  earnest  heart,  and  in  that  way  the 
sermon  would  be  cooked,  and  ready  to  yield  real  spiritual  nourishment.  I  am 
only  giving  just  the  outline  of  the  discourse,  and  though  it  may  look  somewhat 
laughable,  it  was  not  so  esteemed  by  the  hearers.  It  was  full  of  allegory,  and 
kept  up  the  attention  of  the  people  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

"  Well,  my  dear  sir,  how  are  you  ? "  was  my  salutation  to  him,  one  morning, 
"  I'm  pleased  to  see  you  so  well  at  your  age."  "  Yes,  I  am  in  fine  order  for  an  old 
man,  and  hardly  feel  myself  failing  at  all."      "  I  hope  your  good  health  will  continue 

for  years  to  come,  and  that,  like  Moses,  you  will  go  down  to  your  grave  with  your 

s 


2  74  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

eye  undimmed,  and  your  natural  force  unabated."  "  All  very  fine,"  said  the  old 
gentleman,  "but,  in  the  first  place,  Moses  never  went  down  to  his  grave  at  all,  he 
went  up  to  it  ;  and,  in  the  next  place,  what  is  the  meaning  of  all  you  have  been 
talking  about  ?  Why  did  not  the  eye  of  Moses  wax  dim  }  "  "  I  suppose,  sir,"  said 
I,  very  meekly,  "  that  his  natural  mode  of  life  and  quiet  spirit  had  helped  to  preserve 
his  faculties,  and  make  him  a  vigorous  old  man."  "Very  likely,"  said  he,  "but 
that's  not  what  I  am  driving  at  :  what's  the  meaning,  the  spiritual  teaching  of  the 
whole  matter  ?  Is  it  not  just  this  ?  Moses  is  the  law,  and  what  a  glorious  end  of 
the  law  the  Lord  gave  it  on  the  Mount  of  His  finished  work  ;  how  sweetly  its  terrors 
were  all  laid  to  sleep  with  a  kiss  from  God's  mouth  !  and,  mark  you,  the  reason  why 
the  law  no  more  condemns  us  is  not  because  its  eye  is  dim,  so  that  it  cannot  see  our 
sins,  or  because  its  force,  with  which  to  curse  and  punish  us,  is  abated  ;  but  Christ 
has  taken  it  up  to  the  Mount,  and  gloriously  made  an  end  of  it." 

Such    was   Mr.   Sutton's   usual  talk,  and  such  was  his  ministry.      Peace   to   his 

ashes.      He  was  a  quaint  old  man,  who,  after  being  a  shepherd  of  sheep  for  between 

thirty  and  forty  years,  became  a  shepherd  of  men  for  a  similar  period  ;  and  he  often 

told   me    that   his  second    Hock  was   "  a   deal   more  sheepish   than   the  first."     The- 

converts,  who  found   the  road  to  Heaven  under  his  preaching,  were  so  many  that, 

when  we  remember  them,  we  are  like  those  who  saw  the  lame  man  leaping  after  he 

heard  the  word  of  Peter  and  John  ;  they  were  disposed  to  criticize,  but   "  beholding 

the   man   that  was  healed   standing  with    Peter  and   John,   they  could    say  nothing 

against  it." 

*  *  *  * 

In  the  beginning  of  my  preaching  experience,  there  was  a  dear  good  man 
who,  when  I  took  the  service  for  him,  would  persist  in  announcing  the  hymn 
commencing — 

"  Mighty  God  !  while  angels  bless  Thee, 
May  an  infanl  lisp  Thy  name?" 

That  was  to  be  sung  with  special  reference  to  me,  and  at  first  it  was  all  very  proper, 
for  the  veteran  saint  might  well  regard  me  as  "an  infant"  in  spiritual  things  ;  but, 
ten  years  later,  when  I  went  down  into  the  country  to  preach  for  him  again,  there 
was  still  the  same  hymn  to  be  sung  before  my  sermon, — 

"  Mighty  God  !  while  angels  bless  Thee, 
May  ni!  infant  lisp  Thy  name  ?  " 

And  when  I  was  forty  years  of  age,  and  the  venerable  man  was  near  the  close  of  his 
long  life,  and  I  went  once  more  to  help  him  by  a  sermon,  I  still  had  to  join  the 
congregation  in  singing — 

"  Mighty  God!  while  angels  bless  Thee, 
May  an  infant  lisp  Thy  name  ?  " 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  275 

I  thought  that  I  was  rather  a  largish  infant,  and  felt  that  I  would  have  preferred  to 
choose  my  own  hymns. 

On  another  occasion,  the  minister  of  the  place  where  I  was  preaching  would 
give  out  the  hymns,  and  the  hymn-book  in  use  was  that  one  by  Dr.  Watts  in  which 
there  are  first  the  Psalms,  and  then  Books  1.,  II.,  and  III.  of  Hymns.  I  had 
selected  a  hymn  out  of  one  of  the  divisions,  but  by  some  mistake  the  minister  had 
turned  to  the  wrong  part  of  the  book,  and  before  he  had  discovered  his  error,  he  was 
reading — 

"When  the  Eternal  bows  the  skies 
To  visit  earthly  things, 
With  scorn  Divine  He  turns  His  eyes 
From  towers  of  haughty  kings. 

"  He  bids  His  awful  chariot  roll 
Far  downward  from  the  skies, 
To  visit  every  humble  soul 
With  pleasure  in  His  eyes." 

Those  who  are  familiar  with  the  hymns  of  Dr.  Watts,  know  that  the  last  verse 
begins — 

"Just  like  His  nature  is  His  grace. 
All  sov'reign  and  all  free  ;  " 

and  when  the  minister  had  read  these  two  lines,  he  said,  "  We  won't  sing  this 
hymn."  I  felt  that,  under  the  circumstances,  the  hymn  ought  to  be  sung, 
so  I  said,  "  If  you  please,  we  will  sing  that  hymn  ;  or  we  will  not  have 
any  at  all  if  we  do  not  have  that  one."  So  the  minister  shut  up  the  book,  and 
I  went  on  with  the  sermon.  I  had  fixed  upon  quite  a  different  subject  for  my 
discourse  ;  but  when  such  a  challenge  was  given  to  me,  I  felt  compelled  to  change 
my  theme,  so  I  announced  as  my  text,  "  I  will  have  mercy  on  whom  I  will  have 
mercy,  and  I  will  have  compassion  on  whom  I  will  have  compassion.  So  then  it  is 
not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  shcweth  mercy," 
and  I  preached  from  those  words  a  discourse  full  of  good  sound  doctrine, — 
sixteen  ounces  to  the  pound, — which  filled  with  delight  the  hearts  of  all  the  brethren 
and  sisters  who  loved  the  marrow  and  fatness  of  the  faith  which  some  call  Calvinism, 
but  which  we  trace  back  to  our  Lord  Himself  and  His  aposdes. 


# 


In  my  early  ministerial  days,  I  was  invited  to  preach  at  Isleham,  Cambridge- 
shire, where  I  was  baptized.  I  was  to  conduct  the  morning  service  ;  my  Brother 
Aldis,  I  think  it  was,  preached  in  the  afternoon  ;  and  then  I  was  to  take  my  turn 
again  in  the  evening.  The  people  at  Isleham  had  such  a  belief  that  I  should  draw 
a  congregation,  that  they  went  and  borrowed  the  largest  chapel  in  the  place.  I  shall 
never  forget  it,  because  I  preached  that  morning  at  eleven  o'clock  to  seven  persons  ! 


276  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

That  was  all  the  people  I  had  ;  and  I  remember  how  I  told  them  that  they  reminded 
me  of  the  way  ducks  act  when  they  go  through  a  doorway,  they  always  lower  their 
heads  ;  they  will  do  it  even  when  they  are  going  in  or  out  of  a  barn.  The  entrance 
may  be  twenty  feet  high,  but  a  duck  never  goes  through  it  without  putting  his  head 
down,  for  fear  he  might  possibly  hit  the  top  of  the  door  !  So  I  said  to  the  people, 
"You  were  so  afraid  of  your  place  being  overcrowded  that  you  borrowed  that  big 
chapel  for  seven  people  !  "  Well,  being  there,  I  resolved  that  I  would  preach  that 
morning  at  my  very  best,  although  the  congregation  was  so  small.  The  brother, 
who  took  the  afternoon  service,  said  to  me,  "  I  can't  think  how  you  did  it  ;  you  were 
as  earnest,  and  you  preached  as  well  as  if  you  had  had  the  place  crowded."  "  Yes," 
I  replied,  "  1  thought  that  was  the  only  way  to  make  sure  of  getting  it  full  in  the 
evening  ;  so  I  determined  that  I  would  lay  out  all  my  guns,  and  make  the  greatest 
possible  impression  upon  those  few  people."  In  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  very  decent 
audience  of  perhaps,  a  hundred  or  a  hundred  and  fifty  ;  but  when  I  preached 
at  night,  there  was  not  standing  room  in  the  place.  Though  I  did  not  compliment 
myself  upon  gathering  the  crowd,  yet  I  could  not  help  saying  that,  if  I  had  not 
preached  at  my  best  to  the  seven  people  in  the  morning,  I  should  not  have  had  the 
large  company  at  night,  for  those  who  were  there  at  the  first  service  went  away,  and 
talked  about  how  well  they  had  got  on,  and  so  induced  many  others  to  come  out  in 
the  evening  to  hear  for  themselves. 


CHAPTER    XXV. 


later  Strmoucttcs. 


||^r'%^^^^^j!!  ]4  £  j^ g;  ^Ye  probably  few,  if  any,  detailed  records  of  the  services 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapters,  and  the  number  of  persons, 
still  living,  who  were  among  "the  boy-preacher's"  first  hearers, 
must  be  continually  diminishing.  Even  their  reminiscences  of  his 
preaching  would  be  necessarily  very  incomplete  after  so  great  a  lapse 
of  time.  It  is,  therefore,  a  happy  circumstance  that  Mr.  Spurgeon 
was  moved  first  to  write,  and  then  to  preserve,  considerable  portions  of  the  discourses 
that,  in  those  early  days,  were  the  means  of  winning  so  many  souls  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  manuscripts  are  by  no  means  full  reports  of  the  young  Pastor's 
utterances, — they  are  Sermonettes  rather  than  Sermons, — but  they  tell  what  were 
the  subjects  brought  before  the  notice  of  the  villagers  who  crowded  "  the  little 
thatched  chapel  "  at  Waterbeach,  and  they  also  show  how  the  various  topics  were 
handled.  Following  the  arrangement  adopted  in  Chapter  XX.,  one  Sermonette  is 
given  from  each  of  the  Volumes  V.,  VI.,  and  VII.,  with  the  inscriptions  written  at 
the  beginning  and  end  of  the  earlier  books  in  the  series. 


Volume  V.  commences  thus, — 

Feb.  26,  1853. 
"Jehovah  Jireh," — "  I  am  ever  with  you." 

"  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  man." 
"  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  princes." 
Underneath  thee  are  the  everlasting  arms. 
Never  have  I  sought  in  vain. 

*  *  *  * 

Outline  CCXLIII. — Christ  our  Surety. 

"Be  stii'cty  for  Thy  servant  for  good  :  let  not  the  proud  oppress  Die.'' — 
Psalm  c.xi.x.    122. 

The  22nd  verse  of  Hebrews  vii.  supplies  a  comment  on  this  text.  These  are 
the  only  two  places  in  Scripture  in  which  a  surety  between  God  and  man  is 
mentioned  ;  but  though  spoken  of  sparingly,  it  is  none  the  less  important. 

I.     Consider  wherein  Christ  is  a  surety. 


278  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

II.  What  He  engaged  to  do  as  a  surety. 

III.  What  benefits  flow  to  us  through    His  suretyship. 
I.     Consider  in  what  sense  Jesus  is  a  surety. 

1.  Not  for  His  Father, — to  us, — for  God  is  so  true.  His  word  and  oath  so  firm, 
that  we  need  not  wish  for  a  Surety  ;  and,  indeed,  it  would  not  be  an  assistance  to 
our  faith,  since  he  who  doubts  the  Father  would  doubt  the  Son. 

2.  Not  as  promising  in  our  behalf  He  is  not  bound  to  see  that  we  perform  our 
obligations,  for  He  knows  well  enough  that  we  could  not  pay  a  farthing  of  our  debt 
to  God,  even  if  we  would. 

3.  But  He  is  our  Surety  by  taking  all  our  debts  upon  Himself — standing  in  our 
stead, — promising  to  do  what  we  ought  to  have  done. 

We  will  illustrate  this  subject  from  instances  in  the  world.  A  son,  about  to  set 
up  in  business,  has  little  money  ;  but  his  father  says,  "  Charge  the  goods  to  my 
account  ;  let  him  have  them,  but  send  me  the  bill,  I  will   be  surety  for  its  payment." 

A  poor  man  is  in  prison  for  debt,  and  must  continue  to  lie  there  unless  someone 
pays  it  for  him.  A  philanthropist,  like  John  Howard,  comes  in,  and  bids  the  creditor 
loose  his  prisoner,  and  accept  himself  as  surety  for  the  debtor. 

Damon  is  in  prison,  condemned  to  die  ;  but  he  wishes  first  to  see  his  children. 
His  friend,  Pythias,  is  chained  in  his  place,  and  engages  to  die  in  his  stead  if  he 
does  not  return  at  the  appointed  time. 

II.  What  Christ  engaged  to  do  as  a  surety. 
Not  more  than  He  could  do, — for  He  is  God. 
Not  more  than  He  will  do, — for  He  is  faithful. 

1.  He  has  promised  to  render  to  the  law  perfect  obedience.  This  was  our  debt; 
but  He  has  taken  it  away,  cancelled  it  for  ever. 

2.  He  has  promised  to  satisfy  justice  for  our  debt  of  punishment.  Just  as  Paul 
wrote  to  Philemon,  concerning  Onesimus,  "If  he  hath  wronged  thee,  or  oweth  thee 

ought,  put  that  on  mine  account I  will   repay  it."     This  Christ  has  done  for 

all  believers. 

3.  He  has  engaged  to  bring  all  the  elect  home  to  glory.  Judah  said  he  would 
bear  the  blame  if  he  did  not  bring  Benjamin  back.  Jacob  had  to  be  responsible  for 
the  sheep  of  Laban.      So  Jesus  is  bound  by  covenant  to  save  every  believer. 

III.  What  blessings  flow  to  us  through  Christ's  suretyship. 

1.  Complete  pardon, — for  the  punishment  of  our  sin  has  been  transferred  from 
us  to  Him,  and  we  are  reckoned  as  if  we  had  ourselves  endured  the  full  penalty  ot 
our  guilt. 

2.  Complete  justification.  What  Christ  does  for  us  is  counted  as  done  by 
ourselves,  so  that  we  are  now  considered  as  sinless,  and  acceptable  unto  God  by 
Jesus    Christ. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  279 

3.  Freedom  from  fear, — a  settled  peace.  We  have  no  ground  for  despondency 
or  terror  ;  no  bailiff  can  arrest  us  now,  for  our  debt  is  fully  paid. 

4.  Everlasting  security.  Our  whole  indebtedness  is  gone,  and  we  are  safe 
for  ever. 

How  foolish  not  to  seek  this  Surety !  How  dangerous  to  delay,  for  death 
may  come,  and  God  demand  His  due,  and  we  shall  have  nothing  with  which  to  pay 
our  debt  !  A  life  ot  holiness  cannot  pay  it.  Tears,  groans,  and  prayers  cannot  pay 
it.     An  eternity  of  woe  cannot  pay  it. 

Faith  looks  to  Jesus  as  Surety,  and  desires  no  other  means  of  paying  the  debt. 
Trust  Him,  then,  and  you  are  free  for  ever. 
Lord,   aid  me  ! 

*  #  *  * 

(Inscription  at  the  end  of  Volume  V  : — 

The  Lord  is  my  Banner  ;  why  am  I  fearful  when  God  furnishes  me  with  all 
that  is  needful  ? 

(Inscription  at  the  beginning  of  Volume  VI  : — ) 

O  Lord,  I  am  entirely  dependent  on  Thine  aid  !  Do  not  cut  off  the  supplies, 
but  ever  give  me  to  drink  of  Thy  fountain,  and  to  guide  others  to  the  same  Divine 
spring. 

Outline  CCCXI. — Christ  is  Precious. 

"  Unto  you  i/ierefore  zvhich  believe  He  is  pircioics." — i  Peter  ii.  7. 

This  was  the  theme  of  the  first  sermon  I  ever  preached  ;  I  hope  it  is  my  theme 
now,  and  ever  shall  be, — living,  dying,  and  glorified. 

This  is  one  of  the  te.xts  from  which  everyone  imagines  he  could  preach  ;  but 
which,  for  that  very  reason,  is  all  the  more  difficult  to  preach  from  to  your 
satisfaction.  However,  if  the  Good  Spirit  will  apply  to  your  hearts  my  few  homely 
thoughts,  your  being  satisfied  will  not  matter.      Here  we  have, — 

I.  A  precious  people. 

II.  A  precious  Christ. 

III.  A  precious  experience. 
1.     A  precious  people. 

Not  so  in  themselves,  but  quite  the  reverse  ;  yet  they  are  so  in  the  eyes  of  their 
Lord  and  Saviour.     They  are  His  special  favourites.     They  are  His  crown  jewels. 

They  are  all  believers,  whether  they  have  great  faith  or  little  faith.  They  are 
not  mere  repeaters  of  creeds,  but  true,  hearty  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

It  is  only  these  precious  people  who  are  able  to  see  the  preciousness  of  ChrisL 


sSo  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Faith  is  indispensable  to  the  enjoyment  of  Christ.  Can  a  child  know  how  precious 
is  orold  before  he  has  been  taught  its  value  .''  Does  the  beo-grar  in  the  street 
appreciate  a  picture  by  Raphael,  or  can  the  ignorant  rightly  estimate  the  value  of 
learning  ? 

Faith  is  the  eyesight  of  the  soul,  whereby  it  discerns  spiritual  beauty.  Faith 
is  the  mouth  which  relishes  Heavenly  sweetness. 

God  has  made  faith  the  mark  of  His  precious  people,  because  it  is  a  grace 
which  greatly  exalts  God,  and,  at  the  same  time,  abases  the  creature. 

Precious  are  God's  people, — elect,  redeemed,  guarded,  fed,  nurtured,  and  at 
last  glorified. 

II.     A  PRECIOUS  Christ. 

What  need  is  there  for  me  to  enlarge  here  .''  We,  who  believe,  know  that 
Christ  is  precious. 

1.  My  Christ  is  more  precious  to  me  than  anything  that  my  fellow-creatures 
have.  I  see  some  who  live  in  palaces,  sit  on  thrones,  wear  crowns,  and  feast  on 
dainties.  I  have  heard  of  Ale.xanders,  Napoleons,  and  Caesars  ;  but  I  envy  them 
not,  for  Christ  is  more  precious  to  ine  than  all  earth/v  dominion. 

I  see  others  with  great  riches  ;  they  are  afraid  of  losing  what  they  have,  yet 
they  are  groaning  after  more.  They  have  many  cares  through  their  wealth,  and 
they  must  leave  it  all  one  day  ;  but  Christ  is  better  than  all  earthly  riches.  Shall  I 
give  up  Christ  for  gold  .-*  No,  for  Christ  is  more  precious  to  me  than  wealth  could 
ever  be. 

Some  men  have  noble  minds  ;  they  long  for  knowledge,  they  toil  that  they  fnay 
measure  the  earth,  survey  the  heavens,  read  the  lore  of  the  ancients,  dissolve 
minerals,  &c.,  but  Christ  is  better  to  me  than  learning. 

Others  pant  for  fame.  I  shall  be  forgotten,  save  by  the  few  whose  steps  I 
guided  in  the  path  to  Heaven  ;  but  I  weep  not  at  that,  for  Christ  is  more  precious  to 
me  than  fame. 

2.  He  is  more  precious  than  anything  I  myself  have. 

If  1  have  a  home  and  a  fireside,  and  feel  a  comfort  in  them,  yet,  if  called  to 
suffer  banishment,  I  have  a  better  home.      Christ  is  better  to  me  than  home. 

If  I  have  relatives, — mother  and  father, — or  faithful  friends  ;  these  I  value,  and 
rightly,  too.  'Tis  a  bitter  pang  to  lose  them,  but  Christ  is  better  than  relatives  or 
friends.      He  is  my  Husband,  my  Brother,  my  Lover. 

I  have  health,  and  that  is  a  precious  jewel.  Take  it  away,  and  pleasures  lose 
their  gloss  ;  but  my  Jesus  is  mine  still,  and  He  is  better  than  health  ;  yea,  life  itself 
is  valueless  in  comparison  with  Him. 

When  I  consider  the  glory  of  His  nature,  the  excellence  of  His  character,  the 
greatness  of  His  offices,  the  richness  of  His  gifts,  surely  He  is  indeed  precious. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiograi'uv.  281 

III.        A    PRECIOUS    EXPERIENCE. 

Merely  to  say  that  Christ  is  precious,  is  nothing-  ;  but  to  know  that  He  is 
precious,  to  feel  it  in  truth,  is  everything. 

1.  The  self-denials  of  missionaries, — 

2.  The  sufferings  of  martyrs, — 

3.  The  deathbeds  of  saints, — 

all  attest  the  reality  of  the  experience  here  spoken  of. 

Have  we  felt  it  ?  If  so,  may  we  once  more  feel  it  at  His  table  !  Oh,  to  live 
ever  with  the  taste  of  this  honey  in  our  mouths, — to  feast  even  on  the  name  of  our 
dear  Redeemer  ! 

O  precious  One,  help  !     Help  !     Help  ! 


Outline  CCCXXVII. — "Praise  ye  the   Lord." 

''  Praise  yc  the  Lord.  Praise  ye  the  LORD  from  the  heavens:  praise  Lliiii  ui 
the  heights." — Psalm  cxlviii.   i. 

Having  once  and  again  exhorted  you  to  the  most  excellent  work  of  praising 
God,  it  may  seem  unnecessary  to  mention  it  again.  Yet  it  is  most  probable  that 
some  of  you  have  neglected  the  duty  ;  and  if  you  have  not,  you  will  find  your  soul 
still  prepared  to  hear  more  on  the  subject,  that  you  may  rise  to  higher  flights  and 
more  animated  strains. 

There  are  two  places  where  we  can  praise  God, — in  Heaven  and  on  earth. 
There  are  two  great  ways  of  praising  God, — by  song  and  by  service. 

I.     On  earth,  we  have  two  ways  of  praising  God, —  by  song  and  by  service. 

I.  By  song.  Almost  all  great  events  have  been  celebrated  in  song;  poets  have 
employed  their  utmost  ability  in  this  way.  One  of  the  oldest  books  in  the  world, 
next  to  the  Bible,  sings  of  the  ten  years'  siege  of  Troy.  Virgil,  the  almost  equal  of 
the  mighty  Homer,  sang,  "Arms  and  the  man."  The  taking  of  Jerusalem,  the 
discovery  of  America,  great  batdes,  notable  births,  and  even  the  sinking  of  ships, 
have  found  poets  to  celebrate  them. 

In  early  times,  the  wily  priests  called  in  music  and  poetry  to  aid  in  their  false 
worship.  Whether  Jupiter  or  Baal,  Bacchus  or  Moloch,  Venus  or  Thammuz,  Dagon 
or  Neptune,  was  worshipped,  hymns  or  paeans  were  chanted  in  their  praise,  making 
valleys  and  mountains  ring  with  the  heathen  melodies. 

Nor  has  true  religion — offspring  of  Heaven,  whose  life-blood  came  from  Christ 
upon  the  cross, — refused  to  employ  poesy  in  the  worship  of  the  great  Jehovah,  who 
says,  "  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else."  In  our  days,  the  poet  of  the  sanctuary 
puts  into  our  mouths  his  simple  yet  harmonious  strains.      Sometimes,  we  sing, — 

"Behold  the  glories  of  the  Lamb  !" 


282  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiogfl\phy. 

At  other  times,  filled  with  holy  rapture,  we  sing, — 

"What  equal  honours  shall  we  bring  !" 

or,  though  in  lowlier  notes,  we — 

"  Join  our  cheerful  songs 
With  angels  round  the  throne  ;" 

or,  to  a  solemnly  grand  tune,  we  sing, — 

'■  Keep  silence,  all  created  things." 

Our  friends   opposite    (the  Wesleyans)   have   the  warm   and   fervent  strains  of 
Wesley, — 

"  Harl<,  the  herald  angels  sing." 

"Jesu,  lover  of  my  soul." 

"Oh,  for  a  heart  to  praise  my  God  !" 

Then  we  nave  Doddridge  singing, — 

"Jesus,  I  love  Thy  charming  name." 
"Grace  !  'tis  a  charming  sound  !  " 

Sometimes, — 

"All  hail  the  power  of  Jesus'  name  !" 

rises  loftily  to  a  noble  tune.  Then,  John  Newton — the  African  blasphemer,  who 
was  converted,  while  standing  at  the  helm  of  the  ship  in  a  storm,  as  he  recalled  a 
te.xt  his  mother  taught  him, — leads  us  in  singing, — 

"  How  sweet  the  name  of  Jesus  somds!" 

"Sweeter  sounds  than  music  knows. 
Charm  me  in  Immanuel's  name. ' 

"When  any  turn  from  Zion's  way;" 

or  his  companion,  the  amiable,  tender,  loving  Cowper,  sings, — 

"  There  is  a  fountain  fill'd  with  blood;  ' 

or,— 

"God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way 
His  wonders  to  perform." 

Toplady,  strong  in  faith,  sings, — 

"  A  debtor  to  mercy  alone." 
"  Jesus  immutably  the  same  ;  " 

or, — 

"  Rock  of  ages,  cleft  tor  me, 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  Thee." 

But  why  enumerate  when  we  all  have  a  large  store  of  sacred  poetrv,  dear  to  us  even 
from  childhood,  and  treasured  in  our  memories?     If  we  go  back  to  the  times  of  the 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOBIOGRArHY.  283 

second  Reformation,  we  find  the  Covenanters  in  Scotland  and  the  old  Conventiclers 
of  England,  under  such  men  as  Baxter,  Bunyan,  Cameron,  &c.,  &c.,  ever  fond  of 
hymning  God's  praises.  In  the  first  Reformation,  Luther's  hymns  and  ballads  pro- 
bably did  more  than  his  massive  tomes  to  help  forward  the  good  cause.  Look  on 
yon  Alpine  steeps  and  vales,  where  but  here  and  there  a  cottage  can  be  seen.  Wait 
awhile,  and  you  shall  hear  the  songs  of  praise  ascending  to  the  God  of  Heaven.  In 
apostolic  times,  the  prisoners  of  Philippi  heard  the  voices  of  Paul  and  Silas  praising 
God  at  midnight.  Paul  and  James  agree  in  advising  us  to  sing  ;  and  our  Lord 
Himself  sometimes  joined  with  His  apostles  in  singing  a  hymn.  Mary  and  Elizabeth 
sang  praises  unto  God. 

Go  back  to  the  age  of  the  prophets,  and  see  how  often  their  inspired  writings 
are  songs.  Retreat  still  further  till  you  come  to  the  golden  age  of  psalmody. 
Solomon  and  David  especially  are  full  of  praise  to  Jehovah. 

"  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul  !  " 
"  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  Lord  all  ye  lands." 

Who  can  forg-et  the  sono-  of  Deborah,  or  the  sono-  of  Moses  ?  Who  does  not 
believe  that,  long  ere  their  day,  the  sons  of  God,  in  their  meetings  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  sang  praises  unto  God  ?  I  believe,  with  Milton,  that  in  Eden's  garden  sublimer 
songs  were  heard  than  any  that  we  fallen  beings  can  even  imagine.  Let  us,  then, 
praise  the   Lord  by  singing. 

2.   By  seii'icc,  we  may  praise  God  as  much  as  by  song. 

Our  common  duties  should  be  done  in  such  a  manner  that  they  may  become 
spiritual  worship. 

Then  there  is  the  temple  worship  of  the  Lord's  house  on  the  Sabbath  and 
also  on  week-days. 

Then,  acts  of  charity,  liberality,  and  holy  labour  lor  souls,  performed  by  the 
tract-distributor,  the  Sunday-school  teacher,  the  minister,  the  deacon  ;  above  all,  by 
the  missionary  who  risks  his  life  for  his  Master's  honour  and  service  ; — all  these  are 
praising  the  Lord  as  they  minister  unto  Him  in  various  ways.  In  some  way  or 
other,  let  all  of  us  who  believe  in  Jesus  serve  our  God  right  heartily.  Let  us  be 
like  the  woman  who  anointed  Christ  with  the  precious  ointment,  loving  much,  since 
we  have  had  much  forgiven. 

II.     I\   Heaven,  the  same  two  modes  of  praising  God  are  emploved. 

I.  By  song.  The  angelic  hosts  praise  Him  now  as  thev  have  ever  done.  We 
read  that  these  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy  on  Creation's  morning  ;  ^nd  they  still 
praise  the  Lord  whenever  a  prodigal  returns.  The  saints  now  add  their  notes,  and 
sing  what  angels  cannot  sing, — how  Immanuel,  God  with  us,  suffered  and  died  for 
them.      How  sweet  their  voices,  how  matchless  their  tunes,  how  glorious  the  melody ! 


284  C-     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

How  magnificent  the  Heavenly  concert  will  be  when  all  the  ransomed  throng  at 
once  shall  sing  unto  Him  who  loved  them,  and  washed  them  from  their  sins  in  His 
own  blood  ! 

2.  By  service.  Even  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  Adam  had  to  till  the  ground  ;  and 
in  Heaven  no  idlers  are  to  be  found,  all  there  are  employed.  Some  are  ministering 
spirits,  some  attendant  angels,  some  are  studying  the  perfections  of  Deity,  and  others 
are  framing  music  to  His  praise.  They  have,  doubtless,  far  more  to  do  with  us  than 
we  wot  of.  God,  who  makes  all  things  work,  and  work  together  in  harmony,  and 
work  together  for  the  good  of  His  chosen  people,  will  not  leave  His  noblest 
creatures   unemployed. 

Let  us,  then,  begin  song  and  service  below,  that  soon  we  may  continue  our 
worship  on  high  with  a  sweeter  song  and  nobler  service. 

(The  above  was  the  600th  discourse  delivered  by  Mr.  Spurgeon.  It  was 
preached  at  Waterbeach  in  the  course  of  his  last  year  as  Pastor  there.) 


CHAPTER    XXVI. 


d^limpscs  of  (0sst):  anb  Cambriigcsljirt  lift,  1853. 

It  has  been  my  privilege  and  joy,  sometimes,  to  tarry  tor  a  little  season  amongst  the  lowly.  1 
have  had  a  seat  given  me  in  the  chimney  corner,  and,  by-and-by,  as  the  time  to  retire  for  the  night 
drew  nigh,  the  good  man  of  the  house  has  said  to  me,  "  Now,  sir,  will  you  kindly  read  for  us  to-night, 
as  you  are  here  ?"  And  I  have  noticed  the  faces  of  the  little  group  around  me,  as  I  have  read  some 
portion  like  this,  "  Truly,  God  is  good  to  Israel,  even  to  such  as  are  of  a  clean  heart."  Then  I  have 
said  to  the  father  of  the  family,  "I  will  not  lead  you  in  prayer  this  time;  you  must  be  priest  in  your 
own  house,  and  yourself  pray.''  So  the  good  man  has  prayed  for  his  children,  and  when  1  have  seen 
them  rise  up  from  their  knees,  and  kiss  their  parent  for  the  night,  I  have  thought,  "Well,  if  this  is 
the  kind  of  family  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  makes,  '  let  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  His  glory.' 
For  the  present  blessedness  and  for  the  eternal  happiness  of  man,  let  God's  Kmgdom  come,  and  let 
His  will  be  done  on  earth  even  as  it  is  done  in  Heaven."— C.  H.  S. 


WAS  delighted,  one  Sabbath  evening  in  the  year  1853,  when 
driving  from  the  village  where  I  had  supplied  for  a  minister,  to  see 
in  one  place  a  father,  with  four  or  five  little  ones-iibout  him,  sitting 
on  a  small  plot  of  grass  before  the  cottage  door.  He  had  a  large 
Bible  on  his  knee,  and  the  children  also  had  their  Bibles  ;  and  he 
in  the  midst  was  holding  his  finger  up,  with  all  solemnity  and 
earnestness,  in  simple  style  endeavouring  to  enforce  some  sacred  truth.  It  was 
a  road  but  little  frequented  on  the  Sabbath-day,  and  I  should  hope  that  scarcely  a 
rumbling  or  rattling  noise  was  heard  there  on  the  holy  day  of  rest,  saving  the  gig 
bearing  the  minister  to  and  from  the  place  of  his  labour,  or  other  vehicles  carrying 
devout  worshippers  to  the  house  of  God.  It  appeared  almost  a  sacrilege  to  drive 
by, — although  I  was  returning  from  a  sacred  errand, — it  seemed  a  pity  to  break 
the  spell  even  for  a  moment,  and  to  take  the  eyes  and  the  attention  of  the  little  ones 
for  an  instant  from  such  sweet  employment.  A  little  further  was  a  house  which  had 
a  small  workshop  adjoining  it.  The  door  was  open,  so  I  could  see  that  no  one  was 
inside  ;  but  there  stood  a  chest,  and  on  it  lay  a  Bible  of  the  largest  kind,  and  on  the 
floor  below  was  a  cushion  which  still  bore  the  impress  of  knees  which,  I  trust,  had 
been  bent  in  wrestling  prayer.  Perhaps  a  mother  had  there  been  begging  at  the 
Redeemer's  hands  the  souls  of  her  dearly-beloved  children  ;  or,  possibly,  some  son,  in 
answer  to  that  mother's  prayer,  had  been  secretly  pouring  out  his  heart,  and  crying  for 
mercy  from  the  hands  of  God.  Yet  once  more,  I  saw  a  little  girl  spelling  over  to  her 
parents  the  words  of  the  Book  of  Truth,  and  I  felt  constrained  to  pray  that  the 
daughter  and  the  lowly  pair  might  all  be  able  to  read  their  titles  clear  to  mansions 
in   the  skies.       I   have   seen   hills  and   forests,   vales   and   rivers,   fine   buildines   and 


2S6  C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOlJIUGKArilV. 

romantic  ruins,  but  never,  never  have  I  seen  a  sight  more  simple,  more  beautiful, 
nor  more  subhme.  Blest  households,  of  which  these  things  can  be  written  !  May 
you  not  be  solitary  instances,  but  may  God  raise  up  thousands  like  unto  you  ! 

Household  piety  is  the  very  cream  of  piety.  There  is  no  place  in  which 
relio-ion  so  sweetly  opens  all  its  charms  as  in  the  family  gathered  round  the  hearth. 
Who  does  not  admire  the  house  where,  at  the  hour  ot  prayer,  all  are  assembled,  and 
the  head  of  the  household  reads  from  the  sacred  page  the  Word  of  Inspiration, 
and  then  all  on  bended  knee  seek  for  a  blessing  on  themselves  that  day,  or  in  joyful 
strains  oive  thanks  to  Heaven  for  the  manifold  mercies  so  freely  and  so  constantly 
dispensed  ?  Who,  on  the  other  hand,  can  refrain  from  pitying  the  family  where  the 
day  is  a  round  of  duties  begun  and  ended  without  one  prayer  to  God, — no  place 
where  all  may  come  together  in  supplication,  and  feel  as  one, — no  way  tor  the 
parent  to  e.xpress  his  thoughts  of  love  for  the  souls  of  his  offspring  ?  I  know  the 
sweetness  of  kneeling  at  eventide  beneath  the  paternal  roof,  and  hearing  my  lather 
say,  "  Lord,  we  bless  Thee  that  our  son  has  again  returned  to  us  in  health  and 
streno-th  ;  and,  after  an  absence  from  each  other,  we  praise  Thee  that  we  now  meet 
an  unbroken  circle.  Oh,  our  God,  we  beg  most  earnestly  of  Thee  that  we  may  all 
meet  around  the  throne  in  Heaven,  not  one  being  left  behind  !  "  The  father's  words 
are  all  but  choked  in  their  utterance  whilst  he  weeps  tears  of  joy  to  think  that  his 
first-born  is  walking  in  the  ways  of  God,  and  the  mother  sobs  aloud  ar.d  her  tears 
are  falling,  big  with  gratitude,  that  once  more  she  is  kneeling  beside  her  son,  the 
delio-ht  of  her  eyes,  whilst  the  whole  tribe  are  around  her  secure  from  death  and  ill. 

I  pity  the  wretch  without  a  chair  or  bed  on  which  to  rest  his  weary  limbs  ;  I  pity 
the  miserable  creature  who  shivers  in  the  wintry  blast,  and  finds  no  fire  to  give  the 
needed  heat  ;  but  I  pity  far  more  the  homeless  creature — for  he  is  truly  homeless, — 
who  has  no  altar,  no  family  prayer.  Half  the  happiness  is  absent  where  this  is 
neglected.  I  despise  unmeaning  formality,  but  this  is  no  form.  Spoiler,  lay  not  thy 
ruthless  hand  on  this  most  sacred  thing  !  Rather  let  the  queen  of  night  forget  to  rise 
with  all  her  train  of  stars  than  that  family  devotion  should  even  begin  to  be  neglected. 
The  glory  of  Britain  is  her  religion,  and  one  of  religion's  choicest  treasures  is  the 
Christian  home.  Who  is  so  foolishly  alarmed  as  ever  to  suppose  that  an  invading 
host  will  ravage  our  fair  shores  when  the  whole  land  is  studded  with  castles,— not 
with  turret  towers,  'tis  true,  but  yet  with  places  where  the  God  of  Jacob  dwells, 
residing  as  a  fire  around,  a  glory  in  the  midst  ?  Go  invader,  go,  the  prayer  ol  house- 
holds will  blow  thee  adown  the  white  cliffs  of  Albion  like  chaff  before  the  wind  ! 
The  flag  of  old  England  is  nailed  to  the  mast,  not  bv  our  sailors,  but  by  our  God  ; 
and  He  has  fastened  it  there  with  something  stronger  than  iron, — He  has  nailed  it 
with  the  prayers  of  His  people,  the  fathers,  mothers,  sons,  and  daughters,  with  whom 
He  delights  to  dwell.     From  the  tents  of  Jacob  arise  the  fairfooted  sons  of  Zion, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON's     AUTOIilOGRAPHV.  287 

who  on  the  mountains  stand  declaring  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  and  from  these 
tabernacles  there  is  gradually  gathering  a  host,  glittering  and  white,  who  continually 
praise  God  and  the  Lamb. 


(The  foregoing  paragraphs  and  the  two  following  letters  show  that  Mr.  .Spurgeon 
was  preaching  in  his  native  county  of  Essex  twice,  if  not  thrice,  or  even  oftener, 
during  the  year  1853.  He  had  treasured,  among  his  most  precious  papers  of  those 
early  days,  evidently  with  a  view  to  inclusion  in  his  Autobiography,  this  characteristic 
epistle  from  his  venerable  grandfather  : — 

"  Dear  Charles, 

"  I  just  write  to  say  that  we  hope  nothing  will  occur  to  prevent 
our  e.xchange  on  Sabbath,  the  14th  of  August.  Will  you  come  by  Broxted  ?  If 
so,  your  Uncle  will  bring  you  to  Stambourne.  I  have  hardly  made  up  my  mind 
whether  I  shall  drive  through,  or  leave  my  pony  at  my  son  Obadiah's  ;  but  my 
intention  is  to  be  at  Waterbeach  on  the  Wednesday.  As  you  ought  to  be  on 
the  way,  and  as  so  many  want  to  see  as  well  as  hear  you,  don't  you  stay  on 
my  account.  I  had  too  much  respect  manifested  to  me  the  last  time  I  was  with 
your  good  people,  so  no  doubt  they  will  gladly  receive  me  again.      I  am,  and  have 

been  for  some  days,   very  poorly 1   hope,   by   the   blessing   of  God,    I 

shall  soon  be  all  right  once  more.  I  must — I  ought  to  expect  pains  and  aches  now  ; 
yet  how  natural  it  is  to  wish  to  be  free  from  them  !  But  it  this  was  always  the  case, 
it  would  be  bad  for  us,  for  we  should  become  cold,  careless,  glued  to  the  world, — 
pride  and  self-righteousness  would  arise  within  us.  But  our  Saviour's  declaration 
has  gone  forth,  and  cannot  be  recalled,  '  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation  ; 
in  Me,  ye  shall  have  peace.' 
"With  kind  love  to  you,  in  which  all  here,  if  they  knew  I  was  writing,  would 
unite, 

,  "  Believe  me  to  be, 

"  Your  affectionate  grandfather, 
"  Stambourne,  "  J.   Spurgeon.  ' 

"July  27/53." 

"  N.B. — Some  people  do  not  date  their  letters  ;   I  do,  and  think  it  quite  right.") 


(Two  months  later,  Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote,  to  one  of  his  uncles  at  Stambourne, 
the  letter  printed  on  the  next  page.  This  communication  is  interesting,  not  only 
because   of  its  faithful   reference   to  the  ordinance    of   believers'   baptism,    but   also 


288  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

from  its  revelation  of  the  intense  longing  of  the  young  preacher  to  be  doing  more 
for  his  Lord,  either  at  home  or  abroad.  Verily,  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  coming 
he  so  ardently  desired,  was  preparing  him  for  the  wide  sphere  of  service  which 
was  so  soon  after  to  open  up  for  him.) 

"  9,  Union  Road, 

"  Cambridge, 

"Sep.  27/53. 
"  My  Dear  Uncle, 

"  I  have  two  or  three  reasons  for  writing  to  you  just  at  this  time.  We 
are  going  to  have  a  baptizing  service  on  October  19,  and  I  should  be  so  glad  to  see 
my  uncle  following  his  Master  in  the  water.  I  am  almost  afraid  to  mention  the 
subject,  lest  people  should  charge  me  with  giving  it  undue  prominence  ;  if  they  will 
do  so,  they  must.  I  can  bear  it  for  my  Master's  sake.  I  know  you  love  my  Jesus  ; 
and  the  mention  of  His  name  makes  the  tear  rush  to  your  eye,  and  run  down  your 
cheek.      Better  than  wife  or  child  is  our  Beloved  ;  you  can  sing, — 

"  '  Yes,  Thou  art  precious  to  my  soul, 
My  transport  and  my  trust  ; 
Jewels  to  Thee  are  gaudy  toys 
And  gold  is  sordid  dust.' 

"  You  can  lift  your  eye  to  Heaven,  and,  on  your  bended  knee,  before  the  presence  of 
your  Redeemer,  exclaim,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all  things  ;  Thou  knowest  that  I 
love  Thee.' 

"  Now,  my  beloved  brother  in  Jesus,  can  you  refuse  to  perform  this  one  easy 
act  for  Him  ?  '  No,'  you  say,  '  I  do  not  refuse  ;  I  would  do  it  at  once  if  I  were 
sure  He  had  commanded  it.  I  love  Him  too  well  to  keep  back  any  part  of  mv 
obedience.'  Ah  !  but  you  are  sure  it  is  your  duty, — or,  permit  me  to  hint  that  you 
may  be  sure, — for  it  is  clearly  revealed  in  the  New  Testament.  Taking  the  lowest 
view  of  it,  suppose  it  is  your  duty,  only  make  a  supposition  of  it, — now,  can  you  go  to 
bed  happily  with  the  bare  supposition  that  you  are  refusing  to  practise  an  express 
command  ot  your  Redeemer  ?  Surely,  a  true  lover  of  his  Divine  Master  will  never 
let  even  a  supposed  duty  rest  ;  he  will  want  to  be  sure  either  that  it  is  his  duty,  or 
that  it  is  not  ;  and  knowing  that,  he  will  act  accordingly. 

"  I  charge  you,  by  the  debt — the  infinite  debt,  you  owe  to  Christ, — I  charge  you, 
by  the  solemnity  of  all  our  Saviour's  commands, — I  charge  you,  by  the  shortness  of 
time,  and  the  near  approach  of  the  awful  judgment, — not  to  trifle  with  convictions  of 
the  rightness  of  this  ordinance,  not  to  put  off  a  serious,  prayerful  enquiry  as  to 
whether  it  is,  or  is  not,  enjoined  upon  all  believers  in  Jesus,  and  then  to  carry  out  your 
conscientious  conviction.      If  Christ  commands  me  to  hold  up  my  little  finger,  and   I 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  289 

do  not  obey  Him,  it  looks  like  a  coolness  in  my  love  to  Him  ;  and  I  feel  assured  that 
I  should  sustain  loss  by  the  neglect. 

■'  I  will  not  press  the  matter  as  one  in  authority  ;  I  only  beg  of  you,  as  a  friend, 
and  a  dear  friend,  as  well  as  a  loving  relative,  not  to  forget  or  trifle  with  the 
commands  of  One  dearer  still  to  me. 

"  Now  with  regard  to  coming  for  a  week  to  preach  at  Stambourne  and  neigh- 
bouring villages,  I  am  yours  to  serve  to  the  utmost  ; — not  on  the  Sabbath,  but  all  the 
week.  I  have  a  good  sphere  of  labour  here,  but  I  want  to  do  more,  if  possible. 
There  is  a  great  field,  and  the  labourers  must  work  with  all  their  migrht.  I  often 
wish  I  were  in  China,  India,  or  Africa,  so  that  I  might  preach,  preach,  preach 
all  day  long.  It  would  be  sweet  to  die  preaching.  But  I  want  more  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  ;  1  do  not  feel  enough — no,  not  half  enough, — of  His  Divine  energy.  '  Come 
■  Holy  Spirit,  come  !  '  Then  men  must  be  converted  ;  then  the  wicked  would  repent, 
and  the  just  grow  in  grace. 

"  If  I  come,  I  shall  not  mind  preaching  two  evenings  in  Stambourne  if  you 
cannot  get  other  convenient  places  ;  and  I  should  love  to  have  some  good,  thoroughly- 
hot  prayer-meetings  after  the  services.  I  wish  it  were  possible  to  preach  at  two 
places  in  one  evening,  but  I  suppose  time  would  hardly  permit  me  to  do  that.  Con- 
sult the  friends,  send  me  word,  and  I  am  your  man. 

"  As  to  the  books,  you  had  better  bring  them  yourself  when  you  come  to  be 
baptized.  Mr.  Elven,  of  Bury,  is  going  to  preach  the  sermon  for  me  ;  and,  as  we 
have  not  many  candidates  this  time,  we  shall  all  the  more  value  your  presence. 

"  If  you  do  not  come, — I  cross  that  out,  because  you  MUST, — then  send  the 
books  when  you  can.  /  Ay?  so//ic  tracts  in  Mr.  HowelFs  gig.  I  should  be  obliged 
if  you  will  see  after  them  if  you  go  to  Hedingham.  I  should  like  to  go  there,  too, 
if  I  come. 

"  You  may  show  grandfather  all  I  have  written,  if  you  like,  for  truth  is  truth, 
even  if  he  cannot  receive  it  ; — still,  I  think  you  had  much  better  not,  for  it  is  not  at  all 
likely  he  will  ever  change  an  opinion  so  long  rooted  in  him,  and  it  is  never  worth 
while  for  us  to  mention  it  if  it  will  only  irritate,  and  do  no  good.  I  wish  to  live  in 
unity  with  every  believer,  whether  Calvinist,  Arminian  (if  not  impossible),  Churchman, 
Independent,  or  Wesleyan  ;  and  though  I  firmly  believe  some  of  them  are  tottering, 
I  do  not  like  them  well  enough  to  prop  them  up  by  my  wrangling  with  them. 

"  My  best  respects  and  regards  to  Aunt, — Uncles  and  Aunts, — cousins, — grand- 
father,— Mr.  Unwin,  Will  Richardson,  and  all  the  good  people  in  Stambourne,  not 
excepting  yourself. 

"  I  am, 
V  "Yours  most  truly, 

"  C.   H.   Spurgeon." 

T 


290  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

(The  "  Will  Richardson  "  here  mentioned  was  a  godly  ploughman,  at  Stambourne, 
to  whom  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  while  living  at  his  grandfather's,  was  devotedly  attached  ; 
and  the  friendship  between  them  was  continued  in  after  years.  The  first  volume  of 
The  New  Park  Street  Pulpit  contains  the  following  reference  to  him  : — "  1  recollect 
walking  with  a  ploughman,  one  day, — a  man  who  was  deeply  taught,  although  he 
was  a  ploughman  ;  and,  really,  ploughmen  would  make  a  great  deal  better  preachers 
than  many  College  gentlemen, — and  he  said  to  me,  '  Depend  upon  it,  my  good 
brother,  if  you  or  I  ever  get  one  inch  above  the  ground,  we  shall  get  just  that  inch 
too  high.'  "  This  was  a  favourite  utterance  of  the  good  man,  as  appears  from  the 
brief  sketch  of  him  written  by  Pastor  J.  C.  Houchin  : — 

"  When  I  came  to  Stambourne,  one  of  the  old  men  who  had  overlived  their 
former  Pastor,  and  whose  grey  hairs  adorned  the  table-pew  of  the  old  chapel,  was 
William  Richardson,  a  farm-labourer,  and  a  man  of  clear  and  strong  mind.  He  was 
able  to  read,  so  as  to  make  fair  use  of  his  Bible  and  hymn-book,  and  he  had  a  heart- 
felt knowledge  of  the  gospel.  It  is  said  that  'Master  Charles'  was  very  fond  of 
Will,  and  that  Will  used  to  like  to  talk  with  the  boy,  and  that  the  two  have  been 
seen  walking  up  and  down  the  field  together  when  Will  was  following  the  plough. 

"Will  Richardson  had  a  reputation  for  what  they  call  '  cramp'  sayings,  many  of 
which  used  to  be  retailed  in  the  village  twenty  years  ago.  On  one  occasion,  when  a 
young  minister,  just  settled  in  the  neighbourhood,  had  occupied  the  pulpit  for  the 
day,  in  exchange  with  the  present  Pastor,  he  was  met  at  the  foot  of  the  pulpit  stairs 
by  Will,  who,  shaking  his  hand,  said,  'Ah,  young  man,  you  have  got  a  good  many 
stiles  to  get  over  before  you  get  into  Preaching  Road  !  '  Will  spoke  the  truth,  as  it 
turned  out,  but  it  was  pretty  straight  hitting. 

"  Visiting  him,  one  day,  and  finding  him  full  of  faith,  and  giving  glory  to  God, 
on  my  expressing  a  strong  desire  for  fellowship  with  him  in  those  experiences, 
he  remarked  that,  when  the  sun  shone,  and  the  bees  were  at  work,  if  there  was 
honey  in  one  skep,  there  was  enough  to  fill  another.  Some  friends  had  visited  him, 
and  had  observed  that,  if  they  were  blessed  with  his  experiences,  they  should 
be  beyond  all  doubt  and  fear  ;  and  he  replied  that  God  only  gave  these  great  things 
when  His  former  gifts  had  been  made  good  use  of  I  quoted  the  parable  of  the 
talents,  and  he  said,  '  That  is  it.' 

"Will  was  wont  to  say,  '  Depend  upon  it,  if  we  get  one  inch  above  the  ground 
in  our  own  estimation,  we  get  just  that  inch  too  high.' 

"  On  one  occasion,  I  found  him  excessively  weak,  but  quite  sensible,  and  he 
said,  '  Don't  we  read  of  one  of  old  tried  in  the  fire  .-* '  I  quoted  the  passage,  and  he 
replied,  'That  is  gold  indeed.'  He  then  said  that  he  had  felt  the  two  armies  of  the 
flesh  and  the  spirit  as  lively  in  him  now  as  when  he  was  well  and  about  in  the  worlds 


H.     SrURGEON  S     ACITOBIOGRArHV. 


291 


and  that  he  was  disappointed  and  grieved  to  find  it  so,  as  it  gave  the  enemy  his  chief 
advantage.  So  Satan  had  laid  all  his  sins  for  years  past  before  him,  and  insinuated 
that  they  must  end  in  his  destruction.  '  But,'  said  Will,  '  I  was  enabled  to  say  to 
him,  "  God  is  a  gracious  and  holy  God,  and  what  He  has  put  into  my  heart,  He  will 
not  take  away  any  more  ;  and  He  has  put  love  into  my  heart  ;  and  if  He  were  to 
send  me  to  hell,  I  must  love  Him  still."  And  1  told  him  not  to  say  any  more  to  me 
about  my  sins,  but  to  "go  to  the  Lord  about  them  ;  for  He  knows  whether  I  be 
pardoned,  and  made  His  child,  or  whether  I  be  a  hypocrite."  He  could  not  carry 
such  a  message.  Then  there  seemed  to  come  a  strong  voice,  which  said,  "  He  shall 
die  in  the  Lord."  And  oh,  the  peace  and  the  joy,  I  cannot  describe  to  you  nor 
nobody!  Oh,  that  His  dear  name  was  known  and  loved  by  every  person  all  over 
the  whole  world  !  ' 

"My  last  visit,  in  July,  1870,  four  days  before  his  death,  showed  the  ruling 
passion  for  'cramp  '  sayings  to  be  strong  in  death.  He  was  quite  sensible,  and  after 
conversation,  I  took  up  the  Bible,  and,  opening  it  at  the  seventeenth  of  John,  I 
commenced  reading,  when  he  shouted  aloud,  '  Oh,  that  is  my  blood  horse  !  '  I  said, 
'What  do  you  mean?'  and  he  replied,  '  I  can  ride  higher  on  that  chapter  than  on 
any  other.'     So  I  read  it,  and  prayed  with  him  for  the  last  time.") 


(The  uncle,  referred  to  in  the  following  playful  note,  has  kindly  sent  it  for  the 
Autobiography,  with  another  and  longer  letter  which  appears  in  Chapter  XXX.,  so 
that,  clearly,  he  was  living  at  the  time  it  was  written,  although  he  had  not  answered 
his  nephew's  previous  communications  : — ) 

"  No.  60,  Park  Street. 

"  Cambridge, 

" 1853. 

"  My  Dear  Aunt, 

"Can  you  kindly  inform  me  whether  Mr.  James  Spurgeon,  Junr.,  of  the 
parish  of  Stambourne,  Essex,  is  yet  alive  ?  I  have  written  two  letters  to  the  said 
gentleman,  and,  as  he  was  a  particular  friend  of  mine,  I  begin  to  feel  somewhat 
anxious  seeing  that  I  have  had  no  reply.  If  you  should  find,  among  the  papers  he 
has  left,  any  letter  directed  to  me,  I  shall  feel  much  obliged  by  your  forwarding  the 
same. 

"When  I  was  last  at  his  house,  he  was  extremely  kind  to  me,  and  I  flattered 
myself  that,  if  I  should  ever  have  occasion  to  ask  a  favour,  I  should  not  be  refused  ; 
or,  if  denied,  it  would  be  in  so  kind  a  manner  that  it  would  not  look  like  neglect.  If 
he  is  alive,  and  not  gone  beyond  the  seas,  please  to  give  him  my  kind  love  the  first 


292 


H.     Sl'URGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


time  you  meet  him,  and  tell  him  I  suppose  he  must  have  gout  in  his  hands,  so  that 
he  cannot  write.  Should  it  turn  out  that  it  is  so,  keep  all  wines  and  spirits  from 
him,  as  they  are  bad  things  lor  gouty  folk  ;  and  be  so  good  as  to  foment  his  hands 
with  warm  water  boiled  with  the  heads  of  poppies.  By  this  treatment,  the  swelling 
will  subside  ;  and,  as  soon  as  he  is  able,  if  you  find  him  at  all  tractable,  put  a  pen  in 
his  hand,  and  make  him  write  his  name,  and  post  it  to  me,  so  that  I  may  be  sure  he 
is  alive.      Ah,  'tis  a  sad  thing  people  will  get  gouty  ! 

"  But  perhaps  he  is  gone.  Well,  poor  fellow,  he  was  not  the  worst  that  ever 
lived  ;  I  felt  sorry  to  part  from  him  the  last  time,  and,  as  the  Irishman  said,  I  hoped 
he  would,  at  any  rate,  have  let  me  know  that  he  was  dead.  I  thought  you  were  the 
most  likely  person  to  know  him,  as  I  have  seen  you  at  his  house  several  times  when 
I  have  been  there.  I  trust  you  will  just  send  me  a  line  to  let  me  know  how  the 
poor  fellow  is,  if  alive  at  all. 

"  With  best  love  to  you  and  the  little  ones, 

"  I   am, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"Charles  H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XXVII. 


3rijt  last  Wm  at  TOatcrbeacIj  aub  Cambridge. 


^  BRIGHT  constellation  of  Jubilee  celebrations  has  risen  on  our  age  ; 
amongst  them,  as  one  star  in  the  galaxy,  too  small  to  be  recognized 
singly,  was  the  Waterbeach  Baptist  Chapel  Jubilee.  The  year  1853 
beheld  the  grass  of  fifty  years  growing  in  the  small  spot  surrounding 
the  meeting-house  where  a  crowd  of  willing  worshippers  often 
assembled  in  the  memorable  days  of  my  first  pastorate.  The  village 
should  not  be  unknown  to  fame,  for  the  records  of  the  Baptist  Church  prove  that 
Rowland  Hill  first  exercised  in  Waterbeach  his  gifts  as  a  minister  of  Jesus,  after 
riding  over  from  Cambridge  by  stealth  between  the  hours  of  College  duty.  The 
house  still  stands  in  which  he  is  said  to  have  commenced  his  labours  as  a 
preacher.  Long  before  that  time,  the  sainted  Holcroft,  the  apostle  of  Cambridge- 
shire, ejected  by  the  Act  of  Uniformity  from  his  living  at  Bassingbourne,  had 
founded  a  church  in  this  village,  as  in  many  others  around.  When  confined  in 
Cambridge  Castle  for  the  truth's  sake,  he  obtained  favour  in  the  eyes  of  his  jailor, 
who  allowed  him  by  night  to  visit  Waterbeach,  where  he  preached  and  administered 
the  o-'dinances  of  our  Lord  to  his  little  "band  ot  followers,  returning  always  before 
morninof  licrht  awoke  his  slumberingf  foes.  Since  then,  the  little  vessel,  launched  in 
boisterous  times,  has  been  safely  steered  by  its  Captain  even  until  now.  It  has 
passed  through  rough  waters  and  fierce  storms  ;  but  it  still  lives,  thanks  to  Him  who 
sits  at  the  helm. 

(The  following  hymns,  composed  by  the  young  Pastor,  were  sung  at  the  Water- 
beach Jubilee  services  on  Lord's-day,  June  26th,   1853  : — ) 


The  One  Request. 

If  to  my  God  I  now  may  speak, 
And  make  one  short  request ; 

If  but  one  favour  I  mieht  seek 
Which  I  esteem  the  best, — 


2  94 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOIilOGRAPHY. 

I  would  not  choose  this  earth's  poor  wealth  ; 

How  soon  it  melts  away  ! 
I  would  not  seek  continued  health  ; 

A  mortal  must  decay 

I  would  not  crave  a  mighty  name  ; 

Fame  is  but  empty  breath. 
Nor  would  I  urge  a  royal  claim  ; 

For  monarchs  bow  to  death. 

I  would  not  beg  for  sinful  sweets  ; 

Such  pleasures  end  in  pain. 
Nor  should  I  ask  fair  learning's  seats  ; 

Love  absent,  these  are  vain. 

My  God,  my  heart  would  choose  with  joy, 

Thy  grace,  Thy  love,  to  share  ; 
This  is  the  sweet  which  cannot  cloy, 

And  this  my  portion  fair. 

IiMMAXUEL. 

When  once  I  mourned  a  load  of  sin, 
When  conscience  felt  a  wound  within. 
When  all  m\-  works  were  thrown  away. 
When  on  my  knees  I  knelt  to  pray, 

Then,  blissful  hour,  remembered  well, 
I  learned  Thy  love,   Immanuel  ! 

When  storms  of  sorrow  toss  my  soul. 
When  waves  of  care  around  me  roll, 
When  comforts  sink,  when  joys  shall  flee. 
When  hopeless  gulfs  shall  gape  for  me. 

One  word  the  tempest's  rage  shall  quell. 

That  word.  Thy  name,  Immanuel  ! 

When  for  the  truth  I  suffer  shame, 
When  foes  pour  scandal  on  my  name. 
When  cruel  taunts  and  jeers  abound, 
When  "  bulls  of  Bashan  "  gird  me  round, 
Secure  within  my  tower  I'll  dwell, 
That  tower,  Thy  grace,  Immanuel ! 


C.     H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  295 

When  hell,  enraged,  lifts  up  her  roar, 
When  Satan  stops  my  path  before, 
When  fiends  rejoice,  and  wait  my  end, 
When  legion'd  hosts  their  arrows  send. 

Fear  not,  my  soul,  but  hurl  at  hell 

Thy  battle-cry,  Immanuel  ! 

When  down  the  hill  of  life  I  eo, 
When  o'er  my  feet  death's  waters  flow, 
When  in  the  deep'ning  flood  I  sink. 
When  friends  stand  weeping  on  the  brink, 

I'll  mingle  with  my  last  farewell. 

Thy  lovely  name,  Immanuel  ! 

When  tears  are  banished  from  mine  eye, 
When  fairer  worlds  than  these  are  nigh, 
When  Heaven  shall  fill  my  ravish'd  sight, 
When  I  shall  bathe  in  sweet  delight, 

One  joy  all  joys  shall  far  excel, 

To  see  Thy  face,  Immanuel  ! 


At  our  Waterbeach  prayer-meetings,  we  used  sometimes  to  have  very  quaint 
utterances  from  certain  of  the  brethren  who  led  the  devotions  of  the  assembly.  I 
once  heard  a  poor  man  offer  this  singular  supplication  :  "  Lord,  watch  over  these 
young  people  during  the  feast  time,  for  Thou  knowest.  Lord,  how  their  enemies 
watch  for  them  as  a  cat  watches  for  mice."  Some  ridiculed  the  form  of  the  petition, 
but  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  natural  and  expressive,  considering  the  person  who 
presented  it.  When  it  was  known  that  I  was  coming  to  London,  I  was  made  the 
subject  of  many  remarkable  requests.  One  queer  old  man  offered  a  very 
extraordinary  prayer  for  me.  I  did  not  understand  it  at  the  time,  and  I  hardly  think 
he  ought  to  have  prayed  it  in  public  in  that  shape.  He  pleaded  that  I  might  be 
able  "to  swallow  bush-faggots  cross-ways."  It  was  a  very  strange  prayer;  but  I 
have  often  done  just  what  he  asked  that  I  might  do,  and  it  has  cleared  my  throat 
wonderfully  ;  and  there  is  many  a  man,  who  cannot  now  speak  out  boldly  for  God, 
who  will  be  obliged  to  have  some  of  those  bush-faggots  thrust  down  his  throat  ;  and 
when  those  great  troubles  come,  and  he  is  compelled  to  swallow  th<;m,  then  he  will 
grow  to  be  a  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  will  proclaim  with  power  to  others  the  truths 
he  has  tried  and  proved  in  his  own  experience. 


296  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Another  of  my  country  brethren  prayed  that  I  might  be  "  deUvered  from  the 
bleating  of  the  sheep  ;  "  and,  for  the  hfe  of  me,  I  could  not  make  out  what  he 
meant.  I  am  not  sure  that  he  understood  it  himself  but  1  quite  understand  it  now. 
He  meant  to  ask  the  Lord  that  I  might  live  above  the  fear  of  man,  so  that,  when 
some  persons  said  to  me,  "  How  much  we  have  been  edified  to-day  !"  I  might  not  be 
puffed  up  ;  or  if  another  said,  "  How  dull  the  discourse  was  to-day  !  "  I  might  not 
be  depressed.  There  is  no  leader  of  the  fiock  who  will  not  occasionally  wish  to  be 
delivered  from  the  bleating  of  the  sheep,  for  they  bleat  such  different  tunes 
sometimes.  There  is  some  old  bell-wether,  perhaps,  that  is  not  bleating  in  the 
right  style,  and  one  is  apt  to  be  troubled  about  it  ;  but  it  is  a  great  thing  to 
feel,  "  Now,  I  am  not  going  to  be  influenced  by  the  way  these  sheep  bleat.  I  am 
set  to  lead  them  rather  than  to  let  them  lead  me,  and  I  am  going  to  be  guided 
by  something  far  more  reliable  than  the  bleating  of  the  sheep,  namely,  the  voice 
of  the  Great  Shepherd."  I  soon  found  that  the  best  way  to  be  delivered  from 
the  bleating  of  the  sheep  was  to  seek  to  be  filled  with  the  spirit  of  the  Good 
Shepherd. 

(On  page  229,  there  is  the  Outline  of  the  first  Sermon  preached  by  Mr. 
Spurgeon  at  Waterbeach  ;  the  following  are  his  notes  of  his  last  .Sermon  as 
Pastor  of  the  little  village  church  which  had  been  so  greatly  increased  under  his 
ministry : — ) 

Outline   CCCLXV. — Jesus  Saves  from  Sin. 

"  Thoii  shalt  call  His  name  JESUS :  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from 
their  sins. " — Matthew  i.  21. 

As  this  was  my  first  text  in  Waterbeach,  so,  by  the  help  of  God,  it  shall  be  the 
one  with  which  I  close  my  stated  ministry  among  you, — in  order  that  Jesus  may  be 
Alpha  and  Omega  with  us.      Let  us  speak  of — 

L     The  glorious  name. 

H.     The  wondrous  salvation. 

HI.     The  blessed  people 

L     The  glorious  name  :  Jesus,  or  Joshua,  "  the  Saviour." 

Two  men,  who  had  borne  this  name  before, — Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  and 
Joshua  the  son  of  Jozadak, — were  both  types  of  Christ. 

Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun, — 

Fought  for  Israel,  and  overcame. 

He  led  them  through  Jordan. 

He  divided  their  inheritance  for  them. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  297 

Joshua,  the  son  of  Jozadak, — 

Restored  the  priesthood,  and 

Rebuilt  the  temple  ; 
but  how  much  greater  is   our  Joshua,  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  !     All  that  these  two 
men  did,  and  far  more,  He  has  done  in  His  glorious  work  of  saving  His  people. 

II.  The  wondrous  salvation. 

The  salvation  Jesus  wrought  for  His  people  is  salvation  from  sin. 

1.  From  the  result  of  sin, — the  anger  of  God, — death, — hell, — loss  of  Heaven. 
He  who  trusts  in  Jesus  is  pardoned  for  all  his  offences  against  God 

2.  From  the  guilt  and  charge  of  sin,  so  that  we  become  innocent  in  the  sight  of 
God,  yea,  and  even  meritorious  through  the  righteousness  of  Jesus.  This  justification 
is  instantaneous,  perfect,  unalterable,  and  brings  with  it  all  the  blessings  which  by 
right  only  belong  to  perfection. 

3.  From  the  very  being  of  sin.  There  is  in  each  of  us  our  original  depravity, 
and  our  acquired  habits,  but  these  the  Lord  graciously  takes  away  ;  and  puts  in  their 
place  a  new  nature,  and  holy  desires  leading  to  holy  acts. 

This  is  a  gradually  progressive  work. 

These  three  things — pardon,  justification,  and  sanctification, — must  go  together. 
God  will  not  justify  an  unpardoned  or  unsanctified  sinner  at  the  last. 
Oh,  how  glorious  is  this  salvation  !      My  soul,  often  muse  thereon  ! 

III.  The  blessed  people. 

Not  known  at  first,  but  mingled  with  others  ;  some  ot  all  countries,  ranks,  and 
characters,  shall  be  brought  in.      The  marks  by  which  they  are  distinguished  are — 

1.  A  sincere  desire  after  Heaven. 

2.  A  devout  seeking  for  God. 

3.  Diligent  labour  to  find  the  way  of  salvation. 

4.  Great  abhorrence  of  sin. 

5.  Sense  of  personal  nothingness. 

6.  Humble  reliance  on  Jesus. 

And  now,  my  Father,  make  Thy  servant  mighty  at  last  to  wrestle  with  sinners  ! 
Come,  O  Father,  to  mine  assistance,  by  the  ever-blessed  Spirit,  tor  JESUS 
CHRIST'S  sake!     Amen. 


Before  I  left  Cambridge,  to  come  to  London,  I  went  one  day  into  the  library  of 
Trinity  College,  and  there  I  noticed  a  very  fine  statue  of  Lord  Byron.  The  librarian 
said  to  me,  "Stand  here,  sir."  I  did  as  I  was  directed,  and  as  I  looked  at  it  I  said, 
"  What  a  fine  intellectual  countenance  !  What  a  grand  genius  he  was  !  "  "  Come 
here,"  said  the  librarian,  "and  look  at  the  other  side  of  the  statue."      I  said,  "  Oh  ! 


298  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

what  a  demon  !  There  stands  the  man  who  could  defy  the  Deity."  He  seemed  to 
have  such  a  scowl  and  such  a  dreadful  leer  on  his  face,  as  Milton  would  have  painted 
upon  Satan  when  he  said,  "  Better  to  reign  in  hell,  than  serve  in  Heaven."  I  turned 
away,  and  asked  the  librarian,  "  Do  you  think  the  artist  designed  this?"  "Yes,"  he 
said,  "  he  wished  to  picture  the  two  characters, — -the  great,  the  grand,  the  almost- 
superhuman  genius  that  Byron  possessed,  and  yet  the  enormous  mass  of  sin  that  was 
in  his  soul."  Was  ever  libertine  more  free  in  his  vices?  Was  ever  sinner  more 
wild  in  his  blasphemy?  Was  ever  poet  more  daring  in  his  flights  of  fancy?  Was 
ever  any  man  more  injurious  to  his  fellows?  Yet  what  did  Byron  say?  There  is 
a  verse  of  his  which  just  tells  us  what  he  felt  in  his  heart  ;  the  man  had  all  that 
he  wanted  of  sinful  pleasure,  but  here  is  his  confession, — 

"  I  fly,  like  a  bird  of  the  air, 

In  search  of  a  home  and  a  rest ; 

A  balm  for  the  sickness  of  care, — 

A  bliss  for  a  bosom  unblest." 

Yet  he  found  it  not,  for  he  had  no  rest  in  God.  He  tried  pleasure  till  his  eyes  were 
red  with  it  ;  he  tried  vice  till  his  body  was  sick  ;  and  he  descended  into  his  grave  a 
premature  old  man. 

In  the  year  1853,  I  was  asked  to  give  an  address  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the 
Cambridge  Sunday  School  Union,  in  the  Guildhall  of  that  town.  There  were  two 
other  ministers  to  speak,  both  of  them  much  older  than  myself ;  and,  as  a  natural 
consequence,  I  was  called  upon  first.  I  do  not  now  recollect  anything  that  I  said  on 
that  occasion,  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  I  spoke  in  my  usual  straightforward  fashion. 
I  do  not  think  there  was  anything  in  my  remarks  to  cause  the  other  speakers  to  turn 
upon  me  so  savagely  as  they  did  when  it  came  to  their  turn  to  address  the  large 
gathering.  One  of  them,  in  particular,  was  very  personal  and  also  most  insulting  in 
his  observations,  specially  referring  to  my  youth,  and  then,  in  what  he  seemed  to 
regard  as  a  climax,  saying  that  it  was  a  pity  that  boys  did  not  adopt  the  Scriptural 
practice  of  tarrying  at  Jericho  till  their  beards  were  grown  before  they  tried  to 
instruct  their  seniors. 

Having  obtained  the  chairman's  permission,  I  reminded  the  audience  that  those 
who  were  bidden  to  tarry  at  Jericho  were  not  boys,  but  full-grown  men,  whose 
beards  had  been  shaved  off  by  their  enemies  as  the  greatest  indignity  they  could  be 
made  to  suffer,  and  who  were,  therefore,  ashamed  to  return  home  until  their  beards  had 
grown  again.  I  added  that,  the  true  parallel  to  their  case  could  be  found  in  a  minister 
who,  through  falling  into  open  sin,  had  disgraced  his  sacred  calling,  and  so  needed 
to  go  into  seclusion  for  a  while  until  his  character  had  been  to  some  e.xtent  restored. 
As  it  happened,  I  had  given  an  exact  description  of  the  man  who  had  attacked  me 


H.      SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


J99 


so  unjustly,  and  for  that  reason  all  who  were  present,  and  knew  the  circumstances, 
would  be  the  more  likely  to  remember  the  incident.  There  was  in  the  hall,  that 
evening,  a  gentleman  from  Essex, — Mr.  George  Gould,  of  Lough  ton, — who  felt  so 
deeply  sympathetic  with  me  in  the  trying  position  in  which  I  had  been  placed, 
through  no  fault  of  my  own,  and  who  also  was  so  much  impressed  by  what  he  had 


^' 


MR.    rllO.MAS   OLNEY,    SENIOR. 


heard  that,  shortly  afterwards,  meeting  in  London  old  Mr.  Thomas  Olney,  one  of 
the  deacons  of  the  church  worshipping  in  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  he  pressed  him  to 
try  to  secure  my  services  as  a  supply  for  the  vacant  pulpit,  and  thus  became,  in  the 
hand  of  God,  the  means  of  my  transference  from  Cambridgeshire  to  the  metropolis. 


300  C.      H.      SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

(The  night  before  he  came  to  London,  Mr.  Spurgeon  gave  the  following  poem, 
which  he  had  composed,  to  the  ladies  with  whom  he  had  lodged  after  leaving 
Mr.  Leeding's  school  ;  it  has  probably  never  been  published  until  now  : — ) 

The   Noble  Army  of  Martyrs. 

Rouse  thee,  Music  !    Rouse  thee,  Song  ! 
Noble  themes  await  thee  long. 
Not  the  warrior's  thund'ring  car, 
Not  the  batde  heard  afar, 
Not  the  garment  rolled  in  blood, 
Not  the  river's  redden'd  flood  ; 
Subjects  more  sublime   I   sing. 
Soar  thee,   then,   on  highest   wing  ! 

Sing  the  white-robed  hosts  on  high, 
Who  in  splendour   suns  outvie  ; 
Sing  ot  them,   the  martyr'd  band. 
With  the  palm-branch   in  their  hand  ; 
Fairest  of  the  sons  of   light, 
Midst  the  bright  ones  doubly  bright. 

•  Who  are  these  ''    Of  noble  birth  ? 
Were  they  monarchs  of  the  earth  .'' 
Kines  of  Babel's  ancient  state, 
Lords  of   Persia,  proud  and  great, 
Grecian   heroes,   bold  and   brave, 
Romans,   making  earth   their  slave  ? 

No, — but  hearken  !    Heav'n  replies, 
List  the  music  from  the  skies  : — 
"  These  are  they  who  dared  to  die, 
Champions  of  our  Lord  on  high. 
At   His  name  they  bow'd  the  knee. 
Sworn  to  worship  none  but   He. 
Fearless  of  the   tyrant's  frown. 
Mindful  of  the  promised  crown  ; 
Trampling  on  Satanic  rage, 
Conqu'ring  still  from  age  to  age. 
Come,  the  glorious  host  review, 
March   the  glittering  squadrons  through." 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHV.  30I 

Some,  from  show'rs  of  deadly  stones, 
Some,  from   wheels, — with  broken  bones, 
Snatch'd  by  sweet  seraphic  might. 
Borne  above  the  tyrant's  spite, — 
Wondrous  in  their  dying  hour^ 
Rose  above  the  demon's  power. 

Some  by  cruel   racks  were  torn, 
Others  were  in  sunder  sawn. 
Hunger,  nakedness,  and  thirst, 
Sword,  and  axe,  and  spear  accurs'd, 
Cross,  and  knife,  and  fiery  dart. 
All  conspiring,  join'd  their  smart  ; 
Vet,  unconquer'd  e'en  in  death, 
Triumph   fill'd  their  latest  breath. 

Yonder  rank  in  chariots  came, 
Blazing  o'er  with  fiery  fiame  ; 
Now,   in  burnish'd  arms  they  shine, 
Glorious   in  the  gift   Divine. 

Some,   from  jaws  of  cruel  beasts. 
Rose  to   Heav'n's  triumphal  feasts  ; 
Some,   in  dungeons  long  immured. 
Saw  in  death   their  crown  secured, 
WrithinsT  in  their  tortures  dread, 
Smiled  as  if  on  downy  bed. 

•  These,   Irom   Rome's  dark  dungeons  fiew  ; 
These,  on  Alps,   the  despot  slew  ; 
These,  by  Spanish   priests  were  slain  ; 
These,  the   Moslem   curs'd  in  vain. 

Yonder  stands  a  gallant  host. 
Martyrs  from   the  Gallic  coast. 
Heroes  from   Bartholomew, 
Soldiers  to  their  Master  true. 

These,   again,   in  shining  row. 
Saw  the  fiery  torments  glow, 
They  in  Smithfield  kiss'd  the  stake. 
Blest  to  die  for  Jesus'  sake. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Those  who,  further  in  the  plain, 
Lift  to   Heav'n  the  lofty  strain. 
In  the  ocean  found  a  orrave, 
Pluno'd  by  lorce  beneath  the  wave. 

Some,  by   EnoHsh  prelates  tried, 
On   the  scaffold  firmly  died  ; 
Scorn'd  to  own  prelatic  sway, 
Nobly  dared  to  disobey. 

Covenanters  bold  are  there. 
Sons  of  Scotia's  mountains  bare, 
Mingled  with   the  valiant  band, 
Heroes  of  my  fatherland. 


CHAPTER   XXVIIL 


Br.  IltppDu's  l&xum  anb  its  xlnsbjtr. 

One  of  the  best  things  that  a  church  can  do  is  to  catch  a  minister  young,  and  train  him  for  them- 
selves. Some  of  the  happiest  and  longest  pastorates  in  our  denomination  commenced  with  the  invita- 
tion of  a  young  man  from  the  country  to  a  post  lor  which  he  was  barely  qualihed.  His  mistakes  were 
borne  with,  his  efforts  were  encouraged,  and  he  grew,  and  the  church  grew  with  him.  His  pastorate 
continued  for  many  a  year,  since  he  was  under  no  temptation  to  leave  for  another  position,  because  he 
felt  at  home,  and  could  say,  like  one  of  old,  "  I  dwell  among  mine  own  people." 

I  am  told  that  my  venerable  predecessor,  Dr.  Rippon,  used  often,  in  his  pulpit,  to  pray  for  some- 
body, of  whom  he  knew  nothing,  who  would  follow  him  in  the  ministry  of  the  church,  and  greatly 
increase  it.  He  seemed  to  have  in  his  mind's  eye  some  young  man,  who,  m  after  years,  would  greatly 
enlarge  the  number  of  the  flock,  and  he  often  prayed  for  him.  He  died,  and  passed  away  to  Heaven,  a 
year  or  two  after  I  was  born.  Older  members  of  the  cliurch  have  told  me  that  they  have  read  the 
answer  to  Dr.  Rippon's  prayers  in  the  blessing  that  has  been  given  to  us  these  many  years.— C.  H.  S. 

HE  Christians  commonly  called  Baptists  are,  according  to  my  belief, 
the  purest  part  of  that  sect  which,  of  old,  was  "everywhere  spoken 
against,"  and  I  am  convinced  that  they  have,  beyond  their  brethren, 
preserved  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  they  were  delivered 
unto  the  saints.  I  care  very  little  for  the  "  historical  church " 
argument ;  but  if  there  be  anything  at  all  in  it,  the  plea  ought  not 
to  be  filched  by  the  clients  of  Rome,  but  should  be  left  to  that  community  which  all 
along  has  held  by  "one  Lord,  one  faith,  and  one  baptism."  This  body  of  believers 
has  not  been  exalted  into  temporal  power,  or  decorated  with  worldly  rank,  but  it  has 
dwelt  for  the  most  part  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth, — "destitute,  afflicted,  tor- 
mented,"— and  so  has  proved  itself  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  the  Crucified.  The 
church  which  most  loudly  claims  the  apostolical  succession  wears  upon  her  brow 
more  of  the  marks  of  Antichrist  than  of  Christ  ;  but  the  afflicted  Anabaptists,  in 
their  past  history,  have  had  such  fellowship  with  their  suffering  Lord,  and  have 
borne  so  pure  a  testimony,  both  to  truth  and  freedom,  that  they  need  in  nothing  to 
be  ashamed.  Their  very  existence  under  the  calumnies  and  persecutions  which  they 
have  endured  is  a  standing  marvel,  while  their  unflinching  fidelity  to  the  Scriptures 
as  their  sole  rule  of  faith,  and  their  adherence  to  the  simplicity  of  gospel  ordinances, 
is  a  sure  index  of  their  Lord's  presence  among  them.  It  would  not  be  impossible  to 
show  that  the  first  Christians  who  dwelt  in  this  land  were  of  the  same  faith  and  order 
as  the  believers  now  called  Baptists.  The  errors  of  the  churches  are  all  more  or  less 
modern,  and  those  which  have  clustered  around  the  ordinance  of  baptism  are  by  no 


304  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

means  so  venerable  for  age  as  some  would  have  us  suppose.  The  evidence  supplied 
by  ancient  monuments  and  baptisteries,  which  still  remain,  would  be  conclusive  in 
our  favour  were  it  not  that  upon  this  point  the  minds  of  men  are  not  very  open  to 
argument.  Foregone  conclusions  and  established  ecclesiastical  arrangements  are 
not  easily  shaken.  Few  men  care  to  follow  truth  when  she  leads  them  without  the 
camp,  and  calls  them  to  take  up  their  cross,  and  endure  to  be  thought  singular  even 
by  their  fellow-Christians. 

The  church  now  worshipping  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle*  took  its  rise  from 
one  of  the  many  assemblies  of  immersed  believers  who  met  in  the  borough  of 
Southwark.  Crosby,  in  his  Hisioiy  of  the  Baptists,  says: — "This  people  had 
formerly  belonged  to  one  of  the  most  ancient  congregations  of  the  Baptists  in 
London,  but  separated  from  them  in  the  year  1652,  for  some  practices  which  they 
judged  disorderly,  and  kept  together  from  that  time  as  a  distinct  body."  They 
appear  to  have  met  in  private  houses,  or  in  such  other  buildings  as  were  open  to 
them.  Their  first  Pastor  was  William  Rider,  whom  Crosby  mentions  as  a  sufferer 
for  conscience  sake,  but  he  is  altogether  unable  to  give  any  further  particulars  of 
his  life,  except  that  he  published  a  small  tract  in  vindication  of  the  practice  of 
laying  on  ot  hands  on  the  baptized  believers.  The  people  were  few  in  number, 
but  they  had  the  reputation  of  being  men  of  solid  judgment,  deep  knowledge,  and 
religious  stability,  and  many  of  them  were  also  in  easy  circumstances  as  to  worldly 
goods.  Oliver  Cromwell  was  just  at  that  time  in  the  ascendant,  and  Blake's  cannon 
were  sweeping  the  Dutch  from  the  seas,  but  the  Presbyterian  establishment  ruled 
with  a  heavy  hand,  and  Baptists  were  under  a  cloud.  In  the  following  year, 
Cromwell  was  made  Protector,  the  old  parliament  was  sent  about  its  business,  and 
England  enjoyed  a  large  measure  of  liberty  of  conscience.  This  seems  to  have 
been  a  period  of  much  religious  heart-searching,  in  which  the  ordinances  of  churches 
were  tried  by  the  Word  of  God,  and  men  were  determined  to  retain  nothing  which 
was  not  sanctioned  by  Divine  authority  ;  hence,  there  were  many  public  disputes 
upon  baptism,  and,  in  consequence,  many  became  adherents  of  believers'  immersion, 
and  Baptist  churches  sprang  up  on  all  sides.  Truth  suffers  nothing  from  free 
discussion  ;  it  is,  indeed,  the  element  in  which  it  most  freely  e.xerts  its  power.  I 
have  personally  known  several  instances  in  which  sermons  in  defence  of  infant 
baptism  have  driven  numbers  to  more  Scriptural  views,  and  I  have  felt  that,  if 
Paedo- Baptists  will  only  preach  upon  the  subject.  Baptists  will  have  little  to  do  but 
to  remain  quiet  and  reap  the  sure  results.  It  is  a  dangerous  subject  for  any 
ministers  to  handle  who  wish  their  people  to  abide  by  the  popular  opinion  on  this 
matter. 


*  Readers  who  desire  more  detailed  information  concerning  the  Tabernacle  Church,  can  find  it  in  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle: 
its  History  and  IVorh.     By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Passmore  and  Alabaster,     is.  and  2S. 


H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


305 


How  long-  William  Rider  exercised  the  ministerial  office,  I  am  unable  to  tell  ; 
but  the  church's  next  record,  bearing  date  1668,  says: — "The  Pastor  having  been 
dead  for  some  time,  they  unanimously  chose  Mr.  Benjamin  Keach  to  be  their  elder 
or  pastor."  Accordingly,  he  was  solemnly  ordained,  with  prayer  and  the  laying  on 
of  hands,  being  then  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  of  his  age.  Previous  to  his  coming 
to  London,  Keach  was  continually  engaged  in  preaching  in  the  towns  of  Bucking- 
hamshire, making  Winslow  his  headquarters  ;  and  so  well  did  the  good  cause  flourish 
under  his    zealous   labours,   and   those    of  others,    that  the  government    quartered 


MR.    BENJAMIN    KEACH. 


dragoons   in  the  district   in  order   to  put  down   unlawful   meetings,  and  stamp  out 

Dissent.     The  amount  of  suffering  which  this  involved,   the  readers  of  the  story  of 

the  Covenanting    times  in   Scotland   can   readily    imagine.      For  publishing  a  little 

book,    The  Child's  Instructor,   Keach  was  fined,  imprisoned,  and  put   in   the  pillory 

at  Aylesbury  and  Winslow  ;   but  he  continued  to  labour  in  the  country  until  1668, 

when  he  came  to    London,    and  very  speedily  was  chosen    Pastor  of  the   late    Mr. 

Rider's  congregation. 

u 


3o6  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

Benjamin  Keach  was  one  of  the  most  useful  preachers  of  his  time,  and  for  thirty- 
six  years  built  up  the  Church  of  God  with  sound  doctrine.  Having  been  in  his  very 
earliest  days  an  Arminian,  and  having  soon  advanced  to  Calvinistic  views,  he 
preserved  the  balance  in  his  preaching,  and  was  never  a  member  of  that  exclusive 
school  which  deems  it  to  be  unsound  to  persuade  men  to  repent  and  believe.  He 
was  by  no  means  so  highly  Calvinistic  as  his  great  successor,  Dr.  Gill  ;  but  evidently 
held  much  the  same  views  as  are  now  advocated  from  the  pulpit  of  the  Tabernacle. 
Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  he  was  incessantly  preaching  upon  believers'  baptism, 
and  other  points  of  denominational  peculiarity  ;  his  teaching  was  sweetly  spiritual, 
intensely  Scriptural,  and  full  of  Christ.  Whoever  else  kept  back  the  fundamental 
truths  of  our  holy  gospel,  Benjamin  Keach  did  not  so.  During  the  time  of  an 
indulgence  issued  by  Charles  H.,  the  congregation  erected  a  large  meeting-house, 
capable  of  holding  "near  a  thousand  hearers,"  in  Goat's  Yard  Passage,  Fair  Street, 
Horse-lie-down,  Southwark,  and  this  is  the  first  house  of  prayer  actually  set  apart  for 
Divine  worship  which  I  find  that  our  church  possessed.  The  joy  of  being  able  to 
meet  in  quiet  to  worship  God,  the  delight  of  all  assembling  as  one  church,  must  have 
been  great  indeed.  I  have  tried  to  imagine  the  cheerful  salutations  with  which  the 
brethren  greeted  each  other  when  they  all  gathered  in  their  meeting-house  of  timber, 
and  worshipped  without  fear  of  molestation.  The  architecture  was  not  gorgeous, 
nor  were  the  fittings  luxurious  ;  but  the  Lord  was  there,  and  this  made  amends  for 
all.  In  all  probability,  there  were  no  seats,  for  at  that  time  most  congregations 
stood,  and  pews  are  mentioned,  in  after  days,  as  extras  which  persons  erected 
for  themselves,  and  looked  upon  as  their  own  property.  Mr.  Keach  trained  his 
church  to  labour  in  the  service  of  the  Lord.  Several  were  by  his  means  called  into 
the  Christian  ministry,  his  own  son,  Elias  Keach,  among  them.  He  was  mighty  at 
home  and  useful  abroad.  By  his  means,  other  churches  were  founded,  and  meeting- 
houses erected  ;  he  was,  in  fact,  as  a  pillar  and  a  brazen  wall  among  the  Baptist 
churches  of  his  day,  and  was  in  consequence  deservedly  had  in  honour.  He  "fell 
on  sleep,"  July  i6,  1704,  in  the  sixty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  and  was  buried  at  the 
Baptists'  burying-ground  in  the  Pa7-k,  Southwark.  It  was  not  a  litde  singular  that, 
in  after  years,  the  church  over  which  he  so  ably  presided  should  pitch  its  tent  so 
near  the  place  where  his  bones  were  laid,  and  that  New  Park  Street  should  appear 
in  her  annals  as  a  well-beloved  name. 

When  Mr.  Keach  was  upon  his  death-bed,  he  sent  for  his  son-in-law,  Benjamin 
Stinton,  and  solemnly  charged  him  to  care  for  the  church  which  he  was  about  to 
leave,  and  especially  urged  him  to  accept  the  pastoral  office  should  it  be  offered  to 
him  by  the  brethren.  Mr.  Stinton  had  already  for  some  years  helped  his  iather-in- 
law  in  many  ways,  and  therefore  he  was  no  new  and  untried  man.  It  is  no  small 
blessing  when  a  church  can  find  her  pastors  in  her  own  midst  ;  the  rule  is  to  look 


C.      H.     SPURGEONS     AUTOEIOGRAPIIY.  307 

abroad  ;  but,  perhaps,  if  our  home  gifts  were  more  encouraged,  the  Holy  Spirit 
would  cause  our  teachers  to  come  forth  more  frequently  from  among  our  own 
brethren.  Still,  we  cannot  forget  the  proverb  about  a  prophet  in  his  own  country. 
When  the  church  gave  IVIr.  Stinton  a  pressing  invitation,  he  delayed  a  while,  and 
gave  himself  space  for  serious  consideration  ;  but,  at  length,  remembering  the  dying 
words  of  his  father-in-law,  and  feeling  himself  directed  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  gave 
himself  up  to  the  ministry,  which  he  faithfully  discharged  for  fourteen  years, — 
namely,  from  1704  to  17 18.  He  had  great  natural  gifts,  but  felt  in  need  of  more 
education,  and  set  himself  to  work  to  obtain  it  as  soon  as  he  was  settled  over  the 
church.  To  be  thoroughly  furnished  for  the  great  work  before  him,  was  his  first 
endeavour.  Crosby  says  of  him  : — "  He  was  a  very  painful  and  laborious  minister  of 
the  gospel,  and  though  he  had  not  the  advantage  of  an  academical  education,  yet,  by 
his  own  industry,  under  the  assistance  of  the  famous  Mr.  Ainsworth  (author  of  the 
Latin  dictionary),  after  he  had  taken  upon  him  the  ministerial  office,  he  acquired  a 
good  degree  of  knowledge  in  the  languages,  and  other  useful  parts  of  literature, 
which  added  lustre  to  those  natural  endowments  which  were  very  conspicuous  in 
him."  In  his  later  days,  as  the  lease  of  the  meeting-house  in  Goat's  Yard  had 
nearly  run  out,  preparation  was  made  for  erecting  a  new  place  of  worship  in  Unicorn 
Yard.  Spending  himself  in  various  works  of  usefulness,  Mr.  Stinton  worked  on  till 
the  iith  of  February,  1718,  when  a  close  was  put  to  his  labours  and  his  life.  He 
was  taken  suddenly  ill,  and  saying  to  his  wife,  "  I  am  going,"  he  laid  himself  down 
upon  the  bed,  and  expired  in  the  forty-third  year  of  his  life.  He  smiled  on  death, 
for  the  Lord  smiled  on  him.  He  was  buried  near  his  predecessor,  in  the  Park, 
Southwark. 

The  loss  of  its  Pastor  is  always  a  serious  matter  to  a  Baptist  church,  hot  only 
because  it  is  deprived  of  the  services  of  a  well-tried  and  faithful  guide,  but  because, 
in  the  process  of  selecting  a  successor,  some  of  the  worst  points  of  human  nature  are 
apt  to  come  to  the  front.  All  may  unite  in  the  former  Pastor,  but  where  will  they 
find  another  rallying  point  ?  So  many  men,  so  many  minds.  All  are  not  prepared 
to  forego  their  own  predilections,  some  ,are  ready  to  be  litigious,  and  a  few  seize  the 
opportunity  to  thrust  themselves  into  undue  prominence.  If  they  would  all  wait 
upon  the  Lord  for  His  guidance,  and  consent  to  follow  it  when  they  have  obtained 
it,  the  matter  would  move  smoothly;  but,  alas  !  it  is  not  always  so.  In  the  present 
instance,  there  came  before  the  church  an  excellent  young  man,  whose  alter  life 
proved  that  he  was  well  qualified  for  the  pastorate,  but  either  he  was  too  young, 
being  only  twenty  or  one-and-twenty  years  of  age,  or  there  were  certain  points  in 
his  manner  which  were  not  pleasing  to  the  older  friends,  and  therefore  he  was 
earnestly  opposed.  The  deacons,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Thomas  Crosby, 
schoolmaster,  and  son-in-law  of  Keach,  were  resolved  that  this  young  man,  who  was 


2o8  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

no  other  than  John  Gill,  from  Kettering,  should  not  become  the  Pastor.  He  found, 
however,  warm  and  numerous  supporters,  and  when  the  question  came  to  a  vote,  his 
admirers  claimed  the  majority,  and  in  all  probability  their  claim  was  correct,  for 
the  other  party  declined  a  scrutiny  of  the  votes,  and  also  raised  the  question 
of  the  women's  voting,  declaring,  what  was  no  doubt  true,  that  apart  from  the 
female  vote  John  Gill  was  in  the  minority.  The  end  of  the  diflerence  was  that 
about  half  the  church  withdrew  from  the  chapel  in  Goat  Yard,  and  met  in  Mr. 
Crosby's  school-room,  claiming  to  be  the  old  church,  while  another  portion  remained 
in  the  chapel,  and  also  maintained  that  they  were  the  original  church.  The  question 
is  now  of  small  consequence,  if  it  ever  had  any  importance,  for  the  company  who 
rejected  Gill,  after  selecting  an  excellent  preacher,  and  prospering  for  many  years, 
met  with  a  chequered  experience,  and  at  length  ceased  to  exist.  In  all  probability, 
the  division  promoted  the  growth  ot  the  cause  of  Christ,  and  whatever  unhappy 
circumstances  marred  it  for  a  while,  both  parties  acted  conscientiously,  and  in  a  very 
short  time  were  perfectly  reconciled  to  each  other.  Mr.  Gill's  people  did  not  long- 
worship  in  Crosby's  school-room,  but,  as  the  other  friends  were  moving  out  and 
erecting  another  meeting-house  in  Unicorn  Yard,  they  came  back  to  the  old  building 
in  Goat  Yard,  and  found  themselves  very  much  at  home. 

Dr.  Gill's  pastorate  extended  over  no  less  a  period  than  fifty-one  years,  reaching 
from  1720  to  1 77 1,  and  he  proved  himself  to  be  a  true  master  in  Israel.  His  entire 
ministry  was  crowned  with  more  than  ordinary  success,  and  he  was  by  far  the 
greatest  scholar  the  church  had  yet  chosen  ;  but  he  cannot  be  regarded  as  so  great 
a  soul-winner  as  Keach  had  been,  neither  was  the  church  at  any  time  so  numerous 
under  his  ministry  as  under  that  of  Keach.  His  method  of  address  to  sinners,  in 
which  for  many  years  a  large  class  of  preachers  followed  him,  was  not  likely  to  be 
largely  useful.  He  cramped  himself,  and  was  therefore  straitened  where  there  was 
no  Scriptural  reason  for  being  so.  He  does  not  appear  to  have  had  the  public 
spirit  of  Stinton,  though  he  had  a  far  larger  share  of  influence  in  the  churches,  and 
was  indeed  a  sort  of  archbishop  over  a  certain  section.  The  ordination  discourses 
and  funeral  sermons  which  he  preached  must  have  amounted  to  a  very  large 
number  ;  it  seemed  as  if  no  Particular  Baptist  minister  could  be  properly  inducted  or 
interred  without  Dr.  Gill's  officiating.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year  17 19,  the  church 
at  Horsleydown  invited  him  to  preach  with  a  view  to  the  pastorate,  and  he  was 
ordained  March  22,  1720.  Little  did  the  friends  dream  what  sort  of  a  man  they  had 
thus  chosen  to  be  their  teacher  ;  but  had  they  known  it,  they  would  have  rejoiced 
that  a  man  of  such  vast  erudition,  such  indefatigable  industry,  such  sound  judgment, 
and  such  sterling  honesty,  had  come  among  them.  He  was  to  be  more  mighty  with 
his  pen  than  Keach,  and  to  make  a  deeper  impression  upon  his  age,  though  perhaps 
with   the  tongue  he  was  less  powerful  than  his  eminent  predecessor.      Early  in  his 


n.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


309 


ministry,  he  had  to  take  up  the  cudgels  for  Baptist  views  against  a  Psedo- Baptist 
preacher  of  Rowel,  near  Kettering,  and  he  did  so  in  a  manner  worthy  of  that 
eulogium  which  Toplady  passed  upon  him  in  reference  to  other  controversies,  when 
he  compared  him  to  Marlborough,  and  declared  that  he  never  fought  a  battle  without 
winning  it.  As  a  Pastor,  he  presided  over  the  flock  with  dignity  and  affection.  In 
the  course  of  his  ministry,  he  had  some  weak,  some  unworthy,  and  some  very  wicked 


^/  ^^, 


persons  to  deal  with.  To  the  feeble  of  the  flock,  he  was  an  affectionate  friend  and 
father.  He  readily  bore  with  their  weaknesses,  failings,  and  infirmities,  and 
particularly  when  he  saw  they  were  sincerely  on  the  Lord's  side.  In  1757,  the 
church  under  his  care  erected  a  new  meeting-house  for  him  in  Carter  Lane, 
St.  Olave's  Street,  Southwark,  near  London  Bridge  ;  which  he  opened  on  October  9, 
preaching  two  sermons  from  Exodus  xx.  24. 

In  the  Doctor's  later  years,  the  congregations  were  sparse,  and  the  membership 


3IO  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

seriously  declined.      He  was  himself  only  able  to  preach  once  on  the  Sabbath,  and 
living  in  a  rural  retreat  in  Camberwell,  he  could  do  but  little  in  the  way  of  overseeing 
the  church.      It  was  thought  desirable  that  some  younger  minister  should  be  found 
to  act  as  co-pastor.     To  this,  the  Doctor  gave  a  very  decided  answer  in  the  negative, 
asserting  "  that  Christ  gives  pastors,  is  certain  ;  but  that  he  gives  co-pastors,  is  not 
so  certain."      He  even  went  the  length  of  comparing  a  church  with  a  co-pastor  to  a 
woman  who  should  marry  another  man  while  her  first  husband  lived,  and  call  him 
co-husband.      Great  men  are  not  always  wise.      However,  by  his  stern  repudiation  ot 
any  division  of  his  authority,  the  old  gentleman  held  the  reins  of  power  till  the  age 
of  seventy-four,  although  the  young  people  gradually  dropped  off,  and   the  church 
barely  numbered   150  members.      Soon,  the  venerable  divine  became  too  feeble  for 
pulpit  service,  and  confined  himself  to  his  study  and  the  writing-desk,  and  by-and-by 
he  found  that  he  must  lie  down  to  rest,  for  his  dav's  work  was  done.      He  died  as  he 
had  lived,   in  a  calm,   quiet  manner,  resting  on  that  rich  sovereign  grace  which   it 
had  been  his  joy  to  preach.      The  last  words  he  was  heard  to  speak  were,  "  O  my 
Father,  my  Father  !  "      He  died  at  Camberwell,  October  14,  1771,  and  was  buried  in 
Bunhill   Fields.       His  eyesight  had  been   preserved   to  him   so  that  he  could  read 
small  print  by  candle-light  even  to  the  last,  and  he  never  used  glasses.      His  was  a 
mind  and  frame  of  singular  vigour,  and  he  died  before  failing  sight,  either  mental  or 
physical,  had  rendered  him  unfit  for  service  :    in  this  as  highly  favoured  as  he  had 
been  in  most  other  respects.      He  was  one  of  the  most  learned  men  that  the  Baptist 
denomination  has  ever  produced.      His  great  work.  The  Exposition  of  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  is  still  held  in  the  highest  esteem  even  by  those  whose  sentiments 
widely    differ    from    the     author's.       His    Body    of    Divinity    is    also    a    masterly 
condensation  of  doctrinal  and  practical  theology,  and  his   Cause  of  God  and  7 ruth 
is  highly  esteem.ed  by  many.     The  system  of  theology  with  which  many  identify  his 
name  has  chilled  many   churches  to   their  very  soul,    for   it  has   led   them  to   omit 
the  free  invitations  of  the  gospel,  and  to  deny  that  it  is  the  duty  of  sinners  to  believe 
in  Jesus  •  but  for  this,  Dr.  Gill  must  not  be  altogether  held  responsible,  for  a  candid 
reader  of  his   Commentary   will   soon   perceive   in    it   expressions   altogether  out   of 
accord  with  such  a  narrow  system  ;  and  it  is  well  known  that,  when  he  was  dealing 
with  practical  godliness,  he  was  so  bold  in  his  utterances  that  the  devotees  of  Hyper- 
Calvinism  could  not  endure  him.      "  Well,  sir,"  said  one  of  these,  "  if  I  had  not  been 
told  that  it  was  the  great  Dr.  Gill  who  preached,  I  should  have  said  I  had  heard  an 
Arminian." 

The  mighty  commentator  having  been  followed  to  his  grave  by  his  attached 
church  and  a  numerous  company  of  ministers  and  Christian  people,  among  whom  he 
had  been  regarded  as  a  great  man  and  a  prince  in  Israel,  his  church  began  to  look 
around  for  a  successor.     This  time,  as  m  the  case  of  Dr.  Gill,  there  was  trouble  m 


C.     II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3II 

Store,  for  there  was  division  of  opinion.  Some,  no  doubt,  as  true  Gillites,  looked 
only  for  a  solid  divine,  sound  in  doctrine,  who  would  supply  the  older  saints  with 
spiritual  food,  while  another  party  had  an  eye  to  the  growth  of  the  church,  and  to 
the  securino-  to  the  flock  the  younger  members  of  their  families.  They  were  agreed 
that  they  would  write  to  Bristol  for  a  probationer,  and  Mr.  John  Rippon  was  sent  to 
them.  He  was  a  youth  of  some  twenty  summers,  of  a  vivacious  temperament,  quick 
and  bold.  The  older  members  judged  him  to  be  too  young,  and  too  flighty  ;  they 
even  accused  him  of  having  gone  up  the  pulpit  stairs  two  steps  at  a  time  on  some 
occasion  when  he  was  hurried, — a  grave  oftence  for  which  the  condemnation  could 
hardly  be  too  severe.  He  was  only  a  young  man,  and  came  from  an  academy,  and 
this  alone  was  enough  to  make  the  sounder  and  older  members  afraid  of  him.  He 
preached  for  a  lengthened  time  on  probation,  and  finally  some  forty  persons 
withdrew  because  they  could  not  agree  with  the  enthusiastic  vote  by  which  the 
majority  of  the  people  elected  him.  John  Rippon  modestly  expressed  his  wonder 
that  even  more  had  not  been  dissatisfied,  and  his  surprise  that  so  large  a  number 
were  agreed  to  call  him  to  the  pastorate.  In  the  spirit  of  forbearance  and  brotherly 
love,  he  proposed  that,  as  these  friends  were  seceding  for  conscience  sake,  and 
intended  to  form  themselves  into  another  church,  they  should  be  lovingly  dismissed 
with  prayer  and  God-speed,  and  that,  as  a  token  of  fraternal  affection,  they  should 
be  assisted  to  build  a  meeting-house  for  their  own  convenience,  and  the  sum  of  ^^300 
should  be  voted  to  them  when  their  church  was  formed  and  their  meeting-house 
erected.  The  promise  was  redeemed,  and  Mr.  Rippon  took  part  in  the  ordination 
service  of  the  first  minister.  This  was  well  done.  Such  a  course  M'as  sure  to  secure 
the  blessing  of  God.  The  church  in  Dean  Street  thus  became  another  offshoot  from 
the  parent  stem,  and  with  varying  conditions  it  remains  to  this  day  as  the  church  in 
Trinity  Street,  Borough.  It  is  somewhat  remarkable,  as  illustrating  the  perversity 
of  human  judgment,  that  the  seceding  friends,  who  objected  to  Rippon's  youth, 
elected  for  their  pastor  Mr.  William  Button,  who  was  younger  still,  being  only 
nineteen  years  of  age.  His  father,  however,  was  a  deacon  under  Dr.  Gill,  and 
therefore  no  doubt  the  worthy  youth  was  regarded  with  all  the  more  tenderness  ; 
nor  did  he  disappoint  the  hopes  of  his  friends,  for  he  laboured  on  for  more  than  forty 
years  with  the  utmost  acceptance.  The  friends  who  remained  with  young  John 
Rippon  had  no  reason  to  regret  their  choice  :  the  tide  of  prosperity  set  in,  and  con- 
tinued for  half  a  century,  and  the  church  again  came  to  the  front  in  denominational 
affairs.  The  chapel  in  Carter  Lane  was  enlarged,  and  various  agencies  and  societies 
set  in  motion  ;  there  was,  in  fact,  a  real  revival  of  religion  in  the  church,  though  it 
was  of  that  quiet  style  which  became  a  Baptist  church  of  the  straiter  sort.  Rippon 
was  rather  clever  than  profound  ;  his  talents  were  far  inferior  to  those  of  Gill,  but 
he  had  more  tact,  and  so  turned  his  gifts  to  the  greatest  possible  account.      He  said 


312 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


many  smart  and  witty  things,  and  his  preaching  was  always  lively,  affectionate,  and 
impressive.  He  was  popular  in  the  best  sense  of  the  term, — beloved  at  home, 
respected  abroad,  and  useful  everywhere.  Many  souls  were  won  to  Jesus  by  his 
teaching,  and  out  of  these  a  remarkable  number  became  themselves  ministers  of  the 
gospel.  The  church-book  abounds  with  records  of  brethren  preaching  before  the 
church,  as  the  custom  was  in  those  days. 


MR.    RIPPON    IN    HIS   YOUNGER   DAYS. 


In  his  later  years.  Dr.  Rippon  was  evidently  in  very  comfortable  circumstances, 
for  we  have  often  heard  mention  of  his  carriage  and  pair,  or  rather,  "  glass  coach 
and  two  horses."  His  congregation  was  one  of  the  wealthiest  within  the  pale  of 
Nonconformity,  and  always  ready  to  aid  the  various  societies  which  sprang  up, 
especially  the  Baptist  Foreign  Mission,  and  a  certain  Baptist  Itinerant  Society, 
which  I  suppose  to  have  represented  the  Baptist  Home  Mission.  The  Pastor 
occupied  no  mean  position  in  the  church,  but  ruled  with  dignity  and  discretion, — 
perhaps,  ruled  a  little  too  much.  "  How  is  it,  Doctor,  that  your  church  is  always  so 
peaceful  .-'"  said  a  much-tried  brother  minister.  "Well,  friend,"  said  Rippon,  "you 
see,  we  don't  call  a  church-meeting  to  consult  about  buying  a  new  broom  every  time 
we  want  one,  and  we  don't  entreat  every  noisy  member  to  make  a  speech  about  the 


C.     n.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  3 1 3. 

price  of  the  soap  the  floors  are  scrubbed  with."  In  many  of  our  smaller  churches,  a 
want  of  common  sense  is  very  manifest  in  the  management,  and  trouble  is  invited 
by  the  foolish  methods  of  procedure.  Dr.  Rippon  once  said  that  he  had  some  of 
the  best  people  in  His  Majesty's  dominions  in  his  church,  and  he  used  to  add  with  a 
^nod, — ""and  some  of  the  worst."  Some  of  the  latter  class  seem  to  have  got  into 
office  at  one  time,  for  they  were  evidently  a  hindrance  rather  than  a  help  to  the  good 
man,  though  from  his  independent  mode  of  doing  things  the  hindrance  did  not  much 
affect  him.  As  well  as  I  can  remember  it,  the  story  of  his  founding  the  Almshouses 
and  Schools,  in  1803,  runs  as  follows.  The  Doctor  urges  upon  the  deacons  the 
necessity  of  such  institutions  ;  they  do  not  see  the  urgency  thereof ;  he  pleads  again, 
but,  like  the  deaf  adder,  they  are  not  to  be  charmed,  charm  he  never  so  wisely. 
"  The  expense  will  be  enormous,  and  the  money  cannot  be  raised  ; "  this  was  the 
unceasing  croak  of  the  prudent  officers.  At  length  the  Pastor  says,  "  The  money 
can  be  raised,  and  shall  be.  Why,  if  I  don't  go  out  ne.xt  Monday,  and  collect  .1^500 
before  the  evening  meeting,  I'll  drop  the  proposal  ;  but  while  I  am  sure  the  people 
will  take  up  the  matter  heartily,  I  will  not  be  held  back  by  you."  Disputes  in  this 
case  were  urged  in  very  plain  language,  but  with  no  degree  of  bitterness,  for  the 
parties  knew  each  other,  and  had  too  much  mutual  respect  to  make  their  relationships 
in  the  church  depend  upon  a  point  of  difference.  All  were  agreed  to  put  the  Doctor 
to  the  test,  and  challenged  him  to  produce  the  ;^500  next  Monday,  or  cease  to 
importune  them  about  Almshouses,  The  worthy  slow  coaches  were  up  to  time  on  the 
appointed  evening,  and  the  Doctor  soon  arrived.  "  Well,  brethren,"  said  he,  "  I 
have  succeeded  in  collecting  ^^300  ; — that  is  most  encouraging,  is  it  not  .■* "  "  But," 
said  two  or  three  of  them  at  once  in  a  hurry,  "you  said  you  would  get  ^500,  or  drop 
the  matter,  and  we  mean  to  keep  you  to  your  word."  "  By  all  means,"  said  he, 
"and  I  mean  to  keep  my  word,  too,  for  there  is  /800  which  the  friends  gave 
me  almost  without  asking,  and  the  rest  is  nearly  all  promised."  The  prudent  officials 
were  taken  aback,  but  recovering  themselves,  they  expressed  their  great  pleasure, 
and  would  be  ready  to  meet  the  Pastor  at  any  time,  to  arrange  for  the  expending 
of  the  funds.  "  No,  no,  my  brethren,"  said  the  Doctor,  "  I  shall  not  need  your 
services.  You  have  opposed  me  all  along,  and  now  I  have  done  the  work  without 
you,  you  want  to  have  your  say  in  it  to  hinder  me  still  ;  but  neither  you  nor  any 
other  deacons  shall  plague  a  minister  about  this  business.  So,  brethren,  you  can 
attend  to  something  else."  Accordingly,  the  old  trust  deed  of  the  Almshouses  had 
a  clause  to  the  effect  that  the  Pastor  should  elect  the  pensioners,  '"no  deacon 
interfering." 

When  the  time  came  for  removing  the  Almshouses  and  Schools  to  the  fine  block 
of  buildings  erected  by  our  friends  in  the  Station  Road,  Walworth,  near  the 
Elephant    and    Castle    Railway    Station,    I     had    great    pleasure     in    inducing    the 


;i4 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


Charity  Commissioners  to  expunge  this  objectionable  clause,  and  to  give  the  Pastor 
and  deacons  unitedly  the  power  to  select  the  objects  of  the  charity. 

Dr.  Rippon  continued  in  the  pastorate  from  1773  to  1836,  a  period  of  sixty- 
three  years.  He  outlived  his  usefulness,  and  it  was  a  wonderful  instance  of  Divine 
care  over  the  church  that  the  old  gentleman  did  not  do  it  serious  injury.  He 
retained  the  will  to  govern  after  the  capacity  was  gone,  and  he  held  his  power 
over  the  pulpit  though  unable  to  occupy  it  to  profit.  Supplies  who  came 
to  preach  for  him  were  not  always  allowed  to  officiate ;  and  when  they  did, 
the    old    minister's    remarks    from    his    pew    were    frequently    more     quaint     than 


METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE   ALMSHOUSES  AND   SCHOOLS. 


ao-reeable.  It  is  not  an  unqualified  blessing  to  live  to  be  eighty-five.  During 
the  last  few  months,  Mr.  Charles  Room,  with  the  Doctor's  full  approbation, 
acted  as  his  assistant,  but  he  resigned  upon  the  decease  of  Dr.  Rippon.  He  left 
with  the  esteem  and  good  wishes  of  the  church,  and  afterwards  exercised  a 
useful  ministry  at  Portsea.  In  1830,  six  years  before  Dr.  Rippon's  death,  the  old 
sanctuary  in  Carter  Lane  was  closed,  to  be  pulled  down  for  making  the  approaches 
to  the  present  London  Bridge.  Due  compensation  was  given,  but  a  chapel  could 
not  be  built  in  a  day,  and,  therefore,  for  three  years,  the  church  was  without  a  home, 
and  had  to  be  indebted  to  the  hospitality  of  other  congregations.     After  so  long  a 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  315 

time  for  choice,  the  good  deacons  ought  to  have  pitched  upon  a  better  site  for  the 
new  edifice  ;  but  it  is  not  judging  them  hardly  when  I  say  that  they  could  not  have 
discovered  a  worse  position.  If  they  had  taken  thirty  years  to  look  about  them 
with  the  design  of  burying  the  church  alive,  they  could  not  have  succeeded  better. 
New  Park  Street  is  a  low-lying  sort  of  lane  close  to  the  bank  of  the  River  Thames, 
near  the  enormous  breweries  of  Messrs.  Barclay  and  Perkins,  the  vinegar  factories  of 
Mr.  Potts,  and  several  large  boiler  works.  The  nearest  way  to  it  from  the  City  was 
over  Southwark  Bridge,  with  a  toll  to  pay.  No  cabs  could  be  had  within  about 
half-a-mile  of  the  place,  and  the  region  was  dim,  dirty,  and  destitute,  and  frequently 
flooded  by  the  river  at  high  tides.  Here,  however,  the  new  chapel  must  be  built 
because  the  ground  was  a  cheap  freehold,  and  the  authorities  were  destitute  of 
enterprise,  and  would  not  spend  a  penny  more  than  the  amount  in  hand.  That  God, 
in  infinite  mercy,  forbade  the  extinction  of  the  church,  is  no  mitigation  of  the 
shortsightedness  which  thrust  a  respectable  community  of  Christians  into  an  out-of- 
the-way  position,  far  more  suitable  for  a  tallow-melter's  business  than  for  a  meeting- 
house. The  chapel,  however,  was  a  neat,  handsome,  commodious,  well-built  edifice, 
and  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  Baptist  chapels  in  London.  Dr.  Rippon  was 
present  at  the  opening  of  the  new  house  in  1833,  but  it  was  very  evident  that, 
having  now  found  a  place  to  meet  in,  the  next  step  must  be  to  find  a  minister  to 
preside  over  the  congregation.  This  was  no  easy  task,  for  the  old  gentleman, 
though  still  revered  and  loved,  was  difficult  to  manage  in  such  matters.  Happily, 
however,  the  deacons  were  supremely  judicious,  and  having  kept  the  church  out  of 
all  rash  e.\penditure,  they  also  preserved  it  from  all  hasty  action,  and  tided  over 
affairs  till  the  worn-out  Pastor  passed  away  to  his  rest,  and  with  due  funereal 
honours  was  laid  in  that  Campo  Santo  of  Nonconformists, — the  cemetery  of  Bunhill 
Fields,  of  which  it  had  been  his  ambition  to  become  the  historian  and  chronicler. 
There  are  thousands  in  Heaven  who  were  led  first  to  love  the  Saviour  by  his  earnest 
exhortations.  He  quarried  fresh  stones,  and  built  up  the  church.  He  moulded  its 
thought,  and  directed  its  energies.  Without  being  great,  he  was  e.xceedingly  useful, 
and  the  period  in  which  he  was  one  of  the  judges  of  our  Israel  was  one  of  great 
prosperity  in  spiritual  things.  It  was  a  good  sixty-three  years,  and  with  the 
previous  pastorate  of  Dr.  Gill,  enabled  the  church  to  say  that,  during  one  hundred 
and  seventeen  years,  they  had  been  presided  over  by  two  ministers  only. 

The  next  Pastor  was  Mr.,  now  Doctor,  Joseph  Angus,  a  gentleman  whose 
career  since  he  left  us  to  become  secretary  of  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society,  and 
afterwards  the  tutor  of  Stepney  Academy,  now  Regent's  Park  College,  has  rendered 
his  name  most  honourable  among  living  Baptists.  During  Mr.  Angus's  pastorate, 
the  privilege  of  communing  at  the  Lord's  table  was  extended  to  members  of  other 
churches,  whether  baptized  or  not,  and  this  was  done  quietly  and  without  division, 


-7 1 5  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

though  a  considerable  minority  did  not  agree  with  it.  The  church  remains  a 
community  of  baptized  behevers,  and  its  constitution  will  not  admit  any  persons  into 
its  membership  but  those  immersed  upon  personal  profession  of  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  ;  but  it  does  not  attempt  to  judge  the  order  and  discipline  of  other  churches, 
and  has  fellowship  in  the  breaking  of  bread  with  all  churches  which  form  parts  of 
the  mystical  body  of  Christ  :  thus  it  endeavours  to  fulfil  at  the  same  time  the  duties 
of  purity  and  love.  In  December,  1839,  the  Baptist  Missionary  Society  invited 
Mr.  Ancrus  to  become  its  Home  Secretary.  A  sense  of  the  importance  of  the 
Missionary  Society,  and  the  fact  that,  after  much  deliberation,  the  Committee  could 
not  discover  anyone  else  about  whom  they  could  be  at  all  unanimous,  were  the 
motives  which  led  him  to  leave  the  church,  to  the  deep  regret  of  all  the  members. 

After  the  removal  of  Dr.  Angus,  the  church  was  happily  directed  to  hear 
Mr.  James  Smith,  whose  ministry  in  Cheltenham  was  an  abundant  guarantee  that 
he  was  likely  to  prove  the  right  man  to  collect  a  congregation  in  New  Park  Street. 
He  was  Pastor  for  about  eight  years  and  a  half,  from  1841  to  1850,  and  then 
returned  to  Cheltenham,  from  which  many  of  his  best  friends  are  of  opinion  that  he 
ought  never  to  have  removed.  He  was  a  man  of  slender  education,  but  of  great 
natural  ability,  sound  in  the  faith,  intensely  earnest,  and  a  ready  speaker.  Few  men 
have  ever  been  more  useful  than  he.  In  July,  185 1,  the  church  invited  the 
Rev.  William  Walters,  of  Preston,  to  become  the  Pastor,  but  as  he  understood 
the  deacons  to  intimate  to  him  that  his  ministry  was  not  acceptable,  he  tendered  his 
resignation,  and  although  requested  to  remain,  he  judged  it  more  advisable  to 
remove  to  Halifax  in  June,  1853,  thus  closing  a  ministry  of  two  years.  These 
changes  sadly  diminished  the  church,  and  marred  its  union.  The  clouds  gathered 
heavily,  and  no  sunlight  appeared  ;  but  the  Lord  had  not  forgotten  His  people,  and 
in  due  time  He  poured  them  out  such  a  blessing  that  there  was  not  room  to  receive 
it.      Let  me  tell  once  more  the  pleasing  story. 

*  #  *  * 

On  the  last  Sabbath  morning  in  November,  1853,  I  walked,  according  to  my 
wont,  from  Cambridge  to  the  village  of  Waterbeach,  in  order  to  occupy  the  pulpit 
of  the  little  Baptist  Chapel.  It  was  a  country  road,  and  there  were  five  or  si.\  honest 
miles  of  it,  which  I  usually  measured,  each  Sunday,  foot  by  foot,  unless  I  happened 
to  be  met  by  a  certain  little  pony  and  cart  which  came  half-way,  but  could  not  by  any 
possibility  venture  further  because  of  the  enormous  e.xpense  which  would  have  been 
incurred  by  driving  through  the  toll-gate  at  Milton  !  That  winter's  morning,  I  was 
all  aglow  with  my  walk,  and  ready  for  my  pulpit  exercises.  Sitting  down  in  the 
table-pew,  a  letter,  bearing  the  postmark  of  London,  was  passed  to  me.  It  was  an 
unusual  missive,  and  was  opened  with  curiosity.  It  contained  an  invitation  to  preach 
at   New   Park   Street  Chapel,   Southwark,    the    pulpit   of  which    had   formerly   been 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  317 

occupied  by  Dr.  Rippon, — the  very  Dr.  Rippon  whose  hymn-book  was  then  before 
me  upon  the  table, — the  great  Dr.  Rippon,  out  of  whose  Selection  I  was  about  to 
choose  the  hymns  for  our  worship.  The  late  Dr.  Rippon  seemed  to  hover  over  me 
as  an  immeasurably  great  man,  the  glory  of  whose  name  covered  New  Park  Street 
Chapel  and  its  pulpit  with  awe  unspeakable.  I  quiedy  passed  the  letter  across  the 
table  to  the  deacon  who  gave  out  the  hymns,  observing  that  there  was  some  mistake, 
and  that  the  letter  must  have  been  intended  for  a  Mr.  Spurgeon  who  preached  some- 
where down  in  Norfolk.  He  shook  his  head,  and  remarked  that  he  was  afraid  there 
was  no  mistake,  as  he  always  knew  that  his  minister  would  be  run  away  with  by 
some  large  church  or  other,  but  that  he  was  a  little  surprised  that  the  Londoners 
should  have  heard  of  me  quite  so  soon.  "  Had  it  been  Cottenham,  or  St.  Ives,  or 
Huntingdon,"  said  he,  "  I  should  not  have  wondered  at  all  ;  but  going  to  London  is 
rather  a  great  step  from  this  little  place."  He  shook  his  head  very  gravely  ;  but  the 
time  had  come  for  me  to  look  out  the  hymns,  therefore  the  letter  was  put  away,  and, 
as  far  as  I  can  remember,  was  for  the  day  quite  forgotten. 

The  ne.xt  day,  this  answer  was  sent  to  the  letter  from  the  London  deacon  : — 

"  No.  60,  Park  Street, 

"  Cambridge, 

"  November  28th,  1853. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  do  not  reside  at  Waterbeach,  and  therefore  your  letter  did  not  reach 
me  till  yesterday,  although  the  friends  ought  to  have  forwarded  it  at  once.  My 
people  at  Waterbeach  are  hardly  to  be  persuaded  to  let  me  come,  but  I  am  prepared 
to  serve  you  on  the  i  ith  [December].  On  the  4th,  I  could  not  leave  them  ;  and  the 
impossibility  of  finding  a  supply  at  all  agreeable  to  them,  prevents  me  from  leaving 
home  two  following  Sabbaths.  I  have  been  wondering  very  much  how  you  could 
have  heard  of  me,  and  I  think  I  ought  to  give  some  account  of  myself,  lest  I  should 
come  and  be  out  of  my  right  place.  Although  I  have  been  more  than  two  years 
minister  of  a  church,  which  has  in  that  time  doubled,  yet  my  last  birthday  was  only 
my  nineteenth.  I  have  hardly  ever  known  what  the  fear  of  man  means,  and  have  all 
but  uniformly  had  large  congregations,  and  frequently  crowded  ones  ;  but  if  you 
think  my  years  would  unqualify  me  for  your  pulpit,  then,  by  all  means,  I  entreat  you, 
do  not  lee  me  come.  The  Great  God,  my  Helper,  will  not  leave  me  to  myself. 
Almost  every  night,  for  two  years,  I  have  been  aided  to  proclaim  His  truth.  I  am 
therefore  able  to  promise  you  for  the  iith,  and  should  you  accept  the  offer,  I  will 
come  on  Saturday  afternoon,  and  return  on  Monday.  As  I  shall  have  to  procure  a 
supply,  an  early  answer  will  oblige — 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 


3 1 S  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

In  due  time  came  another  epistle,  setting  forth  that  the  former  letter  had  been 
written  in  perfect  knowledge  of  the  young  preacher's  age,  and  had  been  intended  for 
him  and  him  alone.  The  request  of  the  former  letter  was  repeated  and  pressed,  a 
date  mentioned  for  the  journey  to  London,  and  the  place  appointed  at  which  the 
preacher  would  find  lodging.  That  invitation  was  accepted,  and  as  the  result  thereof 
the  boy-preacher  of  the  Fens  travelled  to  London.  Though  it  is  so  long  ago,  yet 
it  seems  but  yesterday  that  I  lodged  for  the  night  at  a  boarding-house  in  Queen 
Square,  Bloomsbury,  to  which  the  worthy  deacon  had  directed  me.  As  I  wore  a 
huge  black  satin  stock,  and  used  a  blue  handkerchief  with  white  spots,  the  young 
gentlemen  of  that  boarding-house  marvelled  greatly  at  the  youth  from  the  country 
who  had  come  up  to  preach  in  London,  but  who  was  evidently  in  the  condition 
known  as  "  verdant  green."  They  were  mainly  of  the  Evangelical  Church  persuasion, 
and  seemed  greatly  tickled  that  the  country  lad  should  be  a  preacher.  They  did  not 
propose  to  go  and  hear  the  youth,  but  they  seemed  to  tacitly  agree  to  encourage  me 
after  their  own  fashion,  and  I  was  encouraged  accordingly !  What  tales  were 
narrated  of  the  great  divines  of  the  metropolis,  and  their  congregations  !  One,  I 
remember,  had  a  thousand  city  men  to  hear  him  ;  another  had  his  church  filled  with 
thoughtful  people,  such  as  could  hardly  be  matched  all  over  England  ;  while  a  third 
had  an  immense  audience  almost  entirely  composed  of  the  young  men  of  London, 
who  were  spell-bound  by  his  eloquence.  The  study  which  these  men  underwent  in 
composing  their  sermons,  their  herculean  toils  in  keeping  up  their  congregations, 
and  the  matchless  o'ratory  which  they  e.xhibited  on  all  occasions,  were  duly  rehearsed 
in  my  hearing,  and  when  I  was  shown  to  bed  in  a  cupboard  over  the  front  door,  1 
was  not  in  an  advantageous  condition  for  pleasant  dreams.  New  Park  Street 
hospitality  never  sent  the  young  minister  to  that  far-away  hired  room  again  ;  but, 
assuredly,  that  Saturday  evening  in  a  London  boarding-house  was  about  the  most 
depressing  agency  which  could  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  my  spirit.  On  the 
narrow  bed  I  tossed  in  solitary  misery,  and  found  no  pity.  Pitiless  was  the  grind  of 
the  cabs  in  the  street,  pitiless  the  recollection  of  the  young  city  clerks,  whose  grim 
propriety  had  gazed  upon  my  rusticity  with  such  amusement,  pitiless  the  spare  room 
which  scarcely  afforded  me  space  to  kneel,  pitiless  even  the  gas-lamps  which  seemed 
to  wink  at  me  as  they  flickered  amid  the  December  darkness.  I  had  no  friend  in  all 
that  city  full  of  human  beings,  but  felt  myself  to  be  among  strangers  and  foreigners, 
and  hoped  to  be  helped  through  the  scrape  into  which  I  had  been  brought,  and  to 
escape  safely  to  the  serene  abodes  of  Cambridge  and  Waterbeach,  which  then 
seemed  to  be  Eden  itself  The  Sabbath  morning  was  clear  and  cold,  and  I  wended 
my  way  along  Holborn  Hill  towards  Blackfriars  and  certain  tortuous  lanes  and  alleys 
at  the  foot  of  Southwark  Bridge.  Wondering,  praying,  fearing,  hoping,  believing, — 
I  felt  all  alone,  and  yet  not  alone.      E.xpectant  of  Divine  help,  and  inwardly  borne 


II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


i^9 


down  by  my  sense  of  the  need  of  it,  I  traversed  a  dreary  wilderness  of  brick  to 
find  the  spot  where  my  message  was  to  be  delivered.  One  text  rose  to  my  lips 
many  times,  I  scarcely  know  why, — "  He  must  needs  go  through  Samaria."  The 
necessity  of  our  Lord's  journeying  in  a  certain  direction,  is  no  doubt  repeated  in  His 
servants  ;  and  as  my  journey  was  not  of  my  seeking,  and  had  been  by  no  means 
pleasing  so  far  as  it  had  gone, — the  one  thought  of  a  "needs  be  "  for  it  seemed  to 
overtop  every  other.  At  sight  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  I  felt  for  a  moment 
amazed  at  my  own  temerity,  for  it  seemed   to  my  eyes  to  be  a  large,   ornate,   and 


NEW   PARK    STREET   CHAPEL,    SOUTHWARK. 

imposing  structure,  suggesting  an  audience  wealthy  and  critical,  and  far  removed 
Irom  the  humble  folk  to  whom  my  ministry  had  been  sweetness  and  light.  It  was 
early,  so  there  were  no  persons  entering  ;  and  when  the  set  time  was  fully  come, 
there  were  no  signs  to  support  the  suggestion  raised  by  the  exterior  of  the  building, 
and  I  felt  that,  by  God's  help,  I  was  not  yet  out  of  my  depth,  and  was  not  likely  to 
be  with  so  small  an  audience.  The  Lord  helped  me  very  graciously,  I  had  a  happy 
Sabbath  in  the  pulpit,  and  spent  the  interval  with  warm-hearted  friends  ;  and  when, 
at  night,  I  trudged  back  to  the  Queen  Square  narrow  lodging,  I  was  not  alone,  and  I 
no  longer  looked  on  Londoners  as  flinty-hearted  barbarians.  My  tone  was  altered  ; 
I  wanted  no  pity  of  anyone,  I  did  not  care  a  penny  for  the  young  gentlemen  lodgers 
and  their  miraculous  ministers,  nor  for  the  grind  of  the  cabs,  nor  for  anything  else 
under  the  sun.  The  lion  had  been  looked  at  all  round,  and  his  majesty  did  not 
appear  to  be  a  tenth  as  majestic  as  when  I  had  only  heard  his  roar  miles  away. 


(The  friend  who  walked  back  with  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  his  lodging  in  Queen 
Square,  at  the  close  ot  the  first  Sabbath  evening's  service  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel, 
was  Mr.  Joseph  Passmore.  That  walk  was  the  prelude  to  a  life-long  friendship  and 
happy  association  in  church  work  and   in   the  publication  of   the  beloved   Pastor's 


320  C.     n.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

many  works.  The  following  is  the  first  letter  ever  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  his 
friend,  and  is  included  in  the  Autobiography  through  the  kindness  of  his  eldest  son 
and  namesake,  Mr.  Joseph  Passmore  : — ) 

"  May   17th,   1854. 
"  My  Dear  Brother, 

"  I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  your  kind  present.  I  find  that  all 
the  kindness  is  not  in  the  country,  some  at  least  grows  in  town  ;  and,  if  nowhere  else, 
it  is  to  be  found  in  a  house  in  Finsbury. 

"  It  is  sweet  to  find  oneself  remembered.  I  trust  the  harmony  between  us 
may  never  receive  the  slightest  jar,  but  continue  even  in  Heaven.  We  have,  I  trust, 
just  commenced  a  new  era;  and,  by  God's  blessing,  we  will  strive  to  make  it  a 
orlorious  one  to  our  Church.  Oh,  that  our  hopes  may  all  be  realized  !  I  feel  assured 
that  your  constant  prayers  are  going  up  fervendy  to  Heaven  ;  let  us  continue 
•wresding,  and  the  wished-for  blessing  must  arrive. 

"With  Chrisdan  regards  to  you  and  Mrs.  Passmore, 

"  I   am, 

"  Yours  most  truly, 

C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


CHAPTER    XXIX. 


first  Sermons  at  i^tbj  }|ark  Street  Cijapftl- 

Let  every  man,  called  of  God  to  preach  the  Word,  be  as  his  Maker  has  fashioned  him.  Neither 
Paul,  nor  Apollos,  nor  Cephas  is  to  be  imitated  by  John ;  nor  are  John's  ways,  habits,  and  modes  of 
utterance  to  be  the  basis  for  a  condemnation  of  any  one  or  all  of  the  other  three.  As  God  gives  to  every 
seed  its  own  body  as  it  rises  from  the  soil,  so  to  each  man  will  He  grant  his  own  appropriate  develop- 
ment, if  he  will  but  be  content  to  let  his  inner  self  reveal  itself  in  its  true  form.  The  good  and  the  evil 
in  men  of  eminence  are  both  of  them  mischievous  when  they  become  objects  of  servile  imitation  ;  the 
good  when  slavishly  copied  is  exaggerated  into  formality,  and  the  evil  becomes  wholly  intolerable,  li 
each  teacher  of  others  went  himself  to  the  school  of  our  one  only  Master,  a  thousand  errors  might  be 
avoided — C.  H.  S. 

HE  text  of  Mr.  Spurgeons  hrst  sermon  in  London  has  long  been 
well  known  ;  but,  until  now,  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any- 
printed  record  of  the  opening  discourse  in  that  marvellous  Metro- 
politan ministry  which  was  destined  to  exercise  such  a  mighty 
influence,  not  only  throughout  London,  and  the  United  Kingdom, 
but  "unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  Happily,  the  young 
preacher  had  written  at  considerable  length  the  message  he  felt  called  to  deliver 
on  that  occasion  in  his  Master's  name,  and  now,  after  a  whole  generation  has 
passed  away,  his  long-forgotten  words  will  speak  to  a  far  larger  audience  than  he 
addressed  that  winter's  morning  (December  i8th,  1853,)  in  New  P'ark  Street 
Chapel.  It  may  interest  some  readers  to  know  that  the  sermon  was  the  673rd 
that  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  preached.  The  evening  discourse  appears  to  have  been 
re-delivered  at  a  later  period,  taken  -down  in  shorthand,  and  afterwards  revised  by 
Mr.  Spurgeon  for  publication  in  The  Baptist  Messenger. 

MORNING      SERMON. 


The  Father  of  Light. 

"  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from 
the  Father  of  tights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadoiv  of  turning." — • 
James  i.  17. 

Some  sciences  and  subjects  of  study  are  to  us  inexhaustible.  We  might  ever 
find  in  them  fresh  matter  for  instruction,  wonder,  and  research.  If  we  were  to 
descend  into  the  depths  of  the  earth,  with  the  geologist,  and  bring  up  the  skeletons 

w 


322  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArHV. 

of  extinct  monsters,  and  note  the  signs  of  great  convulsions,  and  study  the  old  and 
new  formations  and  strata  ;  or  if  we  were  to  soar  aloft,  with  the  astronomer,  and 
attempt  to  measure  the  heavens,  and  count  the  stars  ;  we  should  ever  be  lost  in  the 
new  discoveries  which  we  should  make.  The  same  may  be  said  of  all  the  natural 
sciences.  Whatever  the  subject  of  his  study  may  be,  it  does  not  seem  possible  that 
man  should  ever  be  able  to  say,  "  I  have  nothing  more  to  learn  ;  I  am  master  of 
it  all." 

But  should  it  one  day  happen  that  our  race  has  so  progressed  in  knowledge, 
and  become  so  well  informed  as  to  leave  nothing  unknown, — should  nature  be  stript 
of  all  her  mystery,  and  the  heavens,  the  sea,  and  the  earth  be  all  perfectly  understood, 
— there  will  yet  remain  one  subject  upon  which  the  sons  of  men  may  meditate, 
dispute,  and  ponder  ;  but  it  shall  still  be  unknown.  That  subject  is, — GOD,  of 
whom,  with  humble  reverence,  I  am  now  to  speak.  May  it  please  the  great  Spirit 
of  wisdom  to  enlarge  our  minds,  and  guide  our  hearts  into  an  understanding  of  that 
portion  of  truth  concerning  Him  which  is  revealed  in  the  text  !     We  have,  here, — 

I.  A    MAJESTIC    FIGURE. 

II.  A    GLORIOUS    ATTRIBUTE. 

III.  A    GRATEFUL    ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 

I.       A    MAJESTIC    FIGURE. 

God  is  here  called  "the  I-'ather  of  lights," — comparing  Him  to  the  sun.  It  is 
most  true  that  this  lower  world  is  the  reflection  of  the  upper  one.  In  it,  once,  the 
face  of  God  mio-ht  have  been  seen  as  on  some  glassv  lake  ;  but  sin  has  ruffled  the 
surface  of  the  waters,  so  that  the  portrait  is  broken,  and  presented  only  in  pieces. 
Yet  there  are  the  pieces, — the  wrecks  of  the  picture, — and  we  will  not  throw  them 
aside.  Let  us  lift  up  our  eyes  on  high,  and  behold  the  only  object  which  is  worthy 
to  be  called  an  emblem  of  Deity.  We  think  we  can  see  several  ideas  couched  in  the 
figure  used  in  our  text  by  the  apostle. 

I .   Independence  ;  or.  Self -existence. 

God  is  the  only  self-existent  Being.  The  sun  is  not  really  so  ;  but  he  is  far 
more  independent  than  any  other  object  we  know  of  All  else  of  nature  is  continu- 
ally borrowing  ;  vegetables  draw  their  nourishment  from  the  soil,  animals  from  them, 
or  from  one  another,  man  from  all  ; — he  is  the  greatest  beggar  in  the  universe. 
The  moon  lights  her  nighdy  torch  at  the  sun's  lamp,  the  planets  rekindle  theirs  in 
his  bright  storehouse.  Mother  Earth  is  greatly  dependent  on  the  sun  ;  despite  the 
pride  of  her  children,  what  is  she  but  a  tiny  globule  dancing  in  the  rays  of  that 
majestic  orb  ?  The  sun  gives,  but  takes  not  ;  bestows  on  all,  receives  from  none, 
leans  on  none  ;  but  lives  alone,  in  his  own  solemn  grandeur  and  glory. 

Such  is  God,  the  great  I  AM,  who  sits  on  no  borrowed  throne,  and  begs  no 


c.    H.    spukgeon's    autobiography.  323 

leave  to  be.  All  things  are  of  Him,  and  by  Him.  He  needs  them  not;  were  they 
all  annihilated,  it  would  not  injure  Him.  He  could  e.xist,  as  He  has  from  eternity 
existed,  alone.  He  has  in  Himself  all  that  is  worth  havino-.  On  Him  all  thins^s 
lean  ;  He  leans  on  none.      But  we  can  scarcely  speak  of  Him, — 

"Who,  light  Himself,  in  uncreated  light. 
Invested  deep,  dwells  awfully  retired 
Frotn  mortal  eye,  or  angel's  purer  ken. 
Whose  single  smile  has,  from  the  first  of  time, 
Fill'd  overflowing  all  those  lamps  of  heaven 
That  beam  for  ever  through  the  boundless  sky; 
But  should  He  hide  His  face,  th'  aslonisli'd  sun 
And  all  th'  extinguish'd  stars  would  loosening  reel 
Wide  from  their  spheres,  and  chaos  come  again." 

2.  Sublimity  is  another  idea  suggested  by  the  figure  in  the  te.xt.  The  sun  is 
one  of  the  most  magnificent  of  created  things  ;  when  he  shows  himself,  the  moon 
and  stars  conceal  their  blushing  faces.  Seen  in  any  part  of  his  course,  he  is  a  grand 
object.  When  first  he  tinges  the  Eastern  sky  with  his  rising  beams,  when  he  sits 
serenely  in  mid-heaven  at  noon,  or  when  he  retires  in  splendour  at  eventide,  grandeur 
is  always  one  of  his  characteristics.  He  is  too  bright  for  our  eyes  to  gaze  upon, 
although  we  are  at  such  a  vast  distance  from  him. 

Far  more  sublime  is  God.     Who  shall  describe  Him  ?     His  angrelic  servants  are 

o 

glorious,  the  starry  floor  of  His  throne  is  glorious  ;  what  must  He  Himself  be.? 

"  Imagination's  utmost  stretch 
In  wonder  dies  away." 

Well  may  angels  veil  their  faces,  for  even  their  eyes  could  not  endure  His  brightness. 
No  man  can  see  Him.  His  train  was  all  that  Moses  saw.  Borrow  the  eagle's  eye 
and  wing,  sc^r  on  and  on  until  the  glory  overcomes  you,  and  you  fall  reeling  back  to 
the  earth  ;  do  it  again  and  again,  and  you  will  find  that  man  cannot  see  God. 
Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him,  for  He  may  truly  have  it  said  to  Him, — 

"  Dark  with  excessive  bright  Thy  skirts  appear." 

3.  Poiver  also  seems  a  prominent  idea  in  this  expression  of  the  apostle  :  "The 
Father  of  lights."  The  sun  is  as  a  giant  coming  out  of  his  chamber  ;  and,  like  a 
strong  man,  he  rejoices  to  run  a  race.  He  drags  the  whole  immense  solar  system 
along  in  his  majestic  course,  nor  can  any  oppose  him.  How  mightily  he  still 
moves  on  in  his  appointed  course  ! 

So  is  our  God  glorious  in  His  power.  No  one  knows  His  might;  it  is  like 
Himself,  infinite.  He  speaketh,  and  His  Word  is  with  power.  He  willeth,  and  His 
will  is  omnipotent.  Who  can  thwart  His  purposes?  Shall  nature?  No;  the 
hills  melted  like  wax  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  They  skipped  before  Him  like 
rams.  By  His  power,  the  waters  are  divided  ;  fire  sipges  not  His  servants  ;  wild 
beasts  are  tamed.      He  lifteth  His  finger,  and  the  flood  ariseth  ;   He  droppeth  it,  and 


324  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

the  waters  assuage.  In  vain  could  mountains,  torrents,  stars,  and  all  the  elements  war 
against  Him.  Who  can  conquer  Him  in  battle  .-^  Shall  man?  No;  He  counteth 
all  men  but  as  a  drop  in  a  bucket.  He  that  sitteth  in  Heaven  hath  His  enemies  in 
derision.  Shall  the  devils  in  hell  withstand  Him  ?  No  ;  once  have  they  fallen  from 
the  battlements  of  Heaven,  and  in  vain  is  their  loudest  roar.  .Satan  is  chained,  and 
led  as  a  conquer'd  monarch  to  grace  God's  victory  over  him.  He  is  God's  slave,  and 
unwillingly  doth  his  Master's  will.  O  beloved,  what  a  God  is  here  revealed  to  us  ! 
Put  this  thought  under  thy  pillow  ;  and  when  troubles  arise,  still  calmly  sleep  on,  for 
His  power  protecteth  thee  from  all  evil  ! 

4.  But  Beneficence  seems  even  more  the  leading  idea  of  the  text.  The 
sun  is  absolutely  necessary  to  our  being  ;  there  would  be  no  light,  no  heat,  no  life, 
no  rain,  nothing  without  him.  He  is  necessary  also  to  our  well-being;  the  sun  is 
indeed  the  great  philanthropist  ;  he  visits  every  land,  he  gives  freely,  and  gives  to 
all,  to  the  peasant  as  well  as  to  the  prince.  Curse  him,  or  bless  him,  he  is  the 
same  ;  he  does  not  refuse  his  light  even  to  the  felon,  but  he  visits  the  prisoner  in 
his  cell. 

Such  also  is  God,  the  good,  the  greatly-good.  Should  He  withdraw  His  face, 
Heaven  would  not  be  Heaven.  Without  God,  the  whole  universe  would  be  a  valley 
full  of  dry  bones,  a  horrible  charnel-house.  Oh,  how  good  is  our  God  !  He 
confines  not  His  mercies  to  any  one  race  ;  the  Hottentots  are  as  welcome  to  His 
love  as  are  any  of  us.  The  sinful  receive  His  grace,  and  lose  their  former  evil 
nature.  He  gives  to  sinners,  and  to  the  unthankful  ;  and  if  men  were  not  by 
nature  blind,  they  would  see  by  His  light;  the  defect  is  in  them,  and  not  in  Him. 

Yon  sun  has  shone  on  my  cradle,  it  will  beam  on  my  death-bed,  and  cast  a 
gleam  into  my  grave.  So  doth  God,  the  Beneficent,  gild  our  path  with  sunshine. 
Earth  were  a  gloomy  vault  without  Him  ;  with  Him,  it  is  light  and  joyous,  the 
porch  of  a  still  more  blissful  state. 

H.       A    GLORIOUS    ATTRIBUTE. 

The  apostle,  having  thus  introduced  the  sun  as  a  figure  to  represent  the  Father 
of  lights,  finding  that  it  did  not  bear  the  full  resemblance  of  the  invisible  God, 
seems  constrained  to  amend  it  by  a  remark  that,  unlike  the  sun,  our  Father  has  no 
turninz,  or  variableness. 

The  sun  has  parallax  ;  or,  variation  ;  he  rises  at  a  different  time  each  day,  and 
he  sets  at  various  hours  in  the  course  of  the  year.  He  moves  into  other  parts  of 
the  heavens.  He  is  clouded,  eclipsed,  and  even  sufters  a  diminution  of  light  from 
some  mysterious  decrease  of  the  luminiferous  ether  which  surrounds  him.  He 
also  has  tropic  ;  or,  turning.  He  turns  his  chariot  to  the  South,  until,  at  the 
solstice,  God  bids  him  reverse  his  rein,  and  then  he  visits  us  once  more.  But  God 
is    superior    to    all   figures    or    emblems.       He    is    immutable.      1  he    sun    changes, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  325 

mountains  crumble,  the  ocean  shall  be  dried  up,  the  stars  shall  wither  from  the  vault 
of  night  ;  but  God,  and  God  alone,  remains  ever  the  same.  Were  I  to  enter  into 
a  full  discourse  on  the  subject  of  immutability,  my  time,  if  multiplied  by  a  high 
number,  would  fail  me.  But  reminding  you  that  there  is  no  change  in  His  power, 
justice,  knowledge,  oath,  threatening,  or  decree,  I  will  confine  myself  to  the  fact  that 
His  love  to  us  knows  no  variation.  How  often  it  is  called  unchangeable,  everlasting 
love  !  He  loves  me  now  as  much  as  He  did  when  first  He  inscribed  my  name  in 
His  eternal  book  of  election.  He  has  not  repented  of  His  choice.  He  has  not 
blotted  out  one  of  His  chosen  ;  there  are  no  erasures  in  that  book  ;  all  whose  names 
are  written  in  it  are  safe  for  ever.  Nor  does  God  love  me  less  now  than  when  He 
gave  that  grand  proof  of  love.  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  to  die  for  me.  Even  now.  He 
loves  me  with  the  same  Intensity  as  when  He  poured  out  the  vials  of  justice  on  His 
darlinof  to  save  rebel  worms.     We  have  all  had  times  which  we  considered  times  of 

o 

special  love,  when  His  candle  shone  round  about  us,  and  we  basked  In  the  light  of 
His  smiling  face  ;  but  let  us  not  suppose  that  He  really  loved  us  more  then  than 
now.  Oh,  no  !  He  then  discovered  His  love  In  a  way  pleasing  to  flesh  and  blood  ; 
but  trials  are  equally  proofs  of  His  love.  In  the  fight  with  Apollyon  in  the  Valley  of 
Humiliation,  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  or  in  Vanity  Fair,  He  will  be  ever 
the  same,  and  will  love  us  neither  more  nor  less  than  when  we  sing  with  seraphic 
voices  the  songs  of  Heaven. 

Death,  sometimes,  in  the  prospect,  is  very  trying  to  flesh  and  blood  ;  but  If  this 
truth  of  God's  unchaneine  love  were  well  remembered,  death  would  not  be  such  a 
trial  to  us  as  it  has  been  to  many.  We  should  know  that  He  who  helped  Jacob  to 
gather  up  his  feet,  and  die, — that  He  who  enabled  David  to  say,  "  Although  my  house 
be  not  so  with  God  ;  yet  He  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all 
things,  and  sure  :  for  this  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire,  although  He  make  it 
not  to  grow," — and  that  He  who  permitted  Stephen  to  fall  asleep  amid  a  shower  of 
stones,  will  be  the  Deliverer  of  all  who  trust  in  Him.  Throughout  eternity,  there 
shall  be  no  jars,  not  a  breath  of  strife  ;  but  the  same  uninterrupted,  blessed  unity 
shall  prevail  for  ever,  and  God  will  continue  to  bestow  upon  us  His  unchanging  love. 
Thanks  be  unto  Him  for  loving  us  so  ! 

HI.       A    GR.\TEFUL    ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 

The  apostle,  having  Introduced  God  as  the  Father  of  lights,  and  qualified  the 
figure,  now  proceeds  to  ascribe  all  good  gifts  to  Him  alone  :  "  Every  good  gift  and 
every  perfect  gift  Is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with 
whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning."  If  it  seemed  perfectly 
reasonable  that,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun,  nature  should  welcome  it  with  song,  is  it 
not  even  more  reasonable  that,  at  the  name  of  the  Father  of  lights,  we  should  lift  up 
a  song  ?     What  is  said  here,  is  what  angels  can  sing  in  Heaven;  it  is  what  Adam 


326  .  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography, 

could  have  hymned  in  Paradise  ;  it  is  what  every  Christian  feels  heartily  willing  to 
confess. 

Ever  since  the  Fall,  this  verse  has  had  an  added  emphasis  of  meaning,  since  m 
us,  by  nature,  there  dwells  no  good  thing,  and  by  our  sin  we  have  forfeited  every  right 
to  any  favour  from  God.  So  that  our  ttahira/  gifts,  such  as  beauty,  eloquence,  health, 
life,  and  happiness,  all  come  from  Him  equally  with  our  graces.  We  have  nothing 
which  we  have  not  received.  Earth,  one  day,  shall  make  this  song  thrill  through 
infinity  ;  Heaven  shall  join  the  chorus  ;  the  region  of  chaos  and  old  night  shall 
shout  aloud,  and  even  hell's  unwilling  voice  shall  growl  out  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  fact  that  ''Every  good  gift  arid  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  comet h 
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow 
of  turning." 

I  have  succeeded  in  my  object  if,  with  me,  you  can  from  your  hearts  say,  at  the 
contemplation  of  Jehovah, — "  Glory  be  unto  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost,  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  is  now,  and  ever  shall  be,  world  without 
end  !     Amen." 

Tf  tP  ^  TT 

EVENING     SERMON. 


The  Faultless  Assembly. 

"  They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God.'' — Revelation  xiv.  5. 

It  is  well,  beloved,  sometimes  to  get  aside  from  the  worry  of  business,  to  have  a 
little  conversation  concerning  that  future  world  to  which  we  are  tending.  We  will, 
therefore,  indulge  in  a  brief  contemplation  of  Heaven,  and  will  speak  concerning 
those  things  which,  if  we  are  the  Lord's  people,  we  are  soon  to  realize  when  we 
shall  be — 

"Far  from  a  world  of  grief  and  sin, 
Willi  God  eternally  shut  ui," 

to  live  with  Him  lor  ever. 

There  are  three  things  in  these  words  ;  first,  the  character  of  tlie  people  in 
Heaven:  "they  are  without  fault;"  secondly,  who  they  are:  "they  are  without 
fault;"  and  then,  thirdly,  zvhar  they  are:  "they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne 
of  God." 

I.  The  people  in  He.wen  are  of  a  certain  peculiar  character  :  "  without 
fault." 

I  have  never  discovered  such  creatures  living  upon  earth,  and  do  not  suppose  I 
ever  shall.  I  might  travel  many  a  weary  journey  before  I  could  find  a  man  in  the 
three  kingdoms  that  would  be   "  without  fault  ;  "  yea,  if  an  angel  were  to  be  sent 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  327 

down  to  the  world  for  this  purpose,  he  might  fly  round  it  many  a  time,  till  his  wings 
were  weary,  yet  never  find  a  man   "  without  fault."      I  knew  a  man,  once,  who  told 
me  that  he  was  perfect ;  but  he  soon  got  very  cross  when  I  began  to  speak,  and  I 
saw  that  he  was  perfect  only  in  one  thing, — he  was  perfect  in  weakness  ;  that  was 
the  only  perfection  he  had.      It  is  only  now  and  then  that  you  meet  with  a  man  who 
has  the  impudence  to  tell  you  that  he  is  perfect ;  but  you  can  soon  see,  from  the  very 
look  of  him,  that  he  is  not  perfect,  for  at  any  rate  he  is  not  perfect  in  humility  ;  he 
seems  to  glory  in  his  perfection,  and  all  the  while  his  very  mouth  betrayeth   him. 
That  eye  of  pride,  and  that  lip  of  lust  with  which  he  speaks,  as  he  lusteth  for  the 
praise  of  men,  tell  you  that  he  is  far  from  being  perfect.     A  faultless  creature, — 
where  is  there  such  a  being  on  earth  ?     Fly,    Gabriel,   fly  !  enter   thou   the   loftiest 
palace,  and  then  go  to  the  humblest  cottage,  go  to  the  most  remote  realm,  to  the 
most  civilized,  polite,  and  educated  people,  and  thou  shalt   find  no  perfect  being  ; 
nay,  go  into  the  church,  go  into  the  pulpit,  thou  wilt  ne'er  find  a  perfect  man  nor  a 
perfect  minister.      Imperfection  is  stamped  upon  all  things;  and,  save  the  complete- 
ness that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  the  perfection  we  have  in  Him,  perfection  is  nowhere 
to  be  found  beneath  the  skies  ;  nor  in  Heaven  itself  could  it  be  found  unless  God 
were  there,   for   He  alone  can    make    a   creature   perfect.      But    there,    beloved,    is 
perfection  ;  despite  the  faults  of  men  on  earth,  when  they  shall  have  been  fitted  for 
the  skies  by  God's  most  precious  grace,  they  shall  stand  before  God  "without  fault." 

We  will,  first,  look  at  our  own  faults,  and  then  admire  those  glorious  beings 
above,  and  the  grace  of  God  in  them,  that  they  are  "  without  fault."  I  think  there 
are  three  great  faults  in  the  Church  of  God  at  large,  as  a  body,  from  which  those 
who  are  in  Heaven  are  entirely  free.  Those  three  are, — a  want  of  love  to  one 
another  ;  a  want  of  love  to  souls  ;  and  a  want  of  love  to  Jesus  Christ. 

I.  We  need  not  go  far  without  seeing  that  there  is,  among  Christians,  a  ivani  of 
love  to  one  another.  There  is  not  too  much  love  in  our  churches  ;  certainly,  we  have 
none  to  give  away.     We  have  heard  that — 

"Whatever  brawls  disturb  the  street. 
There  should  be  peace  at  home  ; " 

but  it  is  not  always  as  it  should  be.  We  have  known  churches  where  the  members 
can  scarcely  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table  without  some  disagreement.  There  are 
people  who  are  always  finding  fault  with  the  minister,  and  there  are  ministers  finding 
fault  with  the  people  ;  there  is  among  them  "  a  spirit  that  lusteth  to  envy,"  and 
"  where  envying  and  strife  is,  there  is  confusion  and  every  evil  work."  We  have  met 
with  people  among  whom  it  would  be  misery  to  place  ourselves,  because  we  love  not 
war  ;  we  love  peace  and  charity.  Alas  !  how  continually  do  we  hear  accounts  of 
disputings  and  variance  in  churches  !  O  beloved,  there  is  too  little  love  in  the 
churches  !      If  Jesus  were  to  come  amongst  us,  might  He  not  say  to  us,  "  This  is  My 


328  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

commandment,  that  ye  love  one  another  ;  but  how  have  you  kept  it  when  you  have 
been  always  finding  fault  with  one  another?  and  how  ready  you  have  been  to  turn 
your  sword  against  your  brother  !  "  ? 

But,  beloved,  "  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."     Those  who 
on  earth  could  not  agree,  are  sure  to  agree  when  they  get  to  Heaven.     There  are 
some  who  have  crossed  swords  on  earth,  but  who  have  held  the  faith,  and  have  been 
numbered  amongst  the  saints  in  glory  everlasting.     There  is  no  fighting  amongst 
them  now;   "they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."     There  are  many, 
who  would  never  sit  at  the  same  table  with  each  other  when  they  were  upon  earth, 
though  they  were  the  children  of  God  ;  but  now,  side  by  side,  they  are  standing  and 
singing  to  the  same  tune,  "  Glory  be  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb  !  "     We  discover,  by 
reading  the  records  of  distinguished  men,  that  there  has  scarcely  been  one  eminent 
man  who  could  walk  side  by  side  with  his  fellow.      Like  great  mountains,  they  touch 
at  their  foundations  ;  certainly,  they  unite  nowhere  else.      But  in   Heaven  all  stand 
side  by   side,   and   there  is  no  disunion   amongst  them.     We  know  that,   in    many 
churches,  some  of  the  richer  members  will  scarcely  notice  the  poorer  ;  but  it  will  not 
be  so  above,  there  is  true  love  there.     We  hear  of  church-members  who  have  been 
sick  for  months,   yet  no  brother  or  sister-member  has  ministered  to  them;  but  in 
Heaven  it  is  not  so,  there  is  no  neglect  there.     They  cannot  suffer  there  ;  but  if  it 
were  possible  that  they  could  suffer,  so  sweet  would  be  the  love  displayed  towards 
each  other,  that  suffering  would  be  removed  in  a  moment.     Ask  the  cherubim  if  they 
ever  knew  a  jar  in  Christ's  glorified  Church  above  ;   and  they  would  say,   "  Nay." 
And  if  you  could  make  all  the  blessed  ones  pass  in  review,  and  ask  them  if  they  love 
one  another,  "  Yes,"  they  would  say,  "  with  a  pure  heart,  fervendy  ;  and  though  we 
had  brawls  and  disputings  on  earth,   they  are  all  forgotten  now,   for  the  blood   of 
Christ,  that  covers  a  multitude  of  sins,  has  ended  all  our  disagreements  ;  and  that 
holy  mantle  of  a  Saviour's  love,  that  He  casts  over  all  our  faults,  has  ended  all  our 
wars  with  one  another.     We  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  would  to  God  we  had  seen 
more   of  this  oneness  when   below  !  "     They  are   "  without  fault  "   in   that  respect, 
beloved,  above.     There  is  no  harshness  there  ;  there  is  no  ill  humour  there  ;  there  is 
no  bitterness  there  ;  there  is  no  envy,  no  evil-speaking,  no  spite,  no  uncharitableness, 
there  ;   "  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."     Oh,  how  my  wearied 
spirit  longs  to  be  there  !      I  wish  not  to  live  with  men  of  strife  ;  the  lions'  den  is  not 
for  me,   nor  the  house  of  leopards.     Give  me  the  quiet  place  where  the  oil  runneth 
down  from  the  head  even  to  the  skirts  of  the  garments.      Let  me  live  in  peace  with 
all  Christ's  Church  ;  let  me  not  find  fault  with  anyone.      Sooner  will  I  allow  them  to 
sheath  their  daggers  in  my  heart  than   I  would  draw  mine  in  angry  contest.     Thank 
God  !  there  are  some  of  us  who  can  say,  "  There  is  not  a  man  living  with  whom  we 
are  at  arm's  length  any  more  than  the  infant  that  is  just  born."     There  are  some  of 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  329 

US  who  can  give  our  hand  very  readily  to  anyone  in  whom  we  see  anything  that  is 
pleasing  to  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  but  when  we  see  anything  that  is  contrary  to  the 
Spirit,  we  say,  "  Oh  !  that  I  had  wings — not  like  an  eagle  to  fly  at  my  brother, — oh  ! 
that  I  had  wings  like  a  dove,  that  I  might  fly  away,  and  be  at  rest."  That  happy 
time  shall  soon  come,  beloved,  when  we,  like  those  above,  shall  be  "  without  fault 
before  the  throne  of  God." 

2.  A  second  fault  is,  that  there  is  a  great  want  of  love  to  souls.  John  Bunyan 
gives  the  portrait  of  a  man  whom  God  intended  to  be  a  guide  to  Heaven  ;  have  you 
ever  noticed  how  beautiful  that  portrait  is  ?  He  has  a  crown  of  life  over  his  head,  he 
has  the  earth  beneath  his  feet,  he  stands  as  if  he  pleaded  with  men,  and  he  has  the 
Best  of  Books  in  his  hand.  Oh  !  I  would  that  I  were,  for  one  moment,  like  that 
pattern  preacher  ;  that  I  could  plead  with  men  as  John  Bunyan  describeth.  We  are 
all  of  us  ambassadors  for  Christ,  and  we  are  told  that,  as  ambassadors,  we  are  to 
beseech  men  as  though  God  besought  them  by  us.  How  I  do  love  to  see  a  tearful 
preacher!  How  I  love  to  see  the  man  who  can  weep  over  sinners  ;  whose  soul 
yearns  over  the  ungodly,  as  if  he  would,  by  any  means,  and  by  all  means,  bring 
them  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !  I  cannot  understand  a  man  who  stands  up  and 
delivers  a  discourse  in  a  cold  indifferent  manner,  as  if  he  cared  not  for  the  souls  of 
his  hearers.  I  think  the  true  gospel  minister  will  have  a  real  yearning  after  souls, 
somethino-  like  Rachel  when  she  cried,  "  Give  me  children,  or  else  I  die  ;  "  so  will 
he  cry  to  God,  that  He  may  have  His  elect  born,  and  brought  home  to  Him.  And, 
methinks,  every  true  Christian  should  be  exceedingly  earnest  in  prayer  concerning 
the  souls  of  the  ungodly  ;  and  when  they  are  so,  how  abundantly  God  blesses  them, 
and  how  the  church  prospers  !  But,  beloved,  souls  may  be  damned,  yet  how  lew  ot 
you  care  about  them  !  Sinners  may  sink  into  the  gulf  of  perdition,  yet  how  few  tears 
are  shed  over  them  !  The  whole  world  may  be  swept  away  by  a  torrent  down  the 
precipice  of  woe,  yet  how  few  really  cry  to  God  on  its  behalf!  How  few  men  say, 
"  Oh  that  my  head  were  waters,  and  mine  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep 
day  and  night  for  the  slain  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  !  "  We  do  not  lament 
before  God  the  loss  of  men's  souls,  as  it  well  becomes  Christians  to  do. 

Ah  !  but  in  Heaven,  they  love  souls.  Angels  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth.  As  a  good  Puritan  said,  "  Whenever  a  prodigal  returns,  they  set  all 
Heaven's  bells  ringing,  because  there  is  another  sinner  come  back."  O  beloved, 
when  you  get  a  convert  to  bring  to  the  church,  you  see  some  of  the  members  look 
at  him,  through  their  spectacles,  as  if  they  would  frighten  the  poor  timid  one  ! 
Many  do  not,  like  angels,  rejoice  over  him  ;  but  they  look  at  him  as  if  they 
were  afraid  he  was  a  hypocrite.  The  poor  soul  stands  trembling  before  the  church  ; 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  mighty  upon  him,  but  they  sit  by  as  coldly  as  if  they 
were  on  a  judgment  seat,  and  have  neither  love  nor  mercy  for  him.      1   know  that. 


330  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

when  a  church  increases,  there  should  be  judgment  and  discretion  shown,  and  I 
would  rather  have  too  much  of  what  I  am  speaking  against,  than  too  litde  of  it ;  but, 
sometimes,  the  members  look  at  the  converts,  and  say,  "  It  cannot  be  possible  ;  how 
should  they  be  gathered  in  ?  "  And  when  there  is  an  addition  to  their  numbers, 
they  even  go  home  with  a  heavy  heart,  as  if  the  church  were  likely  to  come  to 
harm  by  admitting  them.  Give  me  a  church-meeting  where  they  weep  with  joy 
over  those  who  come  in,  and  say,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  there  is  another  poor  soul 
rescued  from  the  world  !  "  I  think  it  is  a  sort  of  mark  of  the  sheep,  that  they  love 
to  see  the  lambs  ;  and  I  think  it  is  a  feature  of  the  Lord's  family,  that  they  love 
to  see  another  child  born  into  it.  When  you  see  anyone  brought  to  the  Lord,  do 
you  not  bless  God  for  it  ?  When  you  hear  that  such  an  one  has  received  grace 
and  mercy,  do  you  not  bless  God  tor  it }  No,  not  half  so  much  as  you  ought  ; 
we  are  not  half  thankful  enough  to  our  F"ather  for  it.  But,  up  there,  beloved,  they 
are  "  without  fault  "  in  that  matter,  and  they  do  rejoice,  every  one  of  them,  when 
they  see  souls  brought  in.  Methinks,  young  man,  your  pious  mother  will  rejoice 
when  God  brings  you  to  His  feet  ;  and  those  godly  friends  of  yours  shall  lift 
up  their  notes  high  in  Heaven,  when  they  see  those  dear  to  them  on  earth  united 
to  the  Church  of  God  on  high.  Blessed  be  God's  name  for  them,  they  are  "  with- 
out fault  before  the  throne  of  God  ;  "  and  especially  in  this  matter  of  their  love  to 
souls. 

3.  The  other  fault  I  mentioned  was,  ivant  oj  loz'e  to  Jesus  Christ.  Yes,  how 
little  there  is  among  us  of  love  to  Jesus  Christ !  When  I  think  of  myself  sometimes, 
and  think  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  it  does  appear  as  if  I  did  not  love  Him  at  all.  When 
I  think  of  that  "  love  so  amazing,  so  Divine,"  which  led  Him  to  give  Himself  for  me  ; 
when  I  remember  that  in  me  was  no  good  thing,  yet  He  loved  me  when  I  was  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  loved  me  when  I  hated  Him,  loved  me  when  I  spurned  Him, 
loved  me  when  I  despised  and  rejected  Him,  and  hid,  as  it  were,  my  face  from  Him  ; 
for  "  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  .  .  He  was  despised,  .  .  and  we  esteemed 
Him  not  ;" — when  I  think  of  all  this,  I  cannot  but  wonder  in  my  heart  that  I  do  not 
consecrate  myself  more  entirely  to  Him.  Oh,  if  we  did  but  love  that  sweet  Lord  Jesus 
with  more  ardour  and  clevotedness  !  He  has  love  enough  for  us,  but  how  little  is 
our  love  for  Him  ! 

Methinks  there  is  nothine  over  which  a  Christian  should  oroan  so  much 
as  the  litdeness  of  his  love  to  the  Saviour.  When  our  faith  is  small,  we 
often  lament  ;  but  we  should  recollect  that  love  is  the  Hower  of  faith,  and  springs 
from  faith  ;  and  when  that  is  feeble,  it  is  a  sign  that  faith  also  is  feeble.  Rutherford 
somewhere  beautifully  says,  "O  Lord  Jesus,  let  me  love  Thee,  and  that  will  be 
Heaven  enough  for  me  ;  for  I  find  such  sweetness  in  loving  Thee  that,  if  it  were 
possible   that  Thou  didst  not  love  me.  Thou  canst  not  be  so  cruel  as  to  prevent 


C.     H.     SPURGEOX  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  33 1 

me  loving  Thee  ;  and  if  Thou  wouldst  but  let  me  have  the  presumption  to  love 
Thee,  I  think  it  would  be  Heaven  enough."  Rutherford  felt  it  was  so  sweet  to  love 
his  Lord,  he  found  it  was  so  delightful  to  have  his  heart  go  out  to  the  Saviour, 
that  so  long  as  the  Lord  would  let  him  love  Him,  he  would  be  thankful  for  it, 
even  though  his  Lord  did  not  love  him.  Beloved,  there  is  nought  like  the  love 
of  Jesus  to  make  us  happy!  I  love  the  doctrines  of  grace  as  well  as  any  mortal 
living  does,  but  I  love  Jesus  better  ;  I  love  Christ's  people  as  much  as  anyone 
can,  but  I  love  Christ  best.  Oh,  His  sweet,  glorious,  exalted  person  !  that  is  the 
object  of  our  love  ;  we  look  upon  all  else  as  the  clothes  of  Jesus,  the  crown  of  Jesus. 
And  we  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  His  own  blessed  name's  sake  ;  we  love  Him  for 
what  we  know  of  Him  ;  still,  the  fault  is  that  we  do  not  know  enough  of  Him,  and 
we  do  not  love  Him  enough.  But  up  there,  beloved,  "  they  are  without  fault  before 
the  throne  of  God."  Ask  those  bright  spirits  whether  they  know  Jesus,  and  love 
Jesus,  and  how  would  they  answer  you  ?  Spirit  immortal,  dost  thou  love  Jesus  ? 
Hear  his  answer  !  He  stops  not  to  tell  you,  but  he  repeats  the  song  he  sings 
in  Heaven,  "  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth 
upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  e\'er  and  e\'er."  Ask  him  whether  he  lov'es 
Christ,  he  does  not  stay  to  tell  you,  but  sweeps  his  fingers  across  the  golden  strings 
of  his  harp,  and  again  lifts  up  his  thrice-glorious  voice  in  praise  of  the  name  of 
Jesus. 

'"Jesus!  my  Lord!'  their  harps  employs  ; 
'Jesus  !  my  Love ! '  they  sing  ; 
'Jesus!  the  hfe  of  all  my  joys! 

Sounds  sweet  from  every  string." 

If  there  were  nothing  else  to  expect  in  Heaven  but  that  we  should  know  Christ 
better  and  love  Him  more,  that  is  all  the  Heaven  that  any  of  us  need  desire.  To 
touch  with  our  finger  His  wounded  side,  to  grasp  His  nail-pierced  hands,  to  gaze  on 
His  benignant  face,  to  look  on  those  compassionate  eyes  which  once  were  cold  and 
glazed  in  the  tomb, — to  know  Him,  and  to  love  Him  perfectly, — that  were  Heaven 
enough  ;  and  it  shall  be  so,  for  "  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God  ' 
and  so  shall  we  be. 

We  have  thus  described,  beloved,  the  people  in  Heaven  without  fault  before 
the  throne.  We -have  been  necessarily  brief  and  we  might  have  enlarged  consider- 
ably, by  obser\'ing  how  they  are  without  fault  in  the  opinion  of  others,  and  in  their 
oiLm  opinion,  for  now  they  cannot  see  any  fault  in  themselves.  But,  best  of  all,  they 
are  without  tault  in  Goifs  opinion,  tor  even  the  scrutinizing  eye  of  Jehovah  sees  no 
fault  in  them.  He  looks  upon  them,  and  beholds  not  the  shadow  of  a  staiill.  That 
God,  who  sees  every  little  insect  in  the  air,  and  every  creeping  thing  at  the  bottom 
of  the  sea,  can  perceive  nothing  wrong  in  His  people  in  Heaven  ;  no,  nor  even 
here,   when  He  considers  them  in  Christ.      But  more  especially  then,  when  we  shall 


^T,2  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

be  completely  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  tliere  shall  be  no  indwelling  corruption,  no 
original  sin,  all  that  is  sinful  in  us  shall  be  gone  ;  and  God  Himself  upon  His  throne 
shall  say,  "They  are  without  fault  before  Me."  As  He  looks  upon  the  living  stones 
in  the  Heavenly  Temple,  perfectly  joined  together  with  the  vermilion  cement  of 
Christ's  blood.  He  will  say  of  them  all,  "They  are  without  fault." 

H.  Now,  let  us  enquire,  who  are  these  people  that  are  without  fault.'' 
"  Oh  !  "  says  one,  "  they  are  the  apostles."  Certainly,  they  are  "without  fault." 
Another  says,  "  They  are  some  eminent  saints  such  as  Noah,  Elijah,  and  Daniel." 
No  ;  not  them  exclusively,  beloved.  Another  friend  says,  "  They  are  some  faithful 
ministers  who  preach  the  truth  very  boldly  ;  therefore  they  are  without  fault  before 
the  throne."  No  ;  they  are  not  the  only  ones  who  are  without  fault  ;  I  will  tell  you 
who  they  are.  "  I  looked,  and,  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on  the  Mount  Sion,  and  with  Him  an 
hundred  forty  and  four  thousand,  having  His  Father's  name  written  in  their 
foreheads."  "After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man  could 
number,  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  stood  before  the 
throne,  and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands  ; 
and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying.  Salvation  to  our  God  which  sitteth  upon  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb."  These  are  the  faultless  people  ;  the  chosen  ones  of 
God,  the  elect  ;  these  are  they  who  have  the  Father's  name  written  in  their 
foreheads  ;  those  whom  God  selected  out  of  the  world  to  show  forth  His  praise  ;  the 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand,  and  the  multitude  which  no  man  could  number  who 
were  redeemed  from  among  men.  It  does  not  matter  whether  they  have  been  great 
sinners  or  little  sinners,  they  are  all  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  "  now  ;  it 
matters  not  whether  they  have  been  swearers,  drunkards,  whoremongers,  or  what 
not,  they  are  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  "  if  they  are  but  amongst  the  number 
whom  God  hath  chosen  and  sanctified.  It  matters  not  what  they  were  ;  it  matters 
not  whether  men  despised  them,  or  found  fault  with  them  ;  we  care  not  whether 
they  have  been  put  in  the  pillory  of  scorn,  and  hooted  and  hissed  at  by  mankind, 
all  the  elect  are  "  without  fault"  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  ;  and  they  shall  all  be 
at  the  last  bright  and  glorious  day  before  the  throne  in  person  "  without  fault  "  in 
themselves,  when  God  shall  gather  home  His  people,  and  glorify  His  ransomed  ones. 
T/icy  a.re  without  fault;  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne;  they  are  those 
whom  God  hath  chosen,  those  who  have  their  Father's  name  in  their  foreheads. 

By  reading  the  earlier  part  of  this  chapter,  you  will  see  that  i/uy  wen'  all 
redeemed  persons  :  "The  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand,  which  were  redeemed 
from  the  earths  "These  were  redeemed  from  among  men,  being  the  firstfruits  unto 
God  and  to  the  Lamb."  All  who  were  redeemed  shall  stand  before  God  without 
speck  or  blemish.  We  will  not  go  into  the  doctrinal  part  of  this  subject,  but  simply 
speak   of  it   as   a  matter  of  experience.      "  They  are  without   fault."      Do  you  ask, 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAI'HY. 


533' 


beloved,  "  Am  /  one  of  the  redeemed  ?  "  Canst  thou  say  that  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
has  been  sprinkled  upon  thy  lintel,  and  thy  door  post  ?  Hast  thou,  by  faith,  sat  down 
and  fed  on  that  Paschal  Lamb  ?  Is  He  thy  rod,  thy  stay,  thy  all  in  all,  thy  very 
existence?  Can  thy  faith  lay  her  hand  on  that  dear  head  of  His,  and  there  confess 
thy  sin?  Canst  thou  see  traces  of  His  blood  on  thy  conscience?  Hast  thou  marks 
of  His  blood  on  thy  soul?  Art  thou  blood-washed?  Hast  thou  felt  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  thine  ?     Canst  thou  say, — 

"  I'm  a  poor  sinner,  and  nothing  at  all, 
But  Jesus  Christ  is  my  all  in  all'":' 

Canst  thou  see  the  purchase  price  given  tor  thee  ?     Canst  thou  sino-, — 

"Oh!  how  sweet  to  feel  the  flownig 
Of  his  sin-atoning  blood  ! 
■With  Divine  assurance  knowing 

He  hath  made  my  peace  with  God  "  ? 

If  so,  though  thou  mayest  be  loaded  with  sin,  though  conscience  may  condemn  thee, 
though  Satan  may  bring  all  thy  faults  before  thee,  thou  shalt  be  "  without  fault  before 
the  throne  of  God."  Thou  mayest  have  been  a  black  and  gross  sinner,  thou 
mayest  have  been  a  great  backslider,  thou  mayest  have  been  horribly  wicked,  almost 
as  bad  as  the  devil  himself;  thou  mayest  have  had  risings  of  corruption,  so  horrible 
that  thou  darest  not  reveal  them  to  thy  fellow-man  ;  thou  mayest  be  the  subject  of 
insinuations  so  vile  and  black  that  thou  puttest  thy  hand  to  thy  mouth  to  prevent 
their  finding  utterance  ;  the  flesh  may  be  struggling  so  hard  against  the  spirit  that 
thou  dost  scarcely  know  which  shall  have  the  predominance,  and  thou  art  crying,  "  If 
it  be  so,  why  am  I  thus  ?  " — it  may  be  that  thou  art  lying  down,  self-condemned  and 
law-condemned,  fearing  that  the  sword  of  Justice  will  smite  thy  head  from  thy 
shoulders  ;  and  yet,  with  all  this,  thou  shalt  one  day  be  "  without  fault  before  the 
throne  of  God,"  for  thou  hast  been  redeemed  by  Christ's  atoning  blood. 

O  beloved,  when  I  look  back  upon  my  past  life,  I  am  horrified  at  the  thought  o/ 
what  I  should  have  come  to  if  God  had  left  me  to  work  out  my  own  righteousness  ! 
I  was  the  subject  of  black  thoughts  and  sad  feelings,  I  sinned  against  early  warnings 
and  pious  training,  against  God,  against  my  own  soul  and  body  ;  and  yet  I  know  that, 
notwithstanding  all  these  sins,  I  shall  one  day  be  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of 
God."  Possibly  I  may  be  addressing  some  man  who  has  been  notoriously  guilty  of 
swearing,  and  drunkenness,  and  every  filthy  vice,  yet  he  has  come  to  be  a  believer  in 
Christ  ;  or  perhaps  he  is  saying,  "  I  am  condemned,  there  is  nothing  but  hell  forme  ; 
I  know  I  cannot  be  pardoned."  Nay,  poor  sinner,  if  thou  art  trusting  in  Jesus,  God's 
law  cannot  condemn  twice.  If  God's  law  has  condemned  thee,  God's  grace  absolves 
thee,  if  thou  tremblest  at  God's  Word,  and  sayest,  "  I  am  a  sinner,  but  I  trust  the 
Saviour."      Recollect  the  apostle's  message,  "This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 


334  C-     ^^-     SPURGEONS     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  of  whom  I  am 
chief ;  " — as  if  Paul  would  say  that  you  cannot  go  further  in  sin  than  the  chief  of 
sinners  went.  What  sayest  thou  to  this,  O  drunkard  ?  One  day,  the  Lord  having 
mercy  on  thee,  thou  shalt  stand,  white  as  driven  snow,  before  the  Maiesty  on  high. 
What  sayest  thou  to  this,  O  thou  whose  mouth  has  been  stained  with  black  oaths? 
If  thou  hast  fled  to  Jesus  to  be  saved,  one  day,  unblemished  and  complete,  thou  shalt 
join  in  the  hallelujahs  of  the  glorified  before  the  throne  of  God.  O  youth,  though 
thou  hast  gone  into  the  very  kennel  of  sin,  and  raked  up  all  that  is  vile  and  base  ;  though 
thou  hast  gone  down,  down,  down,  till  it  seemed  impossible  for  thee  to  take  another 
step  into  the  hell  of  sin  ;  even  thou  shalt  stand  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of 
God,"  if  thou  art  a  believer,  trusting  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  hast  that  blood 
applied  to  thy  soul.  And  thou,  O  woman,  outcast,  lost,  ruined  ;  though  thou  dost 
hide  thy  face,  ashamed  to  bear  the  gaze  of  man,  and  comest  with  stealthy  steps  into 
God's  house,  as  if  afraid  to  be  seen,  for  thou  knowest  what  thou  hast  been  ;  ay,  but  a 
woman,  who  was  a  sinner,  once  washed  the  Saviour's  feet  with  her  tears,  and  why  ? 
Because  He  had  washed  her  heart  with  blood  ; — and,  O  thou  poor,  guilty  Magdalene, 
there  is  blood  that  can  wash  even  thee  !  Though  thou  hast  stains  as  black  as  hell 
upon  thee,  Christ's  blood  can  wash  them  out  ;  that  precious  blood  can  take  away  all 
thy  sins.  His  blood  availed  for  me,  and,  having  availed  for  me,  where  shall  I  find 
another  whose  guilt  shall  go  beyond  the  merit  of  His  sacrifice,  whose  crimes  shall 
exceed  His  power  to  save  ?  Never  shall  I  find  such  an  one,  for  Christ  has  boundless 
grace.      I  always  love  that  phrase  of  Hart's, — 

"A  sinner  is  a  sacred  thing, 
The  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  him  so." 

Ah  !  let  me  know  that  I  am  addressing  such  a  sinner  !  I  will  preach  the  gospel 
to  real,  bona-fide,  actual,  positive  sinners  ;  and  no  flesh  and  blood  shall  stop  me  for 
everinore  in  all  my  sermons,  as  long  as  God  gives  me  life  and  breath,  preaching  to 
those  real  sinners.  As  for  your  sham  sinners,  the  people  who  talk  very  daintily  of 
being  sinners,  I  have  no  good  opinion  of  them.  John  Berridge  said  that  he  kept  a 
rod  for  sham  beggars,  and  I  will  keep  one  for  these  pretenders.  I  love  to  see  .one 
who  feels  himself  to  be  a  real  sinner  ;  not  the  one  who  says,  just  by  way  of  compli- 
ment, that  he  is  a  sinner  ;  not  the  one  who  can  read  the  Ten  Commandments  all 
through,  and  say  that  he  has  not  broken  any  of  them  ;  but  the  real  sinner,  the 
downright  guilty  man,  the  man  who  is  a  thorough  sinner,  and  knows  jt,  that  is  the 
man  to  whom  I  like  to  preach  the  gospel.  O  sinner, — you,  you,  you, — if  you  are 
trusting  in  Christ's  name,  and  if  His  blood  has  been  sprinkled  on  your  conscience, 
shall  yet  stand  before  the  throne  of  God  "  without  fault."  Or,  as  the  good  man  in 
Yorkshire  said,  when  he  was  dying,  and  someone  told  him  he  had  been  a  great 
sinner,  "Ah  !  "  said  he,  "  1  have  been  a  great  sinner,  but  there  is  a  crown  in  Heaven 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  335 

which  Gabriel  cannot  wear  ;  it  will  fit  no  head  but  mine,  and  I  shall  wear  it,  too,  for 
I  am  bought  and  paid  for  by  the  blood  of  Christ  ;  and  I  shall  be  with  Him  soon." 
Bought  and  paid  for  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  thou  also,  believing  soul,  shalt  be 
"without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 

Beloved,  there  is  one  thought  that  will  suggest  itself  to  some  of  you,  and  that 
is,  there  ai'e  some  of  your  relatives  that  are  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 
There  is  a  dear,  pious  mother,  on  whose  knees  you  sat  in  childhood,  over  whose 
grave  you  wept  :  and  she  is  "  without  fault  before  the  throne."  You  loved  her,  but 
when  you  look  back,  you  can  see  that  there  was  a  little  fault  of  some  kind  in  her  ; 
perhaps  she  loved  her  children  too  much,  there  was  some  fault  or  other  that  she 
had  :  but  she  has  no  fault  now.  And  there,  husband,  is  your  beloved  wife,  who 
cheered  you  on  your  way  ;  you  look  back,  and  almost  faultless  as  you  in  your 
fondness  deemed  her,  yet  you  feel  that  she  was  not  quite  free  from  some  little 
error:  but  she  is  "without  fault  before  the  throne"  now.  If  you  could  behold  her 
now,  you  would  see  her, — as  the  Interpreter  described  the  pilgrims  who  had  been 
washed, — "  fair  as  the  moon."  Mother,  there  is  your  daughter  ;  and  there  are  our 
brothers  and  sisters  who  have  crossed  the  flood.  When  speaking  on  this  subject 
of  re-union  with  departed  friends,  we  can  say, — 

"  E'en  now,  by  faith,  we  join  our  hands 
With  those  that  went  before  ; 
And  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands, 
On  the  eternal  shore  !  " 

The  members  of  our  churches  have  ascended  up  to  our  Father,  and  to  their  Father, 
and  to  Christ's  Father,  and  now  "they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 
Oh,  to  be  "  without  fault  "  !  If  I  might  ask  one  thing  of  God,  if  it  were  not  sinful 
to  ask  such  a  thing,  methinks  I  would  ask,  "  Let  me  die  now,  that  I  may  go  and  be 
without  fault  before  Thy  throne  !  " 

"O  that  the  happy  word  were  given, — 
Loose  me,  and  let  me  rise  to  Heaven, 
And  wrap  myself  in  God  !  " 

Why  are  we  afraid  to  die  ?  What  are  the  pains,  the  groans,  the  dying  struggle  ^  It 
is  the  paying  of  a  penny  for  a  pound  to  go  through  them,  that  so  we  may  get  to 
Heaven. 

"  Oh  !  if  my  Lord  would  come  and  meet. 
My  soul  should  stretch  her  wings  in  haste. 
Fly  fearless  through  death's  iron  gate, 
Nor  feel  the  terrors  as  she  passed." 

"They  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  Yes,  they  are  there;  and 
perhaps  we,  too,  shall  be  there  in  a  few  days.  I  am  no  prophet,  nor  the  son  of  a 
prophet;  but  it  may  be  that  one  of  us,  who  loves  the  Lord,  will  be  with  Him 
before  long  ;  but  whether   it    be  so   or  not,   whichever   one  of  us  is   to  depart,   we 


336  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

know  that  it  is  to  be  "  without  fault."  So  we  are  not  afraid,  whoever  it  may  be  ;  if 
we  are  of  the  Lord's  family,  we  shall  be  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 

III.  We  can  only  very  briefly  explain  the  third  part  of  the  subject,  which  is,  to 
show  WHERE  THEY  ARE  WHO  ARE  WITHOUT  FAULT  :  "  They  are  without  fault  before 
the  throne  of  God."  "  Before  the  throne  of  God."  We  know  what  it  is  to  lie 
beneath  the  throne  ;  for  we  sometimes  sing, — 

"  We  would  no  longer  lie 
Like  slaves  beneath  the  throne." 

We  know  what  it  is,  at  times,  to  be  far  off  from  the  throne.  Satan  stands  blocking 
up  the  way  to  the  throne.  It  is  as  much  as  we  can  do  to  push  past  him,  and  get  a 
word  from  the  Master.  Have  you  not  sometimes  thought  that  you  were  behind  the 
throne,  and  that  God  could  not  look  at  you, — that  He  could  look  at  all  His  servants, 
but  not  at  you,  for  you  were  behind  the  throne  .''  The  proud  infidel  wants  to  get  on 
the  throne,  but  even  if  it  were  possible  for  him  to  be  in  Heaven,  he  could  not  do 
that,  for  he  would  neither  be  beneath  the  throne,  nor  behind  the  throne,  nor  on  the 
throne,  but  he  would  have  to  stand  before  it  to  be  condemned. 

But  the  saints  of  God  are  all  before  the  throne.  Why  .''  Because  they  ean  then 
always  look  at  God,  and  God  can  ahvays  look  at  them.  They  stand  before  the 
throne.  That  is  all  I  want  here,  to  stand  before  the  throne  of  God.  If  I  could 
always  be  before  it,  if  I  could  always  see  the  light  of  His  countenance,  always  feel  the 
coinforting  assurance  of  being  safe  in  Jesus,  always  taste  His  love,  always  receive 
of  His  grrace,  that-  were  enouirh  for  me.  And  if  that  is  sweet  here,  how  much 
sweeter  shall  it  be  to  bow  before  the  throne  hereafter,  and  "  unceasing  sing  His 
love  "  !  At  times,  here,  we  are  so  far  off  the  throne,  that  we  can  scarcely  tell  where 
it  is  ;  and  if  it  were  not  a  glorious  high  throne,  being  so  far  off,  we  should  never  be 
able  to  see  it.  But  it  is  one  that  you  can  see  a  long  way  off;  yet  there  "  they  are  " 
immediately  "  before  the  throne,"  drinking  in  bliss  with  their  eyes  and  ears,  with 
their  whole  soul  lost  in  Jesus,  standing  perpetually  before  the  throne  !  That  part 
of  the  verse  needs  so  much  illustration  to  explain  it,  that  I  am  afraid,  more  briefly, 
to  venture  on  it.  I,  therefore,  must,  for  the  present,  leave  it.  "They  are  without 
fault  before  the  throne  of  God."  But,  beloved,  there  is  one  serious  question  which 
I  shall  put  to  you,  and  that  is.  Shall  we  be  zvithout  fault  before  the  throne  hereafter  ? 
The  answer  rests  here  ;  are  we  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God  now,  through 
the  justifying  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ  ?     Are  we  able  to  say, — 

"Jesus,  thy  blood  and  righteousness, 
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress  "  ? 

If  SO,  the  Christian  cannot  change  his  position  in  God's  sight.  He  is  now  justified, 
and  shall  be  so  hereafter ;  there  is  now  no  condemnation,  and  he  never  can  be 
condemned.     "Ah  !  "  says  someone,  "  I  cannot  say  as  much  as  that."     Well,  then,  are 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  2>2>7 

you  full  ot  fault  in  your  own  eyes  ?  Hath  God  the  Spirit  shown  you  your  sin  ? 
Next  to  being  shown  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  His 
working  is  our  being  aware  of  our  own  sinfulness.  Do  you,  then,  see  your  own 
sinfulness  }  Have  you  been  brought  down  till  all  that  nature  has  set  upon  the 
throne  has  been  cast  in  the  dust,  and  that  garment  which  you  gloried  in  has  been 
torn  away,  and  you  stand  naked,  and  worse  than  naked  ;  filthy,  and  worse  than  filthy  ; 
diseased,  and  worse  than  diseased  ;  polluted  in  heart,  worse  than  dead  ;  worse  than 
lying  among  the  slain  ;  like  those  that  go  down  to  the  pit,  those  that  have  been 
long  since  dead  ; — ^nay,  if  possible,  worse  than  that  ?  Can  you  feel  as  if  you  have 
been  brought  down,  down,  down,  till  desperation  seized  you,  and  you  had  nothing  to 
rest  in  ?  Can  you  feel  that  you  have  been  stripped  to  the  lowest  degree,  and  all  that 
you  possessed  and  gloried  in  has  been  scattered  to  the  winds  ?  And  can  you  now  say, 
"  Out  of  the  depths  have  I  cried  unto  Thee,  O  Lord  "  ?  Well,  if  you  have  plenty  of 
faults  here,  and  have  known  them,  and  been  taught  them,  and  feel  that  you  cannot 
overcome  them  of  yourself,  you  shall  be  "without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God' 
by-and-by,  for  the  Lord  will  not  bring  you  to  that  state  of  soul-distress,  and  self- 
despair,  without  bringing  you  also  to  peace  and  liberty.  O  sinner,  is  not  this 
glorious  news  to  thee  .''  Thou  knowest  thy  sinnership,  thou  canst  understand  that 
thou  art  a  sinner  ;  that  is  the  first  thing  thou  needest  to  know.     We  sometimes  sing, — • 

"All  the  fitness  He  requireth, 
Is  to  feel  your  need  of  Him." 

But  I  love  the  next  two  lines  of  the  verse, — 

"This  He  gives  you; 
'Tis  the  Spirit's  rising  beam." 

Good  old  Martin  Luther  used  to  say,  "The  devil  comes  to  me,  and  says,  'Martin, 
thou  art  an  e.xceeding  sinner.'"  "  I  know  that  very  well,"  said  Martin,  "and  I'll  cut 
off  thy  head  with  thine  own  sword  ;  for  Christ  died  for  sinners,  and  the  more  I  feel 
I  am  a  sinner,  the  more  evidence  I  have  that  Christ  died  for  me."  Oh  !  to  know  our 
sinnership  !  to  recognize  it  in  our  inmost  soul  !— that  is  blessed  !  And  there  is  only 
one  more  step,  and  that  God  shall  lead  us  to,— to  put  us  in  Christ  Jesus  in  our  own 
feelings  ;  for  we  are  already  in  Him  in  the  eternal  covenant,  if  so  be  we  are  out  of 
ourselves.  Oh  !  trust  Him,  f7-tist  Him,  trust  Him,  TRUST  HIM  !  He  is  a  good 
Christ,  and  a  great  Christ.  Ah,  great  sinner  !  trust  thou  to  His  blood  and  righteous- 
ness ;  and  thou,  even  thou,  the  filthiest,  the  vilest,  the  off-cast,  the  undeserving,  the 
ill-deserving,  and  hell-deserving  sinner,  even  thou  shalt  yet  wear  a  blood-washed 
robe,  spotless  and  white  ;  even  thou  shalt  sing  the  perfect  song,  and  be  perfect 
thyself,  for  thou  shalt  be  "  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God." 


X 


CHAPTER     XXX. 


Ictttrs  tonctrumg  5cttltmtnt  in  ionbort. 

I  do  not  know  whether  all  of  you  can  go  with  me  here  ;  but  I  think  you  must,  in  some  instance  or 
other,  be  forced  to  see  that  God  has  indeed  ordained  your  inheritance  for  you.  If  you  cannot,  I  can.  I 
can  see  a  thousand  chances,  as  men  would  call  them,  all  working  together,  like  wheels  in  a  great  piece 
of  machinery,  to  fix  me  just  where  I  am  ;  and  I  can  look  back  to  a  hundred  places  where,  if  one  of  those 
little  wheels  had  run  awry,  if  one  of  those  little  atoms  in  the  great  whirlpool  of  my  existence  had 
started  aside,  I  might  have  been  anywhere  but  here,  and  occupying  a  verj' different  position.  U  you 
cannot  say  this,  I  know  /can  with  emphasis ;  and  I  can  trace  God's  hand  back  even  to  the  period  of  my 
birth.  Through  every  step  I  have  taken,  I  can  feel  that  indeed  God  has  allotted  my  inheritance  for  me. 
If  any  of  you  are  so  wilfully  beclouded  that  you  will  not  see  the  hand  of  God  in  your  being,  and  will 
insist  that  all  has  been  done  by  your  own  will  without  the  control  of  Providence, — that  you  liave  been  left 
to  steer  your  own  course  across  the  ocean  of  existence,  and  that  you  are  where  you  are  because  your 
own  hand  guided  the  tiller,  and  your  own  arm  directed  ihe  rudder,— all  I  can  say  is,  ray  experience,  and 
the  experience  of  many  now  in  this  place,  would  rise  in  testimony  against  you,  and  we  should  say, 
"  Verily,  it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  "  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes  ; "  and  the 
God  of  Heaven  is  not  unoccupied,  but  is  engaged  in  over-ruling,  arranging,  ordering,  altering,  and 
working  all  things  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  His  will. — C.  H.  S. 

HE  Church  in  New  Park  Street  was  sadly  reduced  in  numbers,  and 
from  the  position  of  its  meeting-house  there  seemed  no  prospect 
before  it  but  ultimate  dissolution  ;  but  there  were  a  few  in  its  midst 
who  never  ceased  to  pray  for  a  gracious  revival.  The  congregation 
became  smaller  and  smaller ;  yet  they  hoped  on,  and  hoped  ever. 
Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that,  when  they  were  at  their  worst,  the 
Lord  remembered  them,  and  gaxe  to  them  such  a  tide  of  prosperity  that  they  have 
since  had  no  mourning,  or  doubting,  but  many,  many  years  of  continued  rejoicing. 


(The  following  official  record  shows  in  what  condition  the  New  Park  Street 
Church  was  at  the  time  that  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  his  first  sermon  in  London. 
Although  there  had  not  been  any  additions  during  the  year,  and  the  total  income  for 
1853  had  been  less  than  /300,  the  members  of  the  church  and  congregation  were  so 
concerned  about  the  spiritual  welfare  of  their  neighbours  that,  without  waiting  for 
the  election  of  a  new  Pastor,  the)-  had  subscribed  the  amount  needed  to  secure  the 
services  ot  a  city  missionary  for  five  years  : — 

"  Monthly  church-meeting,  14th  Deer.,  1853. 
"  Brother  Low  presided. 

"The  minutes  of  the  last  church-meeting  were  read,  and  the  correctness  of  the 
entry  confirmed 


340  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

"  Agreed  to  grant  the  use  of  the  chapel  to  the  London  Baptist  Association  for 
the  holding  of  their  annual  meeting  on  Wednesday,  the  nth  of  January,  1854. 

"  The  letter  proposed  to  be  sent  from  this  church  to  that  meeting  was  read, 
approved,  and  ordered  to  be  signed  by  Brother  Low  as  presiding  deacon.  It  was 
as  follows  : — 

"  '  To  the  Ministers  and  Messengers  composing  the  London  Baptist  Associa- 
tion, the  baptized  Church  of  Christ  assembling  in  New  Park  Street,  Southwark, 
sendeth  Christian  salutation. 

"  '  Dear  Brethren, 

"  '  We  regret  that,  during  the  past  year,  we  ha\'e  made  no  additions  to 
our  numbers  in  consequence  of  our  being  without  a  Pastor,  and  that  we  have  nothing 
particular  to  communicate  to  the  Association,  except  that  a  friend  has  presented  the 
sum  of  one  hundred  pounds,  on  condition  that  our  church  and  congregation  would 
raise  the  like  amount,  with  the  view  to  securing  the  services  of  a  missionary  in  our 
locality,  with  the  aid  of  the  London  City  Mission,  for  five  years.  We  have  the 
pleasure  to  state  that  our  friends  have  contributed  the  full  sum  required  for  the 
carrying  out  of  this  important  object.  We  enclose  our  statistics.  '  Brethren,  pray 
for  us.' 

"  'Signed  on  behalf  of  the  church,  at  our  church-meeting,  14th  Deer.,  1853, 

"'James   Low,   Presiding  Deacon.'") 

(Mr.  Spurgeon  wrote  two  letters  to  his  father,  recounting  his  first  experiences  in 
London.  A  considerable  portion  of  the  earlier  one  is  missing,  including  the  first 
sheet,  and  also  the  end  of  the  epistle.  Evidently,  the  young  preacher  had  been 
relating  what  the  deacons  had  told  him  concerning  the  falling-off  in  the  congrega- 
tions, for  the  part  of  his  letter  that  has  been  preserved  begins  as  follows  : — ) 

" me  that  the  people  would  be  back  at  the  first  blast  of  the  trumpet 

which  gives  a  certain  sound The  people  are  Calvinistic,  and  they  could  not 

get  on  with  anything  else.  They  raised  ^100  last  week  for  a  city  missionary,  so 
that  they  have  the  sinews  of  war.  The  deacons  told  me  that,  if  I  were  there  three 
Sundays,  there  would  be  no  room  anywhere.  They  say  that  all  the  London  popular 
ministers  are  gospel-men,  and  are  plain,  simple,  and  original.  They  have  had  most 
of  the  good  preachers  of  our  denomination  out  of  the  country  ;  but  they  have  never 
asked  one  of  them  twice,  for  they  gave  them  such  philosophical,  or  dry,  learned 
sermons,  that  once  was  enough.  I  am  the  only  one  who  has  been  asked  twice,  the 
only  one  who  has  been  heard  with  pleasure  by  all.  I  told  them  they  did  not  know 
what  they  were  doing,  nor  whether  they  were  in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body  ;  they 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


341 


were  so  starved,  that  a  morsel  of  gospel  was  a  treat  to  them.  The  portraits  of  Gill 
and  Rippon — large  as  life — hang  in  the  vestry.  Lots  of  them  said  I  was  Rippon 
over  again. 

"  It  is  God's  doing.  I  do  not  deserve  it  ; — they  are  mistaken.  I  only  mention 
facts.  I  have  not  exaggerated  ;  nor  am  I  very  exalted  by  it,  for  to  leave  my  own 
dear  people  makes  it  a  painful  pleasure.      God  wills  it. 

"  The  only  thing  which  pleases  me  is,  as  you  will  guess,  that  I  am  rioht  about 
College.  I  told  the  deacons  that  I  was  not  a  College  man,  and  they  said,  '  That  is 
to  us  a  special  recommendation,  for  you  would  not  have  much  savour  or  unction  if 
you  came  from  College.' 

"  x\s  to  a  school,  or  writing  to  my  deacons  in  case  I  do  not  o-q,  I  shall  feel 
happiest  if  left  to  manage  alone,  for  I  am  sure  that  any  letter  to  my  deacons  would 
not  do  any  good.  A  church  is  iree  to  manage  its  own  affairs.  We  are  in  loving 
unity  now,  and  they  will  improve.  But  churches  of  the  Baptist  denomination  would 
think  it  an  infringement  of  their  rules  and  liberties  to  be  touched  in  the  least  by 
persons  of  other  denominations  in  any  matter  which  is  their  own  concern.  I  should 
at  once  say,  and  you  would  not  mind  my  saying  so,  '/  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  note  ; 
I  never  asked  my  fatlicr  to  write  it ;  and  the  deacons  must  do  as  they  please  abont 
laying  it  before  the  chtnrh.' 

"  I  feel  pleasure  in  the  thought  that  it  will  not  now  be  necessary,  and  I  feel  that, 
if  it  had  been,  I  should  have  been  equally  contented.  Many  other  ministers  have 
schools  ;  it  is  a  usual  thing.  It  is  not  right  to  say,  '  If  you  mean  to  be  a  minister  ;  ' 
for  I  am  one,  and  have  been  for  two  years  as  much  a  minister  as  any  man  in 
England  ;  and  probably  v-ery  much  more  so,  since  in  that  time  I  have  preached  more 
than  600  times. 

"  More  soon." 

(The  allusions  to  a  school  refer  to  the  following  advertisement  which  Mr. 
Spurgeon  had  inserted  in  a  Cambridge  newspaper  : — 

"  No.  60,  Park  Street,  Cambridge.  Mr.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  begs  to  inform  his 
numerous  friends  that,  after  Christmas,  he  intends  taking  six  or  seven  young  gentle- 
men as  day  pupils.  He  will  endeavour  to  the  utmost  to  impart  a  good  commercial 
Education.  The  ordinary  routine  will  include  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Geometry, 
and  Mensuration;  Grammar  and  Composition;  Ancient  and  Modern  History; 
Geography,  Natural  History,  Astronomy,  Scripture,  and  Drawing.  Latin  and  the 
elements  of  Greek  and  French,  it  required.      Terms,  ^5  per  annum.") 


342 


H.     STURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY 


"  No.  60,  Park  Street, 

"  Cambridge, 

"  December,  — ,  1853. 

"  My  Dear  Father, 

"  I  concluded  rather  abruptly  before  ; — but  you  are  often  called  out  from 
your  writing,  and  therefore  can  excuse  it  in  me.  I  hardly  know  what  I  leit  unsaid.  I 
hope  to  be  at  home  three  days.  I  think  of  running  down  from  London  on  Tuesday 
(January)  3rd,  and  to  go  home  by  Bury  on  Friday,  6th.  I  hope  it  will  be  a  sweet 
visit  although  a  short  one. 

"  Should  I  be  settled  in  London,  I  will  come  and  see  you  often.  I  do  not 
anticipate  going  there  with  much  pleasure.  I  am  contented  where  I  am  ;  but  it  God 
has  more  for  me  to  do,  then  let  me  go  and  trust  in  Him.  The  London  people 
are  rather  higher  in  Calvinism  than  I  am  ;  but  I  have  succeeded  in  bringing  one 
church  to  my  own  views,  and  will  trust,  with  Divine  assistance,  to  do  the  same  with 
another.  I  am  a  Calvinist  ;  I  love  what  someone  called  '  glorious  Calvinism,'  but 
'  Hyperism  '  is  too  hot-spiced  for  my  palate. 

"  I  found  a  relation  in  London  ;  a  daughter  of  Thomas  Spurgeon,  at  Ballingdon. 
On  the  Monday,  she  came  and  brought  the  unmarried  sister,  who  you  will  remember 
was  at  home  when  we  called  last  Christmas.  I  shall  have  no  objection  to  preach 
for  Mr.  Langford  on  Wednesday,  January  4th,  if  he  wishes  it. 

"  I  spent  the  Monday  in  going  about  London,  climbed  to  the  top  of  St.  Paul's, 
and  left  some  money  with  the  booksellers.* 

"  My  people  are  very  sad  ;  some  wept  bitterly  at  the  sight  of  me,  although   I 

made  no  allusion  to  the  subject  in  the  pulpit,  as  it  is  too  uncertain  to  speak  of  publicly. 

It   is   Calvinism   they  want    in    London,   and   any  Arminian   preaching  will   not    be 

endured.      Several    in   the   church  are   far  before   me  in   theological   acumen  ;    they 

would  not  admit  that  it  is  so,  but  they  all  expressed  their  belief  that  my  originality, 

or  even  eccentricity,  was  the  very  thing  to  draw  a  London  audience.      The  chapel  is 

one   of  the   finest   in   the  denomination  ;    somewhat   in   the  style  of  our  Cambridge 

Museum.     A  Merry  Christmas  to  you  all  ;   a  Happy  New  Year;    and  the  blessing 

of  the  God  of  Jacob  ! 

"  Yours  affectionately, 

"  C.   H.  Spurgeon." 

*  Mr.  Spurgeon's  volume,  Commenting  and  Commentaries,  explains  this  allusion  : — 

Among  entire  commentators  of  modern  date,  a  high  place  is  usually  awarded  to  Thomas  Scott,  and  I  shall  not  dispute  his 
right  to  it.  He  is  the  expositor  of  Evangelical  Episcopalians,  even  as  Adam  Clarke  is  the  prophet  of  the  Wesleyans  ;  but  to  me  he 
has  seldom  given  a  thought,  and  I  have  almost  discontinued  consulting  him.  The  very  first  money  I  ever  received  for  pulpit  services 
in  London  was  invested  in  Thomas  Scott,  and  I  neither  regretted  the  investment,  nor  became  exhilarated  thereby.  His  work  has' 
always  been  popular,  is  very  judicious,  thoroughly  sound  and  gracious  ;  but  forsuggestiveness  and  pith  is  not  comparable  to  Matthew 
Henry.  I  know  I  am  talking  heresy ;  but  I  cannot  help  saying  that,  for  a  minister's  use,  Scott  is  mere  milk  and  water ; — good  and 
trustworthy,  but  not  solid  enough  in  matter  for  full-grown  men.  In  the  family,  Scott  will  hold  his  place;  but  in  the  study,  you  want 
condensed  thought,  and  this  you  must  look  for  elsewhere. 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  343 

(At  the  laying  of  the  foundation  stone  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Mr 
Spurgeon's  father  made  the  following  interesting  reference  to  the  College  incident 
and  his  son's  coming  to  London  : — 

"  My  Lord  Mayor,  I  am  very  happy  to  meet  you  to-night.  We  are  Essex  men  ; 
we  come  from  Colchester.  Colchester  has  something  to  boast  of  great  men. 
The  chief  physician  of  London  comes  from  Colchester  ;  the  Lord  Mayor  comes 
from  Colchester  ;  and  I  need  not  tell  you  who  else.  I  have  never  had  the  headache 
in  my  life,  friends  ;  but  if  I  ever  had  it,  it  would  have  been  to-day.  I  feel  nervous 
and  excited.  But  I  do  feel  very  happy  to-day  to  acknowledge  my  faults  ;  and  when  a 
man  confesses  his  faults,  he  has  done  a  great  deal  towards  amending  them.  I 
always  thought  my  son  did  wrong  in  coming  to  London  ;  now  you  see  that  I 
was  wrong.  I  always  thought  he  was  wrong  in  not  going  to  College  ;  I  tried  three 
or  four  hours  with  him,  one  night,  with  a  dear  friend  who  loved  him  ;  but  it  was  no 
use.  He  said,  '  No,  I  will  never  go  to  College,  except  in  strict  obedience  to  you  as 
a  father.'  There  I  left  the  matter  ;  and  I  see  that  God  has  been  with  him,  though 
I  thought  it  was  a  wrong  step  in  him  to  go  to  London.  And  I  thought  it  was  a 
wrong  step  for  me  to  come  here  to-night  ;  but  perhaps  I  may  be  mistaken  again. 
I  can  tell  you  it  is  one  of  the  happiest  days  of  my  life.  I  feel  beyond  myself  when 
I  think  of  the  kindness  that  has  been  shown  to  my  son  when  but  a  youth.  I  ascribe 
it  all  to  God's  goodness,  and  the  earnest  prayers  of  His  people.  He  has  been 
exposed  to  temptation  from  every  source,  and  even  now,  my  friends,  he  is  not  free 
from  it.  You  have  prayed  for  him,  and  God  has  sustained  him.  Let  me  entreat 
you  to  continue  your  prayers.  Every  one  here  to-night,  go  home,  and  pray  for  your 
Pastor  A  meeting  like  this  is  enough  to  carry  a  man  beyond  himself  and  fill  his 
heart  with  pride  ;  but  the  grace  of  God  is  all-sufficient.  Several  persons  said  to  me 
— I  do  not  know  what  their  motive  was, — '  Your  son  will  never  last  in  London  six 
months  ;  he  has  no  education.'  I  said,  'You  are  terribly  mistaken  ;  he  has  the  best 
education  that  can  possibly  be  had  ;  God  has  been  his  Teacher,  and  he  has  had 
earthly  teachers,  too.'  I  knew,  as  far  as  education  went,  he  could  manage  London 
very  well.  Then  they  said  his  health  would  fail  ;  but  it  has  not  failed  him  yet.  He 
has  had  enough  to  shake  his  constitution,  it  is  true  ;  but  God  has  been  very  merciful 
to  him.  I  think,  if  there  is  one  thing  that  would  crown  my  happiness  to-day,  it 
would  have  been  to  see  his  grandfather  here.  I  should  have  loved  to  see  him  with  us. 
He  said,  '  Boy,  don't  ask  me  to  go,  I  am  too  old  ;  I  am  overcome  with  God's  good- 
ness and  mercy  to  me.'  He  is  always  talking  about  your  Pastor.  Old  people  like  to 
have  something  to  talk  about,  so  he  always  talks  about  his  grandson.  And  next  to 
that,  I  should  like,  my  dear  friends,  to  have  seen  his  mother  here.  I  believe,  under 
God's  grace,  his  mother  was  the  means  of  leading  him  to  Christ.") 

tP  IP  ^  tF 


344  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

In  The  Preachers  Annual  for  1877,  in  an  article  by  Rev.  G.  T.  Dowling  on 
"  Candidating,"  I  read  as  follows  : — "  Charles  Spurgeon  was  not  even  seriously 
thought  of  as  a  prospective  pastor  the  first  time  he  preached  in  London,  Months 
passed  by  before  he  was  again  invited  to  spend  a  Sabbath  ,  and  even  when  a  call 
was  extended,  it  was  by  no  means  unanimous.  Some  families  even  left  the  church 
because  '  that  boy'  was  called." 

This  is  given  as  a  proof  that  successful  preachers  frequently  produce  a  poor 
impression  as  candidates.  This  may  be  a  general  fact,  but  it  was  a  pity  to  fabricate 
an  instance.  The  truth  is  exactly  the  contrary.  The  moment  after  my  first  sermon  was 
preached,  I  was  invited  by  the  principal  deacon  to  supply  for  six  months,  for  he  felt 
sure  that,  at  a  church-meeting,  which  would  at  once  be  held,  such  a  resolution  would 
be  passed.  I  declined  his  offer,  for  I  thought  it  too  hasty  ;  but  I  promised  to  preach 
on  alternate  Sabbaths  during  the  next  month,  and  this  was  done,  and  followed  up 
immediately  by  a  further  invitation.  No  one  person  left  the  church  to  my  know- 
ledge, and  the  resolution  inviting  me  was  as  nearly  unanimous  as  possible,  only  one 
man  and  four  women  voting  to  the  contrary,  all  of  these  becoming  in  after  time  most 
friendly  to  me.  I  only  mention  the  incident  as  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which 
advocates  of  a  theory  too  often  manufacture  their  instances,  and  as  a  warning  to 
friends  to  be  slow  in  believing  anything  which  they  may  hear  or  read  about  public 
persons. 

(The  three  Sabbaths  on  which  Mr.  Spurgeon  agreed  to  preach  in  London  were 
January  ist,  15th,  and  29th,  1854;  but  before  the  last-named  date,  the  church  had 
already  taken  definite  action  with  a  view  to  securing  his  services  permanently.  He 
had  preserved,  amongst  his  most  treasured  papers,  the  following  letters,  which  are 
now  published  for  the  first  time,  together  with  a  correct  copy  of  his  reply  to  the 
invitation  to  supply  the  pulpit  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel  for  six  months  : — 

"  15,  Creed  Lane, 

"  Ludgate  Hill, 

"  London, 

"Jan.  25,  1854. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  It  is  with  pleasure  that  I  write  these  few  lines  to  you  hoping,  through 
Divine  grace,  you  are  well  and  happy. 

"  You  will  remember  that  I  gave  you  a  hint  of  the  intention  of  the  members  of 
the  church  to  request  the  deacons  to  call  a  special  church-meeting  for  the  purpose  of 
inviting  you  to  preach  for  a  certain  period.  That  special  meeting  has  taken  place 
this  evening,  and   I   am  most  happy  to  tell  you  that,  at  the  private  request  of  Mr. 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  345 

W.  Olney,  I  moved  a  resolution  that  you  should  be  invited  for  six  months.  Old  Mr. 
Olney  was  in  the  chair, — Mr.  Low  being  unwell,  but  strongly  in  favour  of  your 
coming.  We  had  a  full  vestry,  and  there  were  only  five  against  you  ;  three  out  of 
the  five  rarely  occupy  their  places  with  us  It  was  a  happy  meeting,  and  I  hope 
that  God,  in  His  tender  mercy,  will  send  you  to  us,  and  that  you  will  see  your  way 
clear  to  come  ;  and  should  the  Great  Shepherd  of  the  flock  make  you  the  instrument 
to  revive  this  ancient  church,  we  shall  be  glad  indeed,  and  shall  give  God  all  the 
glory.  For  my  own  part,  since  I  have  been  at  Park  Street,  I  never  saw  such 
a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  brethren  toward  a  minister  as  there  is  at  the  present  time 
toward  you.  We  are  cast  down,  but  not  destroyed.  It  has  been  a  trying  time  to 
us  ;  our  church  is  scattered,  but  there  is  a  goodly  remnant  filling  their  places 
constantly,  and  a  band  of  young  members  growing  up,  requiring  the  watchful  care  of 
a  good  Pastor.  I  know  you  are  being  persuaded  not  to  come  among  us  ;  but  I 
/vill  say,  '  Come  and  try  us.'  I  hope  next  week  to  spend  half  a  day  with  you,  if 
possible,  and  then  I  will  tell  you  more  than  I  can  write.  I  should  have  written 
before,  but  I  thought  I  would  wait  for  the  result  of  this  evening's  meeting  We 
don't  want  an  idle  preacher  ;  I  know  we  shall  not  have  that  in  you.  As  I  have  said 
before,  we  are  cast  down,  but  there  is  room  to  rise  ;  and  I  believe  God  is  about  to 
answer  our  poor  prayers,  though  they  have  been  offered  weak  in  faith.  The  different 
societies  in  connection  with  the  chapel  will  be  revived  with  an  active  Pastor  as  our 
leader.  There  may  be  a  few  against  you,  but  I  assure  you  it  is  only  on  the  part  o) 
those  who  are  as  unstable  as  water,  and  seldom  are  at  chapel.  You  will  find  a  great 
many  faithful  friends  ;  and  should  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  you  to  decide  for  New  Park 
Street  after  you  have  received  the  request  from  the  deacons,  I  hope  and  pray  that 
you  will  prove  a  blessing  to  thousands, — that  God  will  give  you  a  great  number  of 
souls  for  your  crown  of  rejoicing,  that,  like  Rippon,  and  Cox,  Collier,  Bennet,  and 
others,  you  will  be  a  guide  to  thousands  of  ignorant  travellers  to  conduct  them  to  the 
cross  'of  Jesus.  I  hope  I  shall  soon  see  you,  and  if  it  shall  please  God  that  it  shall 
add  to  His  glory  for  you  to  come  among  us,  I  will  thank  Him,  and  do  all  I  can  so 
far  as  my  influence  is  concerned,  for  your  temporal  and  spiritual  happiness. 

'■  \  have  enclosed  a  copy  of  the  resolution  which  I  moved  at  the  meeting^ 
and  which  Mr.  Ward  seconded.  I  conclude  with  my  Christian  love  to  you,  hoping 
you  will  be  wisely  directed  in  all  your  ways,  and  believe  me  to  be, 

"  Your  sincere  friend  and  brother  in  Christ, 
"William   Cutler,  Superintendent  of  the  Sunday  School." 
"  To  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeoii." 

"  Resolved,  That  the  ministry  of  the  Rev.  Charles  H.  Spurgeon  having  been  very 
generally  appreciated,  he  be  invited  to  supply  the  pulpit  for  six  months  ;  and   that 


346  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

the  deacons  be  requested  to  communicate  this  resolution  to  him,  and  to  make  the 
necessary  arrangements  with  him." 

"  Market  Street, 

"  Bermondsey, 

"  London, 

"  Jany.  26th,  1854. 
"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  cannot  refrain  from  informing  you  of  the  very  satisfactory  result  of 
our  church-meeting  last  evening.  It  was  called  specially  to  confer  as  to  giving  you 
a  further  invitation.  There  was  a  very  large  attendance,  and  a  most  cordial  and 
hearty  enthusiasm  on  your  behalf  I  do  trust  God  will  incline  your  heart  to  come 
among  us.  He  has  already  given  both  you  and  us  clear  indications  that  there  is  a 
great  work  for  you  to  do  among  us.  There  is  one  consideration  that  makes  me  feel 
very  deeply  on  this  subject,  and  that  is,  my  brother  Henry.  He  has  so  repeatedly 
expressed  his  regard  for  your  ministry,  and  his  desire  to  attend  it,  that  I  do  trust 
there  are  already  some  impressions  for  good  on  his  heart.  Oh,  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  seal  these  good  impressions,  and  make  them  abiding,  and  to  end  in  his  conver- 
sion to  God  !  May  you,  my  dear  friend,  be  indeed  his  spiritual  teacher,  to  lead  him 
to  Christ  !  I  do  most  earnestly  pray  that  it  may  be  so.*  Then,  also,  there  are  the 
young  men  at  my  father's.  It  is  with  great  difficulty  they  can  be  induced  to  enter 
any  place  of  worship,  yet  they  will  come  and  hear  you,  and  I  believe  will  continue  to 
do  so.  I  have  most  earnestly  prayed  that  you  may  be  directed  aright  in  this  matter, 
and  I  trust  already  your  heart  is  turned  towards  us. 

"  I  most  heartily  promise  you  sympathy  and  co-operation  ;  and  anything  that 
lies  in  my  power  to  promote  your  comfort  and  usefulness  shall  be  done.  This  is,  I 
am  certain,  the  general  feeling  throughout  the  church  ;  and  if  you  come  for  six 
months,  will,  I  believe,  be  the  unanimous  one.  There  is  now  but  one  family  not 
prepared  to  vote  for  you,  and  I  believe  a  short  acquaintance  with  you  will  soon 
change  their  minds.  Hoping  you  will  have  a  happy  Sabbath  with  us  next  Lord's- 
day,  and  give  us  then  your  affirmative  reply  to  our  invitation, 

"  I  remain, 

"  Yours  in  Christian  bonds, 

"  William  Olney." 
Mr.  John  T.  Olnev  wrote  : — 

"We  had  a  very  delightfu    cnurch-meeting  last  evening.     We  met  at  7, 
and  closed  at  9  o'clock  ;  and,  during  the  whole  evening,   not   a  word   was   spoken 

*  This  wish  was  in  due  time  happily  realized,  for  Mr.  Henry  Olney  was  converted,  and  joined  the  church  under  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
pastoral  charge.     In  1S54,  Mr.  William  Olney  was  not  a  deacon,  but  he  was  a  very  active  Christian  worka- 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  347 

which  did  not  consort  with  the  Heavenly  precept,  '  Walk  in  love.'  The  vestry  was 
well  filled,  great  unanimity  prevailed,  and  a  delightful  satisfaction  beamed  in  the 
countenances  of  all  the  members.  The  special  church-meeting  then  held  was 
convened  by  a  memorial  requesting  the  deacons  that  it  might  be  holden  to  invite 
your  services  for  six  months,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  majority  of  the  church. 
The  memorial  was  signed  by  most  of  the  influential  members  of  the  church,  so  that 
the  deacons  cheerfully  convened  the  meeting.  There  were  a  great  many  speeches 
made,  because  we  were  an.xious  all  should  speak  out  most  fully  and  freely  their 
opinions.  The  resolution  may  be  said  to  have  been  carried  almost  unanimously, — 
only  one  hand  and  four  small  kid  gloves  having  been  held  up  in  answer  to  the 
Chairman's  enquiry,  '  Any  on  the  contrary  ?  '  These  five  friends  were  quite  friendly 
with  the  majority,  and  will  continue  to  fill  their  places  with  us.  They  object  to  you 
on  the  ground  that  they  consider  you  do  not  use  sufficient  reverence  in  prayer. 
This  was  very  well  answered  by  Mr.  Carr,  and  some  of  the  other  brethren.  Apart 
from  this  unimportant  exception,  the  members  were  quite  unanimous  in  giving  you  a 
cheerful,  cordial,  and  loving  invitation  for  six  months.  I  never  expected  we  could 
have  been  nearly  so  much  united  in  sentiment  respecting  any  man  to  occupy  the 
pulpit  of  a  church  consisting  of  many  belonging  to  the  old  church  at  Carter  Lane 
under  Dr.  Rippon,  and  of  many  introduced  by  Dr.  Angus  and  Mr.  Smith.  I  am 
sure  you  will  find  the  church  render  to  you  all  that  esteem  and  affection  you  will 
desire,  and  be  ready  to  sustain  you  by  their  prayers  and  co-operation,  and  I  am 
equally  certain  that  you  will  not  be  lacking  in  your  efforts  to  supply  them  with  the 
Bread  of  Life,  and  the  Good  Wine  of  the  Kingdom.  I  hope  and  pray  that  you  may 
be  led — by  what  appears  to  my  mind,  and  I  trust  will  appear  to  yours  also,  to  be  the 
guiding  of  Providence, — to  accept  the  invitation  of  the  church.  The  church,  the 
neighbourhood,  and  the  denomination  in  London,  have,  I  think,  need  of  the  talents 
and  order  of  preaching  which  God  has,  for  good  and  gracious  purposes,  given  you  to 
possess.") 

(Mr.     Spurgeon's    reply     to     the    official     letter     from     the    deacons    was    as 
follows  : — ) 

"No.  60,  Park  Street, 

"  Cambridge, 

"  January  27th,   1854. 
"  To  James   Low,    Esq., 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  cannot  help  feeling  intense  gratification  at  the  unanimity  ot  the 
church  at  New  Park  Street  in  relation  to  their  invitation  to  me.  Had  I  been 
uncomfortable  in  my  present  situation,  I   should  have  felt   unmixed  pleasure  at  the 


348  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

prospect  Providence  seems  to  open  up  before  me  ;»  but  having  a  devoted  and  loving 
people,  I  feel  I  know  not  how. 

"  One  thing  I  know,  namely,  that  I  must  soon  be  severed  from  them  by 
necessity,  for  they  do  not  raise  sufficient  to  maintain  me  in  comfort.  Had  they  done 
so,  I  should  have  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  any  request  to  leave  them,  at  least  for 
the  present.  But  now  my  Heavenly  Father  drives  me  forth  from  this  little  Garden 
of  Eden  ;  and  whilst  I  see  that  I  must  go  out,  I  leave  it  with  reluctance,  and 
tremble  to  tread  the  unknown  land  before  me. 

"  When  I  first  ventured  to  preach  at  Waterbeach,  I  only  accepted  an  invitation 
for  three  months,  on  the  condition  that  if,  in  that  time,  I  should  see  good  reason  for 
leaving,  or  they  on  their  part  should  wish  for  it,  I  should  be  at  liberty  to  cease 
supplying,  or  they  should  have  the  same  power  to  request  me  to  do  so  before  the 
expiration  of  the  time. 

"  Now,  with  regard  to  a  six  months'  invitation  from  you,  I  have  no  objection  to 
the  length  of  time,  but  rather  approve  of  the  prudence  of  the  church  in  wishing 
to  have  one  so  young  as  myself  on  an  extended  period  of  probation.  But  I  write, 
after  well  weighing  the  matter,  to  say  positively  that  I  cannot,  I  dare  not, 
accept  an  unqualified  invitation  for  so  long  a  time.  My  objection  is  not  to  the 
length  of  the  time  of  probation,  but  it  ill  becomes  a  youth  to  promise  to  preach  to  a 
London  congregation  so  long,  until  he  knows  them  and  they  know  him.  I  would 
engage  to  supply  for  three  months  of  that  time,  and  then,  should  the  congregation 
fail,  or  the  church  disagree.  I  would  reserve  to  myself  liberty,  without  breach  of 
engagement,  to  retire  ;  and  you  could,  on  your  part,  have  the  right  to  dismiss  me 
without  seeming  to  treat  me  ill.  Should  I  see  no  reason  for  so  doing,  and  the 
church  still  retain  their  wish  for  me,  I  can  remain  the  other  three  months,  either  with 
or  without  the  formality  of  a  further  invitation  ;  but  even  during  that  time  (the 
second  three  months),  I  should  not  like  to  regard  myself  as  a  fixture,  in  case  of  ill- 
success,  but  would  only  be  a  supply,  liable  to -a  fortnight's  dismissal  or  resignation. 

"  Perhaps  this  is  not  business-like, — I  do  not  know  ;  but  this  is  the  course  I 
should  prefer,  if  it  would  be  agreeable  to  the  church.  Enthusiasm  and  popularity 
are  often  the  crackling  of  thorns,  and  soon  expire.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  a  hindrance 
if  I  cannot  be  a  help. 

"With  regard  to  coming  at  once,  I  think  I  must  not.  My  own  deacons  just 
hint  that  I  ought  to  finish  the  quarter  here  ;  though,  by  ought,  they  mean  simply, 
'  Pray  do  so,  if  you  can.'  This  would  be  too  long  a  delay.  I  wish  to  help  them 
until  they  can  get  supplies,  which  is  only  to  be  done  with  great  difficulty  ;  and  as  I 
have  given  you  four  Sabbaths,  I  hope  you  will  allow  me  to  give  them  four  in  return. 
I  would  give  them  the  first  and  second  Sabbaths  in  February,  and  two  more  in 
a  month  or  six  weeks'  time.      I   owe  them  much   for  their  kindness,   although  they 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  349 

insist  that  the  debt  Hes  on  their  side.      Some  of  them  hope,  and  almost  pray,  that 
you  may  be  tired  in  three  months,  so  that  I  may  be  again  sent  bacl-c  to  them. 

"  Thus,  my  dear  sir,  I  have  honestly  poured  out  my  heart  to  you.  You  are  too 
kind.  You  will  excuse  me  if  I  err,  for  I  wish  to  do  right  to  you,  to  my  people,  and 
to  all,  as  being  not  mine  own,  but  bought  with  a  price. 

"  I  respect  the  honesty  and  boldness  of  the  small  minority,  and  only  wonder 
that  the  number  was  not  greater.  I  pray  God  that,  if  He  does  not  see  fit  that  I 
should  remain  with  you,  the  majority  may  be  quite  as  much  the  other  way  at  the  end 
of  six  months,  so  that  I  may  never  divide  you  into  parties. 

"  Pecuniary  maUerG  i  am  well  satisfied  with.  And  now  one  thing  is  due  to 
every  minister,  and  I  pray  you  to  remind  the  church  of  it,  namely,  that  in  private,  as 
well  as  in  public,  they  must  all  earnestly  wrestle  in  prayer  to  the  God  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  that  I  may  be  sustained  in  the  great  work. 

"  I  am,  with  the  best  wishes  for  your  health,  and  the  greatest  respect, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

■75"  W  tP  "S" 

(The  following  letter  was  written  to  the  Uncle  mentioned  in  Chapter  XXVI. 
The  swift  transition  from  innocent  mirth  to  deep  solemnity  was  characteristic  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon  to  the  end  of  his  days.) 

"  75,  Dover  Road, 

"  Borough, 

"  March  2,  1854. 
"  Dear  Uncle, 

"  I  shall  be  extremely  obliged  if  you  will,  at  the  earliest  opportunity, 
forward  to  my  address,  as  above,  by  rail  or  otherwise,  the  books  I  purchased  of  you. 
I  have  been  expecting  them  for  many  months  ;  but  thought  that,  perhaps,  you  had 
no  means  of  sending  them.      Send  them  to  any  station,  carriage  I  will  pay. 

"  Of  course,  I  shall  not  look  for  an  answer  to  my  note  ;  I  never  shall  again 
expect  to  see  your  handwriting  to  me.  '  Hope  deferred  maketh  ' — never  mind, — let 
Solomon  finish  the  sentence.  I  have  a  birch  in  pickle  for  you  ;  and  when  I  come  to 
your  house,  I  shall  use  it  with  but  little  mercy,  so  you  had  need  have  on  your  very 
thickest  skin.  I  might  say  some  sharp  things  about  the  matter,  but  I  will  save  them 
until  I  sit  in  your  easy  chair,  or  you  are  seated  in  mine.  When  you  are  in  London, 
you  will  be  in  for  a  sound  scolding  if  you  do  not  come  to  see  me.  I  do  not  think 
you  dare  come,  and  I  am  sure  you  will  not  venture  to  stay  away.  I  promise  you  a 
hearty  welcome. 


350  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

"  /J,  Dover  Road, 

"  Borough  of  Southwark, 
"  London. 

"  Can  you  see  my  address  ?  I  send  my  very  best  respects  to  your  o;ood  wife  ; 
she  is  certainly  worth  more  than  you,  if  I  am  to  value  her  by  the  number  of  letters 
I  have  received. 

"  But,  to  joke  no  more,  you  have  heard  that  I  am  now  a  Londoner,  and  a  little 
bit  of  a  celebrity.  No  College  could  have  put  me  in  a  higher  situation.  Our  place 
is  one  of  the  pinnacles  of  the  denomination.  But  I  have  a  great  work  to  do,  and 
have  need  of  all  the  prayers  the  sons  of  God  can  ofter  for  me. 

"  1  shall  be  glad  to  hear  of  your  temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity.  Do  not,  for 
a  moment,  imagine  that  I  am  cold  towards  you.  My  Master's  one  aim  was  to 
spread  the  spirit  of  love  among  His  disciples;  and  1  trust  little  things  will  never 
chill  my  love  to  the  brethren.  Permit  me,  most  respectfully  and  lovingly,  to  enquire, 
'  How  does  the  cause  of  God  prosper  ? '  '  How  does  your  soul  prosper  } '  '  How  is 
your  love  to  the  precious  name  of  Jesus  ? '  I  wish  for  myself  and  you  much 
soul-prosperity.  We  cannot  afford  to  live  a  useless  life  ;  the  sands  of  time  are  too 
valuable  to  be  allowed  to  run  on  unheeded.  We  have  a  work  before  us,  and  woe  be 
unto  us  if  we  are  idle  or  unfaithful  servants  !  Blessed  is  the  man  who  often  talks 
with  his  God  alone,  and  comes  forth  from  his  closet,  like  Moses  from  the  mountain 
top,  with  a  celestial  glory  on  his  brow  !  Let  us  seek  that  blessing,  and  may  God  be 
ever  with  us  !      Do  not  forget  the  books,  and  believe  me  to  be — 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 
=:j:  *  *  * 

(The  following  letter  was  written  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  to  the  ladies  with  whom,  he 
had  lodged  at  Cambridge  : — ) 

"  75,  Dover  Road, 

"  Borough, 

"  March,  1854. 
"  To   the   Misses    Blunson, 

"  My  Dear  Friends, 

"  I  have  not  forgotten  you,  although  I  have  been  silent  so  long.  I 
have  thought  of  your  trials,  and  have  requested  of  my  Master  that  He  would 
comfort  and  sustain  you.  If  you  have  a  portion  in  Him,  your  troubles  will  be 
blessings,  and  every  grief  will  be  turned  into  a  mercy. 


C.      H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRArin'. 


351 


"  1  am  very  well,  and  everything  goes  on  even  better  than  I  could  have  hoped. 
My  chapel,  though  large,  is  crowded  ;  the  aisles  are  blocked  up,  and  every  niche  is 
packed  as  full  as  possible.  I  expect  to  come  and  see  you  in  about  a  month.  I  hope 
to  be  at  Waterbeach  the  fourth  Sabbath  in  April.  I  get  on  very  well  in  my  present 
lodgings  ; — but  not  better  than  with  you,  for  that  would  be  impossible.  I  had 
nothing  to  wish  for  better  than  I  had,  for  your  attention  to  me  was  beyond  all 
praise.  I  cannot  but  feel  very  much  for  you,  and  only  wish  that  I  knew  how  I 
could  serve  you. 

"  I  hope  you  will  not  give  way  to  doubts  and  despondency  ;  but  do  what  you 
can,  and  leave  the  rest  to  God.  Blessed  is  the  man  who  has  the  God  of  Jacob  for 
his  Helper  ;  he  need  not  fear  either  want,  or  pain,  or  death.  The  more  you  can 
realize  this,  the  happier  will  you  become  ;  and  the  only  means  for  so  doing  is  to  hold 
frequent  communion  with  God  in  prayer.  Get  alone  with  Jesus,  and  He  will  comfort 
your  hearts,  and  restore  your  weary  souls.  I  hope  you  have  let  your  rooms.  I  think 
I  shall  stop  at  Mrs.  Warricker's  ;  but  I  will  be  sure  to  come  and  see  you,  and  leave 
something  to  remember  me  by.      Trust  in  God,  and  be  glad,  and — ■ 

"  Believe  me  to  be, 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  C.    H.   Spurgeon." 

T?  ^  ^  ^ 

The  six  months'  probation  was  never  fulfilled,  for  there  was  no  need.  The  place 
was  filled,  the  prayer-meetings  were  full  of  power,  and  the  work  of  conversion  was 
going  on.  A  requisition  for  a  special  church-meeting,  signed  by  fifty  of  the  male 
members,  was  sent  in  to  the  deacons  on  April  12,  the  meeting  was  held  on  April  19, 
with  the  result  mentioned  in  the  following  letter  : — 

"  30,  Gracechurch  Street, 

"April  20th,  1854. 
"  My  Dear  Young  Brother, 

"  I   annex  a  cDpy  of  a  resolution  passed   last   evening  at  a  numerously- 
attended  special  church-meeting  held  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel. 

"  If  you  feel  it  your  duty  to  accept  the  invitation  of  the  Church  to  become  its 
Pastor,  it  will  be  desirable  that  you  should  obtain  your  dismission  from  the  Church 
at  Waterbeach  to  our  Church  as'  early  as  you  can,  in  order  that  you  may  be  in  a 
position  as  a  member  to  attend  our  church-meetings. 

"  I  remain, 

"  My  dear  young  brother, 

"  Yours  affectionately, 

"James  Low,   Chairman." 
"  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon." 


352  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

(Copy  of  Resolution.) 

"At  a  special  church-meeting,  held  on  Wednesday  evening,  April  19th,  1854,  at 
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  after  prayer  by  two  of  the  brethren,  it  was  resolved  unani- 
mously. That  while,  as  members  of  this  Church,  we  desire  to  record  with  devout  and 
fervent  gratitude  to  God  our  estimation  of  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  services  during 
the  period  of  his  labours  amongst  us,  we  regard  the  e.xtraordinary  increase  in  the 
attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace,  both  on  Lord's-days  and  week-evenings,  com- 
bined with  the  manifest  fact  that  his  ministry  has  secured  the  general  approbation  of 
the  members,  as  an  encouraging  token  that  our  Heavenly  Father  has  directed  his 
way  towards  us,  in  answer  to  the  many  prayers  we  have  offered  up  for  a  suitable 
Pastor, — and  as  there  are  several  enquirers  desirous  of  joining  our  fellowship,  we 
consider  it  prudent  to  secure  as  early  as  possible  his  permanent  settlement  with  us  ; 
— we,  therefore,  beg  to  tender  our  Brother,  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  a  most  cordial 
and  affectionate  invitation  forthwith  to  become  Pastor  of  this  Church,  and  we  pray 
that  his  services  may  be  owned  of  God  with  an  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  a 
revival  of  religion  in  our  midst,  and  that  his  ministry  may  be  fruitful  in  the  conver- 
sion ot  sinners,  and  the  edification  of  those  that  believe." 

(Mr.  Spurgeon's  letter,  accepting  the  invitation  to  the  pastorate,  was  as 
follows  : — ) 

"  75,  Dover  Road, 

"  Borough, 

"  April  28th,  1854. 

"  To  the  Baptist  Church  of  Christ  worshipping  in  New  Park  Street  Chapel, 

Southwark, 

"  Dearly  Beloved  in  Christ  Jesus, 

"  1  have  received  your  unanimous  invitation,  as  contained  in  a  resolution 
passed  by  you  on  the  19th  instant,  desiring  me  to  accept  the  pastorate  among  you. 
No  lengthened  reply  is  required  ;  there  is  but  one  answer  to  so  loving  and  cordial 
an  invitation.  I  accept  it.  I  have  not  been  perplexed  as  to  what  my  reply 
should  be,  for  many  things  constrain  me  thus  to  answer. 

"  I  sought  not  to  come  to  you,  for  1  was  the  minister  of  an  obscure  but 
affectionate  people  ;  1  never  solicited  advancement.  The  first  note  of  invitation 
from  your  deacons  came  quite  unlooked-for,  and  I  trembled  at  the  idea  of  preaching 
in  London.  I  could  not  understand  how  it  had  come  about,  and  even  now  I  am 
filled  with  astonishment  at  the  wondrous  Providence.  I  would  wish  to  give  myself 
into  the  hands  of  our  covenant  God,  whose  wisdom  directs  all  things.  He  shall 
choose  for  me  ;  and  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  this  is  His  choice. 


c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography.  353 

"  I  feel  it  to  be  a  high  honour  to  be  the  Pastor  of  a  people  who  can  mention 
glorious  names  as  my  predecessors,  and  I  entreat  of  you  to  remember  me  in  prayer, 
that  I  may  realize  the  solemn  responsibility  of  my  trust.  Remember  my  youth  and 
inexperience,  and  pray  that  these  may  not  hinder  my  usefulness.  I  trust  also  that  the 
remembrance  of  these  will  lead  you  to  forgive  mistakes  I  may  make,  or  unguarded 
words  I  may  utter. 

"  Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  if  He  has  called  me  to  this  office.  He 
will  support  me  in  it, — otherwise,  how  should  a  child,  a  youth,  have  the  presumption 
thus  to  attempt  the  work  which  filled  the  heart  and  hands  of  Jesus  ? 

"  Your  kindness  to  me  has  been  very  great,  and  my  heart  is  knit  unto  you.  I 
fear  not  your  steadfastness,  I  fear  my  own.  The  gospel,  I  believe,  enables  me  to 
venture  great  things,  and  by  faith  I  venture  this. 

"  I  ask  your  co-operation  in  every  good  work  ;  in  visiting  the  sick,  in  bringing 
in  enquirers,  and  in  mutual  edification. 

"  Oh,  that  I  may  be  no  injury  to  you,  but  a  lasting  benefit !  I  have  no  more  to 
say,  saving  this,  that  if  I  have  expressed  myself  in  these  few  words  in  a  manner 
unbecoming  my  youth  and  inexperience,  you  will  not  impute  it  to  arrogance,  but 
forgive  my  mistake. 

"And  now,  commending  you  to  our  covenant  God,  the  Triune  Jehovah, 

"  I  am, 

"  Yours  to  serve  in  the  gospel, 

"C.   H.  Spurgeon."   ' 


(Professor  Everett  says,  concerning  this  period  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  life  : — "  He 
gave  me  prompt  intimation  of  his  call  to  New  Park  Street  Chapel  ;  and  soon  after  his 
settlement  there,  I  called  upon  him  by  appointment.  I  spent  half  a  day  with  him, 
and  he  poured  forth  to  me,  without  reserve,  the  full  tale  of  his  successes,  telling  me 
of  the  distinguished  men  who  continually  came  to  hear  him,  and  of  the  encomiums 
pronounced  on  his  delivery  by  elocutionists  like  Sheridan  Knowles." 

Pastor  G.  H.  Davies,  of  Lisbon,  North  Dakota,  thus  records  Sheridan  Knowles' 
remarkable  prophecy  : — 

"  I  was  a  student  at  Stepney,  now  Regent's  Park  College.  Sheridan  Knowles, 
the  celebrated  actor  and  play-writer,  had  just  been  baptized  by  Dr.  Brock,  and 
appointed  our  tutor  in  elocution.  We  had  collected  funds  to  give  the  grand  old  man 
a  handsome  Bible.  The  presentation  was  made  one  Wednesday  afternoon.  It  was 
an  occasion  never  to  be  forgotten,  not  only  for  the  sake  of  Sheridan  Knowles  himself, 
but  because  of  his  prophecy  concerning  one  of  whom  till  then  we  knew  nothing. 


354  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Immediately  on  entering,  Mr.  Knowles  exclaimed,  '  Boys,  have  you  heard  the 
Cambridgeshire  lad  ?  '  None  of  us  had  heard  him.  '  Then,  boys,'  he  continued, 
■go  and  hear  him  at  once.'  This  was  after  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  been  preaching  at  New 
Park  Street  Chapel  two  Sundays.  '  Go  and  hear  him  at  once  if  you  want  to  know- 
how  to  preach.  His  name  is  Charles  .Spurgeon.  He  is  only  a  boy,  but  he  is  the 
most  wonderful  preacher  in  the  world.  He  is  absolutely  perfect  in  his  oratory  ; 
and,  beside  that,  a  master  in  the  art  of  acting.  He  has  nothing  to  learn  from  me,  or 
anyone  else.  He  is  simply  perfect.  He  knows  everything.  He  can  do  anything. 
I  was  once  lessee  of  Drury  Lane  Theatre  ;  and  were  I  still  in  that  position,  I  would 
offer  him  a  fortune  to  play  for  one  season  on  the  boards  of  that  house.  Why,  boys, 
he  can  do  anything  he  pleases  with  his  audience  !  He  can  make  them  laugh,  and 
cry,  and  laugh  again,  in  five  minutes.  His  power  was  never  equalled.  Now,  mark 
my  word,  boys,  that  young  man  will  live  to  be  the  greatest  preachei-  of  this  or  any 
other  age.  He  will  bring  more  souls  to  Christ  than  any  man  who  ever  proclaimed  the 
gospel  not  excepting  the  apostle  Paul.  His  name  will  be  known  everywhere,  and  his 
Sermons  will  be  traitslated  into  many  of  the  languages  of  the  world.'  " 

Mr.  Sheridan  Knowles  lived  until  1862,  and  was  abl-e,  therefore,  to  witness  in 
great  part  the  fulfilment  of  his  own  prophecy.  His  widow  long  survived  him,  and 
for  some  years  was  one  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  company  of  faithful  friends  who  gathered 
at  Mentone  ;  and  when  she  also  was  "  called  home,"  she  showed  her  appreciation  of 
his  work  by  leaving  generous  legacies  to  the  Pastors'  College  and  the  Stockwell 
Orphanage.) 


CHAPTER     XXXI. 


Mhint  anb  IHtmau  (DibinatiDtt. 

^jiHERE  is  good  reason  for  asking,  concerning  many  practices, — Are 
tliese  Scriptural,  or  are  they  only  traditions  of  tlie  fathers  ?  A  little 
Ritualism  in  one  generation  may  develop  into  downright  Popery  in 
a  few  years  ;  therefore  it  is  well  to  take  these  things  as  they  arise, 
and  crush  them  in  the  bud.  I  do  not  believe  that,  among  our 
Nonconformist  churches,  there  is  more  than  a  fly  or  two  of  the 
priestly  system  in  the  pot  of  ointment,  but  even  those  flies  should  be  purged  out. 
Great  evils  have  small  beginnings  ;  the  little  foxes  are  to  be  dreaded  among  the 
vines.  Where  so  much  is  admirable,  it  is  a  pity  that  the  specks  and  spots  should  be 
suffered  to  remain.  We  have  a  stern  fight  before  us  against  Ritualistic  Popery, 
and  it  is  well  to  clear  our  decks  of  all  lumber,  and  go  into  the  controversy  with  clean 
hands.  It  is  a  far  more  popular  thing  to  find  fault  with  other  denominations  than  to 
point  out  follies  and  failings  among  ourselves  ;  but  this  consideration  should  never 
occur  to  the  right-minded,  except  to  be  repulsed  with  a  "  Get  thee  behind  me, 
Satan." 

Confining  myself  to  one  branch  of  the  subject,  I  ask, —  IVhencc  comes  the  whole 
paj-aphernaJia  of  ''ordination  "  as  obser'ved  among  some  Dissenters?  Since  there  is 
no  special  gift  to  bestow,  why  in  any  case  the  laying  on  of  empty  hands  ?  Since  we 
cannot  pretend  to  that  mystic  succession  so  much  vaunted  by  Ritualists,  why  are 
men  styled  "  regularly-ordained  ministers  "  ?  A  man  who  has  preached  for  years  is 
Mr.  Brown  ;  but  after  his  ordination,  or  recognition,  he  develops  into  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Brown  :  what  important  change  has  he  undergone  ?  This  matter  comes  before  me 
in  the  form  of  addresses  upon  letters, — "  Rev.  Titus  Smith,  Mr.  Spurgeon's 
College,"  or  sometimes,  "  Rev.  Timothy  Jones,  Spurgeon's  Tabernacle."  Rather 
odd,  this  !  Here  are  reverend  students  of  an  unreverend  preacher,  the  tide  being 
given  to  one  out  of  courtesy,  and  withheld  from  the  other  for  the  same  reason.  The 
Reverend  Titus  has  met  with  a  church  which  will  insist  upon  an  ordination,  and  he 
is  ordained  ;  but  the  President  of  his  College,  having  never  undergone  such  a 
process,  nor  even  that  imitation  of  it  called  a  recognition,  remains  an  unordained, 
unrecognized  person  to  this  day,  and  has  not  yet  discovered  the  peculiar  loss  which 
he  has  sustained  thereby.  I  do  not  object  to  a  recognition  of  the  choice  ot  the 
church  by  its  neighbours  and  their  ministers  ;  on  the  contrary,  I  believe  it  to  be  a 
fraternal  act,  sanctioned  by  the  very  spirit  of  Christianity  ;  but  where  it  is  supposed 


356  ■  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

to  be  essential,  is  regarded  as  a  ceremony,  and  is  thouoht  to  be  the  crowning  feature 
of  the  settlement,  I  demur.  "  The  Reverend  Theophilus  Robinson  offered  up  tlic 
ordination  prayer,'"  has  a  Babylonish  sound  in  my  ears,  and  it  is  not  much  improved 
when  it  takes  the  form  of  ''the  recognition  prayer."  Is  there,  then,  a  ritual  ?  Are 
we  as  much  bound  by  an  unwritten  extempore  liturgy  as  others  by  the  Book  of 
Common  Prayer  ?  Must  there  always  be  "  usual  questions  "  ?  And  why  "  usual"  ? 
Is  there  some  legendary  rule  for  the  address  to  the  church,  and  the  address  to  the 
pastor?  I  do  not  object  to  any  one  of  these  things,  but  I  do  question  the  propriety 
of  stereotyping  them,  and  speaking  of  the  whole  affair  as  if  it  were  a  matter  to  be 
gone  about  according  to  a  certain  pattern  seen  in  the  holy  mount,  or  an  order  given 
forth  in  trust  to  the  saints.  I  see  germs  of  evil  in  the  usual  parlance,  and  therefore 
meet  it  with  a  Quo  warranto  ?  Is  not  the  Divine  call  the  real  ordination  to 
preach,  and  the  call  of  the  church  the  only  ordination  to  the  pastorate  ?  The  church 
is  competent,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  do  her  own  work  ;  and  if  she 
calls  in  her  sister-churches,  let  her  tell  them  what  she  has  done,  in  such  terms  that 
they  will  never  infer  that  they  are  called  upon  to  complete  the  work.  The  ordination 
prayer  should  be  prayed  in  the  church-meeting,  and  there  and  then  the  work  should 
be  done  ;  for  other  churches  to  recognize  the  act,  is  well  and  fitting,  but  not  if  it  be 
viewed  as  needful  to  the  completion  of  the  act  itself  I  have  noticed  many  signs  of 
an  error  in  this  direction. 

(The  following  letter  shows  how  Mr.  Spurgeon  regarded  the  question  of  an 
"ordination  "  or  "  recognition  "  service  at  the  beginning-  of  his  London  pastorate  : — ) 

"  75,  Dover  Road, 

"  Borough, 

"May  2nd,  1854. 
"  To  James  Low,  Esq., 

"  My  Dear  Sir, 

"  I  sit  down  to  communicate  to  you  my  thoughts  and  feelings  with  regard 
to  a  public  recognition.  I  am  sure  I  need  not  request  your  notice  of  my  sentiments, 
for  your  usual  good  judgment  is  to  me  a  rock  of  reliance.  I  can  trust  any  matter 
with  you,  knowing  that  your  kindness  and  wisdom  will  decide  righdy. 

"  I  have  a  decided  objection  to  any  public  ordination  or  recognition.  I  have, 
scores  of  times,  most  warmly  e.xpressed  from  the  pulpit  my  abhorrence  of  such  things, 
and  have  been  not  a  little  notorious  as  the  opponent  of  a  custom  which  has  become 
a  kind  of  iron  law  in  the  country.  I  am  willing  to  retrace  my  steps  if  in  error  ;  but 
if  I  have  been  right,  it  will  be  no  very  honourable  thing  to  belie  my  former  loud  out- 
cries by  submitting  to  it  myself 

"  /  object  to  ordinations  and  recognitions,  as  such,    (i.)    Because  I  am  a  minister, 


C.     H.     SrURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  357 

and  will  never  receive  authority  and  commission  from  man  ;  nor  do  I  like  that  which 
has  the  shadow  of  such  a  thing  about  it.  I  detest  the  dogma  of  apostolic  succession, 
and  dislike  the  revival  of  the  doctrine  by  delegating  power  from  minister  to  minister. 

"(2.)  I  believe  in  the  glorious  principle  of  Independency.  Every  church  has  a 
right  to  choose  its  own  minister  ;  and  if  so,  certainly  it  needs  no  assistance  from 
others  in  appointing  him  to  the  office.  You,  yourselves,  have  chosen  me  ;  and  what 
matters  it  if  the  whole  world  dislikes  the  choice  ?  They  cannot  invalidate  it  ;  nor 
can  they  give  it  more  force.  It  seems  to  me  that  other  ministers  have  no  more  to  do 
with  me,  as  your  minister,  than  the  crown  of  France  has  with  the  crown  of  Britain. 
We  are  allies,  but  we  have  no  authority  in  each  other's  territories.  They  are  my 
superiors  in  piety,  and  other  personal  matters  ;  but,  ex  officio,  no  man  is  my  superior. 
We  have  no  apostles  to  send  Titus  to  ordain.  Prelatic  power  is  gone.  All  we  are 
brethren. 

"(3.)  If  there  be  no  authority  inferred,  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  ceremony.'' 
'  It  is  customary.'  Granted  ; — but  we  are  not  all  Ecclesiastical  Conservatives  ;  and, 
moreover,  I  know  several  instances  where  there  has  been  none.  Rev.  W.  Robinson, 
of  Cambridge,  agrees  with  me,  I  believe  ;  and  has  not  endured  it  himself  Rev. 
J.  Smith  had  nothing  of  it,  nor  had  Rev.  Burton,  of  Cambridge,  nor  Rev.  Wooster, 
of  Sandbeach,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Furthermore,  I  have  seldom  heard  of  an  ordination  service  in  which  there  was 
not  something  objectionable.  There  are  dinners,  and  toasts,  and  things  in  that 
line.  There  is  foolish  and  needless  advice,  or,  if  wise  advice,  unfit  for  public  mention. 
I  am  ready  to  be  advised  by  anyone,  on  any  subject,  in  private  ;  but   I   do  not  know 

how  I  could  sit  in  public  to  be  told,  as  Mr.  C was  told  by  Mr.  S ,  that  I  must 

not  spend  more  than  my  income  ;  and  (if  married),  that  I  must  be  a  good  husband, 
and  not  let  the  wife  say  that,  being  a  minister,  had  lessened  my  affection,  with  all  the 
absurd  remarks  on  family  and  household  matters.  I  do  not  know  what  sort  ot  a 
homily  /  should  get  ;  but  if  I  am  to  have  it,  let  it  be  in  my  study  ;  or  if  it  be  not  a 
very  good  one,  I  cannot  promise  to  sit  and  hear  it. 

"  I  trust,  my  dear  sir,  that  you  will  not  imagine  that  I  write  warmly,  for  I  am 
willing  to  submit  ;  but  it  will  be  submission.  I  shall  endure  it  as  a  se/f-mortification, 
in  order  that  you  may  all  be  pleased.  I  would  rather  please  you  than  myself  ;  but, 
still,  I  would  have  it  understood  by  all  the  church  that  I  endure  it  as  a  penance  for 
their  sake.  I  find  the  friends  do  not  care  much  about  it,  and  others  have,  like  myself, 
a  decided  aversion.  I  am  your  servant  ;  and  whatever  is  for  the  good  of  the  church, 
let  it  be  done.  My  knowledge  is  little  ;  I  simply  e.xpress  my  feelings,  and  leave  it 
entirely  with  you. 

,  "  A  tea-meeting  of  members,  with  handbills,  and  notices  in  the  papers,  will  be  a 
real   recoonition  ;  and   if  my   God   will    make   me  useful,    I   am    not  afraid   of  being 


358  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

recognized  by  all  good  men.      I   write  now  to  you  as  a  kind  and  wise  friend.      You 
can  use  my  communication  as  you  think  best  ;  and  believe  me  to  be — 

"  Yours,  with  the  profoundest  respect, 

"  C.   H.  Sturgeon." 

^  *  ^  -if 

(Shortly  after  writing  the  above  letter,  Mr.  Spurgeon  preached  the  following 
sermon  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel  : — ) 

The  Minister's  True  Ordination. 

"Son  of  fuan,  I  liave  made  thee  a  ivatchiiian  jiiito  the  house  of  Israel:  tliere- 
fore  hear  the  word  at  Jlly  month,  and  give  them  warning  from  Ale." — Ezek.  iii.  17. 

The  office  of  a  gospel  minister  in  some  respects  resembles  that  of  the  ancient 
prophets.  Though  we  cannot,  like  Elisha,  raise  the  dead  ;  nor,  like  Isaiah,  pour 
forth  eloquent  predictions  ;  nor,  as  Ezekiel,  foretell  certain  coming  and  immediate 
judgments  ;  yet,  like  them,  we  are  commanded  to  teach,  to  warn,  and  to  encourage. 
So  much  are  we  like  Ezekiel,  that  his  commission  will  suit  any  gospel  minister  even 
of  our  day.      Let  us  consider, — 

I.     The  minister's  commission. 

Here  is  a  scrap  of  ancient  writing  worthy  of  a  place  in  the  museum.  It  ought 
to  be  in  every  minister's  study.  It  is  the  ultimatum  of  the  King  of  Heaven  to  us  in 
our  doubts  as  to  our  calling.  It  is  our  Emperor's  protocol  to  all  His  legions.  It  is 
the  ministers  true  ordiiiation  ;  a  real  installation,  worth  more  than  a  thousand  Papal 
bulls  from  Rome  bearing  the  mark  of  the  fisherman's  ring  ;  yea,  worth  more  than 
all  the  charters  of  universities,  or  the  appointments  of  archbishops.     Notice, — 

I.  The  zvording  oj  this  ancient  commission.  It  is  worded  in  the  Court  language 
of  Heaven,  and  each  letter  is  Divine.  "  Son  of  man."  Here  is  the  title  by  which 
Ezekiel  is  addressed  ; — not  Right  Reverend,  nor  the  Very  Venerable  ;  but  he  has 
given  to  him  a  graciously-humbling  title.  Ezekiel  is  called  "son  of  man"  no 
less  than  ninety  times.  This  is  the  name  Jesus  often  took  to  Himself  when  He 
was  on  earth,  and  therefore  it  is  a  truly  glorious  one.  The  gracious  and  all-wise 
Father  saw  that  too  lofty  an  eminence  might  tempt  Ezekiel  to  pride.  He  therefore 
styles  him  son  of  man,  as  much  as  to  say, — "  Your  visions,  rank,  talents,  and 
office,  must  not  exalt  you,  for  you  are,  after  all,  only  man.  You  must  not  lean 
on  self,  for  you  are  utter  weakness,  being  only  the  '  son  of  man.'  You  must 
sympathize  with  each  of  your  fellow-creatures,  and  deal  with  him,  not  as  if  you 
were  a  prince,  or  a  master,  but  as  being,  like  him,  a  '  son  of  man.'  " 

"/  haz'e  made  thee  a  zvatchmau."  Here  we  read,  on  this  ancient  manuscript,  a 
true  account  o*"  the  makino-  of  a  minister.      God  alone  can  do  it.      Two  things. are 

o  o 

absolutely  requisite  to  make  a  man  a   preacher,  viz., — (i.)   Special  gifts, — such  as 


C.  H.  SI'URGEON  S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  359 

perception  of  truth,  simplicity,  aptness  to  impart  instruction,  some  degree  of 
eloquence,  and  intense  earnestness.  (2.)  Special  call.  Every  man  who  is  rightly 
in  the  ministry  must  have  been  moved  thereto  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  must  feel 
an  irresistible  desire  to  spend  his  whole  life  in  his  Master's  cause.  No  college,  no 
bishop,  no  human  ordination,  can  make  a  man  a  minister  ,  but  he  who  can  feel, 
as  did  Bunyan,  Whitefield,  Berridge,  or  Rowland  Hill,  the  strugglings  of  an 
impassioned  longing  to  win  the  souls  of  men,  may  hear  in  the  air  the  voice  of  God 
saying,  "  Son  of  man,  1  have  made  thee  a  watchman." 

"  Unto  the  house  of  Israeli  Ezekiel's  was  a  limited  commission  ;  but  ours  is 
not,  it  is  as  wide  as  the  earth,  and  as  long  as  time.  The  world  is  our  parish.  We 
are  not  ordered  to  cast  the  net  alone  in  the  pools  of  Heshbon,  or  the  streams  of 
Jordan,  or  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret ;  but  we  may  cover  all  seas  and  rivers  with  the 
gospel  fishing-boats, — the  navy  of  Jesus.  Yet,  still,  it  is  for  the  sake  of  the  true 
Israel  that  we  go. 

"  Therefore  hear  the  word  at  My  mouth."  The  ancient  seers  spoke  not  at 
random  ;  but  they  declared  what  they  had  been  taught  of  God.  Sometimes,  in 
dreams,  they  heard  Heaven's  message  ;  sometimes,  by  a  voice  from  on  high  ;  but, 
most  commonly,  by  vision,  did  the  Word  of  the  Lord  come  unto  them.  The  soul, 
inspired  by  God,  seems  at  times  to  leave  the  body,  and  that  narrow  tube  of  vision 
which  we  call  eyesight,  and,  with  its  own  eagle  eye,  to  pierce  the  thick  cloud,  and  to 
mount  into  that  remote  region  which  the  ordinary  eye  cannot  see. 

The  prophets  heard  the  spoken  Word,  but  we  have  the  written  Word  ;  and  this 
we  must  devoutly  read.  It  becomes  a  minister  diligently  to  study  the  Scriptures, 
with  all  the  assistance  he  can  gain  from  holy  men  who  have  gone  before,  but  chiefly 
from  the  most  excellent  of  all  instructors,  the  true  Interpreter,  the  Holy  Ghost. 

''  And  give  them  warning  from  Me."  There  are  other  duties  ;  but  as  this  is 
the  most  arduous,  it  is  specially  mentioned.  We  are  to  warn  the  Christian  if  he  is 
found  backsliding,  or  sinning  ;  and  to  warn  the  sinner  of  the  consequences  of  his  sin, 
of  the  strict  justice  of  God,  and  of  the  fearful  hell  in  which  the  ungodly  shall  suffer. 

2.  The  high  office  conferred  by  this  commission.  It  is  that  of  "  watchman." 
Every  soldier  of  the  Cross  is  bound  to  watch  ;  but  the  minister  is  in  a  double  sense 
a  watchman.      He  is  so  called  because — 

( I )  The  ministry  requires  great  vigilance.  We  must  not  sleep  .  we  must  watch 
against  false  doctrine  and  false  brethren  ;  we  must  be  ready  to  help  benighted 
travellers,  and  to  give  alarm  to  any  who  may  be  in  danger.  The  true  minister  is 
to  sit  like  the  shepherd  in  the  wilderness  by  night,  or  like  the  whisper-hearing  sentinel. 

(2.)  The  ministry  involves  toil  and  trouble.  Few  think  of  the  watchman  who 
tramps  by  their  door.  Hark  !  there  is  a  scuffle,  a  fight  !  Who  is  sure  to  be  in  it  ? 
The  watchman.      How  the  wind  blows!     The  snow  must  be  a  foot  deep;  pray  put 


o 


60  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 


list  on  tne  doors,  and  stir  the  fire.  Surely  no  one  is  out  of  doors  to-night, — except 
the  watchman  !  His  bare  face  is  cut  by  the  driving  sleet,  his  fingers  are  numbed  with 
the  cold,  his  eye-lids  are  almost  frozen.  "  Well,  well,"  someone  says,  "  never  mind 
about  the  watchman  and  his  trials  ;  that's  his  work,  and  he  is  used  to  it."  Some  of 
you  come  here,  and  sit,  and  smile,  and  enjoy  the  sermon  ;  but  there  are  some  who 
criticize,  and  find  fault,  and  slander,  and  calumniate.  The  minister  must  bear  it  all 
for  he  is  the  watchman.  He  had  need  be  a  very  tough  veteran,  who  has  swallowed 
many  "  Nor-westers  "  and  I  know  not  what  to  fit  him  for  the  task  he  has  in  hand. 

(3.)  The  ministry  should  be  arousing.  If  there  be  a  fire,  or  a  thief,  or  a  door  or 
shutter  unfastened,  the  watchman  must  not  spare,  but  cry  aloud.  We  must  cry  out 
with  all  our  might, — not  being  afraid  to  disturb,  or  alarm,  or  hurt  the  feelings  of  the 
sleepers.  We  may  as  well  be  asleep  as  be  mumblers,  or  speak  in  such  a  way  that 
none  can  really  make  out  what  we  mean  ;  we  must  preach  the  truth  in  plain,  blunt, 
honest  language  which  none  can  mistake.  Every  man,  who  labours  in  Word  and 
Doctrine,  should  ponder  over  this  commission,  and  wear  it  next  his  heart,  and  on  his 
brow.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many,  who  profess  to  preach  the  gospel,  are  not 
alive  to  a  sense  of  their  position  ;  but,  having  the  next  presentation  to  a  living,  or 
having  purchased  a  benefice,  they  rush  in  where  angels  if,  like  them,  uncalled,  would 
fear  to  venture. 

II.  The  minister's  responsibility. 

The  watchman  holds  a  responsible  office.  If  the  sentinel,  by  sleeping,  causes 
the  death  of  a  single  person,  he  is  a  murderer.  If  the  prisoner  escapes  from  his 
charge,  he  shall  be  required  to  answer  for  his  neglect.  So,  if  the  ungodly  man  is  not 
warned,  he  shall  suffer  for  his  own  guilt,  but  my  unfaithfulness  will  lie  as  a  crime  on 
me.  If  the  professing  Christian  falls,  his  fall  is  his  own  ;  but  if  I  have  not  warned 
him,  I  also  am  guilty.  If  I  do  not  utter  the  whole  truth, — the  threatenings,  the 
promises,  and  the  invitations  of  God, — I  shall  be  a  sleeping  sentinel,  a  careless 
captain,  a  negligent  railway  guard,  and  I  shall  be  the  slaughterer  of  my  fellow- 
creatures.  Or  if,  to  the  professor,  I  give  wine  instead  of  medicine,  a  plaster  instead 
of  a  lancet,  or  a  stone  for  bread, — I  shall  be  a  guilty  wretch,  and  God  help  me, 
then,  for  no  one  more  requires  help  than  an  unfaithful  minister  ! 

III.  The  minister's  comfort. 

1.  The    Lord's  call  to  the  office  :   "  Son  of  man,  I  have  made  thee  a  watchman." 

2.  The  promises  peculiar  to  that  call,  for  every  call  from  God  hath  the  strength 
to  perform  it  enclosed  within  itself 

3.  The  blessed  brow-hardening  Spirit,  who  makes  us  despise  alike  the  frown  or 
the  smile  of  man,  and  thus  keeps  us  from  unfaithfulness. 

4.  The  fact  that  success  is  not  required  of  us, — but  faithfulness. 
O  my  Father,  keep  me  clear  of  the  blood  of  all  men  !     Amen. 


CHAPTER  '  XXXII. 


Z\jt  ioug  iJastaratt  Coiitmntccb  1854. 

Here  and  there  we  meet  with  one  to  whom  it  is  given  to  believe  in  God  u'itli  mighty  faith.  As  soon 
as  snch  a  man  strikes  out  a  project,  or  sets  about  a  work  which  none  but  men  of  his  mould  would 
venture  upon,  straightway  there  arises  a  clamour  :— "The  man  is  over-zealous,"  or  he  will  be  charged 
with  an  innovating  spirit,  rashness,  fanaticism,  or  absurdity  Should  the  work  go  on,  the  opposers 
whisper  together,  "Wait  a  Utile  while,  and  you'll  see  the  end  of  all  this  wild-fire."  What  said  the  sober 
semi-faith  of  men  to  Luther?  The  monk  had  read  in  the  Scriptures  this  passage,  "We  arejuatified  by 
faith,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law."  He  went  to  a  venerable  divine  to  ask  him  about  it,  and  at  the 
same  time  he  complained  of  the  enormities  of  Rome.  What  was  the  good  but  weak  brother's  reply? 
"Go  thnu  to  thy  cell,  and  pray  and  study  for  thyself,  and  leave  these  weighty  matters  alone."  Here  it 
would  have  ended  had  the  brave  Reformer  continued  to  consult  with  flesh  and  blood  ;  but  his  faith 
enabled  him  to  go  forward  alone,  if  none  would  accom])any  him.  He  nailed  up  his  theses  on  the  church 
door,  and  showed  that  one  man  at  least  had  faith  in  the  gospel  and  in  its  God.  Then  trouble  came,  but 
Luther  minded  it  not,  because  the  Father  was  with  him.  We  also  must  be  prepared,  if  God  gives  us 
strong  faith,  to  ride  far  ahead,  like  spiritual  Uhlans,  who  bravely  pioneer  the  way  lor  the  rank  and  tile  of 
the  army.  It  were  well  if  the  Church  of  God  had  more  of  the  Heet-footed  sons  of  Asahel,  -bolder  than 
lions,  swifter  than  eagles,  in  their  Lord's  service, — men  who  can  do  and  dare  alone,  till  laggards  take 
courage,  and  follow  in  their  track.  These  Valiant-for-truths  will  pursue  a  solitary  path  full  often,  but 
let  them  console  themselves  with  this  thought,  "Yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  s  with  me." 
If  we  can  believe  in  God,  He  will  never  be  behindhand  with  us  ;  if  we  can  dare,  God  will  do  ;  if  we  can 
trust,  God  will  never  suffer  us  to  be  confounded,  woild  without  end.  It  is  sweet  beyond  expression  to 
climb  where  only  God  can  lead,  and  to  plant  the  standard  on  the  highest  towers  of  the  foe. -C.  H.  S. 

HEN  I  came  to  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  it  was  but  a  mere  handful 
of  people  to  whom  I  first  preached  ;  yet  I  can  never  ibrget  how 
earnestly  they  prayed.  Sometimes,  they  seemed  to  plead  as  though 
^  they  could  really  see  the  Angel  of  the  covenant  present  with  them, 
i^AJii  and  as  if  they  must  have  a  blessing  from  Him.  More  than  once, 
we  were  all  so  awe-struck  with  the  solemnity  of  the  meeting,  that  we 
sat  silent  for  some  moments  while  the  Lord's  power  appeared  to  overshadow  us  ;  and 
all  I  could  do  on  such  occasions  was  to  pronounce  the  Benediction,  and  say,  "  Dear 
friends,  we  have  had  the  Spirit  of  God  here  very  manifestly  to-night  ;  let  us  go  home, 
and  take  care  not  to  lose  His  gracious  influences."  Then  down  came  the  blessing  ; 
the  house  was  filled  with  hearers,  and  many  souls  were  saved.  I  always  give  all  the 
glory  to  God,  but  I  do  not  forget  that  He  gave  me  the  privilege  of  ministering 
from  the  first  to  a  praying  people.  We  had  prayer-meetings  in  New  Park  Street 
that  moved  our  verv  souls.  Everv  man  seemed  like  a  crusader  besieeine  the  New 
Jerusalem,  each  one  appeared  determined  to  storm  the  Celestial  City  by  the  might 
of  intercession  ;  and  soon  the  blessing  came  upon  us  in  such  abundance  that  we 
had  not  room  to  receive  it. 

There   is  a   confidence  in  one's  own   powers  which   inust  ever  be  of  service  to 
those  who  are  called  to  eminent  positions,  provided  the  confidence  is  well-grounded, 


36::  c.    h.    spurgeon's    autobiograthv. 

seasoned  with  humility,  and  attended  \yith  that  holy  gratitude  which  refers  all  honour 
and  glory  to  the  Giver  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift.  But,  at  the  same  time,  there 
is  nothing  more  true  than  the  fact  that  the  self-confident  are  near  a  fall,  that  those 
who  lean  on  themselves  must  be  overthrown,  and  that  carnal  security  has  but  a  base- 
less fabric  in  which  to  dwell.  When  I  first  became  a  Pastor  in  London,  my  success 
appalled  me  ;  and  the  thought  of  the  career  which  it  seemed  to  open  up,  so  far  from 
elating  me,  cast  me  into  the  lowest  depth,  out  of  which  1  uttered  my  viiscrcre,  and 
found  no  room  for  -3^  gloria  iii  cxcclsis.  Who  was  I  that  I  should  continue  to  lead  so 
great  a  multitude  ?  I  would  betake  me  to  my  village  obscurity,  or  emigrate  to 
America,  and  find  a  solitary  nest  in  the  backwoods,  where  I  might  be  sufficient  for 
the  things  which  would  be  demanded  of  me.  It  was  just  then  that  the  curtain 
was  rising  upon  my  life-work,  and  I  dreaded  what  it  might  reveal.  I  hope  I  was  not 
laithless  ;  but  I  was  timorous,  and  filled  with  a  sense  of  my  own  unfitness.  I  dreaded 
the  work  which  a  gracious  Providence  had  prepared  for  me.  I  felt  mjself  a  mere 
child,  and  trembled  as  I  heard  the  voice  which  said,  "  Arise,  and  thresh  the  moun- 
tains, and  make  them  as  chaff."  This  depression  comes  over  me  whenever  the  Lord 
is  preparing  a  larger  blessing  for  my  ministry  ;  the  cloud  is  black  before  it  breaks, 
and  overshadows  before  it  yields  its  deluge  of  mercy.  Depression  has  now  become 
to  me  as  a  prophet  in  rough  clothing,  a  John  the  Baptist,  heralding  the  nearer  coming 
ol  m\'  Lord's  richer  benison.  So  ha\-e  far  better  men  found  it.  The  scouring  of  the 
vessel  has  fitted  it  for  the  Master's  use.  Immersion  in  suftering  has  preceded  the 
baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Fasting  gives  an  appetite  for  the  banquet.  The  Lord 
is  revealed  in  the  backside  of  the  desert,  while  His  servant  keepeth  the  sheep,  and 
waits  in  solitary  awe.  The  wilderness  is  the  way  to  Canaan  The  low  valley  leads 
to  the  towering  mountain.  Defeat  prepares  for  victory.  The  raven  is  sent  forth 
before  the  clove.  The  darkest  hour  of  the  night  precedes  the  day-dawn.  The 
mariners  go  down  to  the  depths,  but  the  next  wave  makes  them  mount  towards  the 
heavens  ;  and  their  soul  is  melted  because  of  trouble  before  the  Lord  bringeth  them 
to  their  desired  haven. 

Not  long  after  I  was  chosen  Pastor  at  Park  Street,  I  was  interviewed  by  a 
good  man  who  had  left  the  church,  having  been,  as  he  said,  "  treated  shamefully."  He 
mentioned  the  names  of  half-a-dozen  persons,  all  prominent  members  of  the  church, 
who  had  behaved  in  a  very  unchristian  manner  to  him, — he,  poor  innocent  sufferer, 
having  been  a  model  of  patience  and  holiness  !  I  learned  his  character  at  once  from 
what  he  said  about  others  (a  mode  of  judging  which  has  never  misled  me),  and  I 
made  up  my  mind  how  to  act.  I  told  him  that  the  church  had  been  in  a  sadly 
unsettled  state,  and  that  the  only  way  out  of  the  snarl  was  for  every  one  to  forget 
the  past,  and  begin  again.      He  said  that  the  lapse  of  years  did  not  alter  facts  ;    and 


c.    II.    spurgeon's    autobiogkai'UY.  363 

I  replied  that  it  would  alter  a  man's  view  of  them  if  in  that  tnne  he  had  become  a 
wiser  and  a  better  man.  I  added  that  all  the  past  had  gone  away  with  my  prede- 
cessors, that  he  must  follow  them  to  their  new  spheres,  and  settle  matters  with  llioii, 
for  I  would  not  touch  the  affair  with  a  pair  of  tongs.  He  waxed  somewhat  warm  ; 
but  I  allowed  him  to  radiate  until  he  was  cool  again,  and  we  shook  hands,  and  parted. 
He  was  a  good  man,  but  constructed  upon  an  uncomfortable  principle,  so  that,  at 
times,  he  crossed  the  path  of  other  people  in  a  very  awkward  manner  ;  and  if  I  had 
gone  into  his  case,  and  taken  his  side,  there  would  have  been  no  end  to  the  strife. 
I  am  quite  certain  that,  for  my  own  success,  and  for  the  prosperity  of  the  church,  I 
took  the  wisest  course  by  applying  my  blind  eye  to  all  disputes  which  dated  previously 
to  my  advent.  It  is  the  extremity  of  unwisdom  for  a  young  man,  fresh  from  College, 
or  from  another  charge,  to  suffer  himself  to  be  earwigged  by  a  clique,  and  to  be 
bribed  by  kindness  and  Hattery  to  become  a  partisan,  and  so  to  ruin  himself  with  one- 
half  of  his  people. 

I  do  not  find,  at  the  present  time,  nearly  so  much  advice  being  given  to  young 
men  as  when  I  first  came  to  London.  Dear  me,  what  quantities  I  had  !  I  believe  I 
had  as  much  as  that  American  humourist,  who  said  he  found  enough  advice  lying 
loose  round  about  him  to  ruin  three  worlds  at  least  ;  I  am  sure  I  had  quite  enough 
to  have  done  that.  But  now,  instead  of  advising  our  young  brethren,  and  hinting  at 
their  indiscretions,  we  rather  rejoice  in  their  impetuosity  and  earnestness.  We  like 
to  see  much  freshness  and  vigour  about  them  :  and  if  they  do  kick  over  the  traces 
now  and  then,  we  feel  that  time  will  moderate  their  zeal,  and  probably  a  very  few 
years  will  add  to  them  the  prudence  which  they  now  lack. 

I  could  tell  many  stories  of  the  remarkable  conversions  that  were  wrought 
in  those  early  days.  Once,  when  I  was  in  the  vestry,  an  Irishman  came  to  see 
me.  Pat  began  by  making  a  low  bow,  and  saying,  "  Now,  your  Riverence,  I  have 
come  to  ax  you  a  question."  "Oh  !"  said  I,  "Pat,  I  am  not  a  Riverence;  it  is 
not  a  title  I  care  for  ;  but  what  is  your  question,  and  how  is  it  you  have  not  been  to 
your  priest  about  it.''"  He  said,  "  I  have  been  tc  him  ;  but  I  don't  like  his  answer." 
"Well,  what  is  your  question.''"  Said  he,  "God  is  just  ;  and  if  God  be  just,  He 
must  punish  my  sins.  I  deserve  to  be  punished.  If  He  is  a  just  God,  He  ought  to 
punish  me  ;  yet  you  say  God  is  merciful,  and  will  forgive  sins.  I  cannot  see  how 
that  is  right;  He  has  no  right  to  do  that.  He  ought  to  be  just,  and  punish  those 
who  deserve  it.  Tell  me  how  God  can  be  just,  and  yet  be  merciful."  I  replied, 
"That  is  through  the  blood  of  Christ."  "Yes,"  said  he,  "that  is  what  my  priest 
said,  you  are  very  much  alike  there  ;  but  he  said  a  good  deal  besides,  that  I  did 
not  understand  ;  and  that  short  answer  does  not  satisfy  me.  I  want  to  know  how 
it  is  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  enables  God  to  be  just,  and  vet  to  be  merciful." 


364  C.     H.     SPURGEON'S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

Then  I  saw  what  he  wanted  to  know,  and  explained  the  plan  of  salvation  thus  : — 
"Now,  Pat,  suppose  you  had  been  killing  a  man,  and  the  judge  had  said,  'That 
Irishman  must  be  hanged.'  "  He  said  quickly,  "And  I  should  have  richly  deserved  to 
be  hanged."  "  But,  Pat,  suppose  I  was  very  fond  of  you,  can  you  see  any  way  by 
which  I  could  save  you  from  being  hanged.-^"  "  No,  sir,  I  cannot."  "  Then,  suppose 
I  went  to  the  Queen,  and  said,  '  Please  your  Majesty,  I  am  very  fond  of  this  Irish- 
man ;  I  think  the  judge  was  quite  right  in  saying  that  he  must  be  hanged  ;  but  let 
me  be  hanged  instead,  and  you  will  then  carry  out  the  law.'  Now,  the  Queen  could 
not  agree  to  my  proposal  ;  but  suppose  she  could, — and  God  can,  for  He  has  power 
greater  than  all  kings  and  queens, — and  suppose  the  Queen  should  have  me  hanged 
instead  of  you,  do  you  think  the  policemen  would  take  you  up  afterwards  ?"  He  at 
once  said,  "  No,  I  should  think  not  ;  they  would  not  meddle  with  me  ;  but  if  they 
did,  I  should  say,  '  What  are  you  doing  .''  Did  not  that  gintleman  condescind  to  be 
hung  for  me  ?  Let  me  alone  ;  shure,  you  don't  want  to  hang  two  people  for  the  same 
thing,  do  ye  .'* '  "  I  replied  to  the  Irishman,  "  Ah,  my  friend,  you  have  hit  it  ;  that  is 
the  way  whereby  we  are  saved  !  God  must  punish  sin.  Christ  said,  '  My  Father, 
punish  Me  instead  of  the  sinner;'  and  His  Father  did.  God  laid  on  His  beloved 
Son,  Jesus  Christ,  the  whole  burden  of  our  sins,  and  all  their  punishment  and 
chastisement  ;  and  now  that  Christ  is  punished  instead  of  us,  God  would  not  be  just 
if  He  were  to  punish  any  sinner  who  believes  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  thou 
believest  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  well-beloved  and  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  thou  art 
saved,  and  thou  mayest  go  on  thy  way  rejoicing."  "  Faith,"  said  the  man,  clapping 
his  hands,  "  that's  the  gospel.  Pat  is  safe  now  ;  with  all  his  sins  about  him,  he'll 
trust  in  the  Man  that  died  for  him,  and  so  he  shall  be  saved." 

Another  singrular  conversion,  wrous^ht  at  New  Park  Street,  was  that  of  a 
man  who  had  been  accustomed  to  go  to  a  gin-palace  to  fetch  in  gin  for  his  Sunday 
evening's  drinking.  He  saw  a  crowd  round  the  door  of  the  chapel,  so  he  looked  in, 
and  forced  his  way  to  the  top  of  the  gallery  stairs.  Just  then,  I  turned  in  the  direction 
where  he  stood  ;  I  do  not  know  why  I  did  so,  but  I  remarked  that  there  might  be  a 
man  in  the  gallery  who  had  come  in  with  no  very  good  motive,  for  even  then 
he  had  a  gin-bottle  in  his  pocket.  The  singularity  of  the  expression  struck  the  man, 
and  being  startled  because  the  preacher  so  exactly  described  him,  he  listened  atten- 
tively to  the  warnings  which  followed,  the  Word  reached  his  heart,  the  grace  of 
God  met  with  him,  he  became  converted,  and  soon  was  walking  humbly  in  the  fear 
of  God.  On  another  occasion,  a  poor  harlot  found  the  Saviour  in  the  same  building. 
She  had  determined  to  go  and  take  her  own  life  on  Blackfriars  Bridge  ;  but, 
passing  the  chapel  on  a  Sunday  evening,  she  thought  she  would  step  in,  and  for 
the  last  time  hear  something  that  might  prepare  her  to  stand  before  her  Maker. 
She  forced  her  way  into  the  aisle  ;  and  being  once  in,  she  could   not  get  out  even  if 


c.    u.    sturgeon's   autobiography.  365 

she  had  wanted  to  do  so.  The  text  that  nio-ht  was,  "  Seest  thou  this  woman  ?"  I 
described  the  woman  in  the  city  who  was  a  notorious  pubhc  sinner,  and  pictured  her 
washing  her  Saviour's  feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiping  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head, 
loving  much  because  she  had  been  forgiven  much.  While  I  was  preaching,  the 
wretched  woman  was  melted  to  tears  by  the  thought  that  her  own  evil  life  was 
being  depicted  to  the  congregation.  It  was,  first,  my  great  joy  to  be  the  means  of 
saving  the  poor  creature  from  death  by  suicide,  and,  then,  to  be  the  instrument  of 
savinof  her  soul  from  destruction. 

Deeds  of  grace  have  been  wrought  in  the  Tabernacle  alter  the  same  fashion. 
Men  and  women  have  come  in,  simply  out  ot  curiosity, — a  curiosity  often  created  by 
some  unfounded  story,  or  malicious  slander  of  prejudiced  minds  ;  yet  Jesus  Christ  has 
called  them,  and  they  have  become  both  //is  disciples  and  o^tr  warm-hearted  friends. 
Some  of  the  most  unlikely  recruits  have  been,  in  after  days,  our  most  valuable 
soldiers.  They  began  with  aversion,  and  ended  with  enthusiasm.  They  came  to 
scoff,  but  remained  to  pray.  Such  cases  are  not  at  all  uncommon.  They  were  not 
unusual  in  the  days  of  Whitefield  and  Wesley.  They  tell  us  in  their  Journals  of 
persons  who  came  with  stones  in  their  pockets  to  throw  at  the  Methodists,  but  whose 
enmity  was  slain  by  a  stone  from  the  sling  of  the  Son  ot  David..  Others  came  to 
create  disturbances,  but  a  disturbance  was  created  in  their  hearts  which  could  never 
be  quelled  till  they  came  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  found  peace  in  Him.  The  history  of 
the  Church  of  God  is  studded  with  the  remarkable  conversions  of  persons  who  did 
not  wish  to  be  converted,  who  were  not  looking  for  grace,  but  were  even  opposed  to 
it,  and  yet,  by  the  interposing  arm  of  eternal  mercy,  were  struck  down  and 
transformed  into  earnest  and  devoted   followers  of  the  Lamb. 

Ever  since  I  have  been  in  London,  in  order  to  get  into  the  habit  of  speaking 
extemporaneously,  I  have  never  studied  or  prepared  anything  for  the  Monday 
evening  prayer-meeting.  I  have  all  along  selected  that  occasion  as  the  opportunity 
for  off-hand  exhortation  ;  but  I  do  not  on  such  occasions  select  difficult  expository 
topics,  or  abstruse  themes,  but  restrict  myself  to  simple,  homely  talk  about  the 
elements  of  our  faith.  When  standing  up,  on  such  occasions,  my  mind  makes  a 
review,  and  enquires,  "What  subject  has  already  occupied  my  thought  during  the 
day  ?  What  have  I  met  with  in  my  reading  during  the  past  week  ?  What  is  most 
laid  upon  my  heart  at  this  hour  ?  What  is  suggested  by  the  hymns  or  the  prayers  ?  " 
It  is  of  no  use  to  rise  before  an  assembly,  and  hope  to  be  inspired  upon  subjects  of 
which  one  knows  nothing  ;  if  anyone  is  so  unwise,  the  result  will  be  that,  as  he  knows 
nothing,  he  will  probably  say  it,  and  the  people  will  not  be  edified.  But  I  do  not 
see  why  a  man  cannot  speak  extemporaneously  upon  a  subject  which  he  fully  under- 
stands.    Any  tradesman,  well  versed  in  his  line  of  business,  could  explain  it  without 


366  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

needing  to  retire  for  meditation  ;  and  surely  I  ought  to  be  equally  familiar  with  the 
first  principles  of  our  holy  faith  ;  I  ought  not  to  feel  at  a  loss  when  called  upon  to 
speak  upon  topics  which  constitute  the  daily  bread  of  my  soul.  I  do  not  see  what 
benefit  is  gained,  in  such  a  case,  by  the  mere  manual  labour  of  writing  before  speak- 
ing ,  because,  in  so  doing,  a  man  would  write  extemporaneously,  and  extemporaneous 
writing  is  likely  to  be  even  feebler  than  extemporaneous  speech.  The  gain  of  the 
writing  lies  in  the  opportunity  of  careful  revision  ;  but,  as  thoroughly  able  writers  can 
express  their  thoughts  correctly  at  the  first,  so  also  may  able  speakers  The  thought 
of  a  man  who  finds  himself  upon  his  legs,  dilating  upon  a  theme  with  which  he  is 
familiar,  may  be  very  far  from  being  his  first  thought  ;  it  may  be  the  cream  of  his 
meditations  warmed  by  the  glow  of  his  heart.  He  having  studied  the  subject  well 
before,  though  not  at  that  moment,  may  deliver  himself  most  powerfully  ;  whereas 
another  man,  sitting  down  to  write,  may  only  be  penning  his  first  ideas,  which  may 
be  vague  and  vapid. 

I  once  had  a  very  singular  experience  while  preaching  at  New  Park  Street 
Chapel.  I  had  passed  happily  through  all  the  early  parts  of  Divine  service  on  the 
Sabbath  evening,  and  was  giving  out  the  hymn  before  the  sermon.  I  opened  the 
Bible  to  find  the  text,  which  I  had  carefully  studied  as  the  topic  of  discourse,  when,, 
on  the  opposite  page,  another  passage  of  Scripture  sprang  upon  me,  like  a  lion  from 
a  thicket,  with  vastly  more  power  than  I  had  felt  when  considering  the  text  which  I 
had  chosen.  The  people  were  singing,  and  I  was  sighing.  I  was  in  a  strait  betwixt 
two,  and  my  mind  hung  as  in  the  balances.  I  was  naturally  desirous  to  run  in  the 
track  which  I  had  carefully  planned,  but  the  other  text  would  take  no  refusal,  and 
seemed  to  tug  at  my  skirts,  crying,  "  No,  no,  you  must  preach  from  me  !  God  would 
have  you  follow  me."  I  deliberated  within  myself  as  to  my  duty,  for  I  would  neither 
be  fanatical  nor  unbelieving,  and  at  last  I  thought  within  myself,  "  Well,  I  should 
like  to  preach  the  sermon  which  I  have  prepared,  and  it  is  a  great  risk  to  run  to 
strike  out  a  new  line  of  thought  ;  but,  still,  as  this  text  constrains  me,  it  may  be  of 
the  Lord,  and  therefore  I  will  venture  upon  it,  come  what  may."  I  almost  always 
announce  my  divisions  very  soon  after  the  exordium  ;  but,  on  this  occasion,  contrary 
to  my  usual  custom,  I  did  not  do  so,  for  a  very  good  reason.  I  passed  through  the 
first  head  with  considerable  liberty,  speaking  perfectly  extemporaneously  both  as  to 
thought  and  word.  The  second  point  was  dwelt  upon  with  a  consciousness  of 
unusual  quiet  efficient  power,  but  I  had  no  idea  what  the  third  would  or  could  be, 
for  the  text  yielded  no  more  matter  just  then  ;  nor  can  I  tell  even  now  what  I  could 
have  done  had  not  an  event  occurred  upon  which  I  had  never  calculated.  I  had 
brought  myself  into  great  difficulty  by  obeying  what  I  thought  to  be  a  Divine 
impulse,  and  I  felt  comparatively  easy  about  it,  believing  that  God  would  help  me, 
and  knowing  that  I  could  at  least  close  the  service  should  there  be  nothing  more  to 


II.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOIilOGRArHY. 


567 


be  §aid.  I  had  no  need  to  deliberate,  for  in  one  moment  we  were  in  total  darkness, — 
the  gas  had  gone  out  ;  and,  as  the  aisles  were  choked  with  people,  and  the  place  was 
crowded  everywhere,  it  was  a  great  peril,  but  a  great  blessing  What  was  I  to  do 
then  ?  The  people  were  a  little  frightened,  but  I  quieted  them  instantly  by  telling 
them  not  to  be  at  all  alarmed,  though  the  gas  was  out,  for  it  would  soon  be 
re-lighted  ;  and  as  for  myself  having  no  manuscript,  I  could  speak  just  as  well  in 
the  dark  as  in  the  light,  if  they  would  be  so  good  as  to  sit  or  stand  still,  and  listen. 
Had  my  discourse  been  ever  so  elaborate,  it  would  have  been  absurd  to  have  con- 
tinued it  ;  and,  as  my  plight  was,  I  was  all  the  less  embarrassed.  I  turned  at  once 
mentally  to  the  well-known  text  which  speaks  of  the  child  of  light  walking  in 
darkness,  and  of  the  child  of  darkness  walking  in  the  light,  and  found  appropriate 
remarks  and  illustrations  pouring  in  upon  me  ;  and  when  the  lamps  were  again  lit, 
I  saw  before  me  an  audience  as  rapt  and  subdued  as  ever  a  man  beheld  in  his  life. 
The  odd  thing  of  all  was  that,  some  few  church-meetings  afterwards,  two  persons 
came  forward  to  make  confession  of  their  faith,  who  professed  to  have  been  converted 
•  that  evening  ;  but  the  first  owed  her  conversion  to  the  former  part  of  the  discourse, 
which  was  on  the  new  text  that  came  to  me,  and  the  other  traced  his  awakenine  to 
the  latter  part,  which  was  occasioned  by  the  sudden  darkness.  Thus,  Providence 
befriended  me.  I  cast  myself  upon  God,  and  His  arrangements  quenched  the  light 
at  the  proper  time  for  me.  Some  may  ridicule,  but  I  adore  ;  others  may  even 
censure,  but  I  rejoice. 


This  illustration  represents  the  pulpit  stairs  used  by  me  at  New   Park  Street 
Chapel  after  the  enlargement.     When  that  building  was  sold,  I  removed  them  to  my 


368  c.    H.    spurgeon's   autobiography. 

garden  at  Nightingale  Lane,  and  fixed  them  to  a  huge  willow  tree.  I  remember 
reading,  with  some  amusement,  of  Lorenzo  Dow,  who  is  reported,  many  years  ago, 
to  hav^e  slipped  down  a  tree  in  the  backwoods,  in  order  to  illustrate  the  easiness  of 
backsliding.  He  had  previously  pulled  himself  up,  with  extreme  difficulty,  in  order 
to  show  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  regain  lost  ground.  I  was  all  the  more  diverted 
by  the  story  because  it  has  so  happened  that  this  pretty  piece  of  nonsense  has  been 
imputed  to  myself.  I  was  represented  as  sliding  down  the  banisters  of  my  pulpit, 
and  that  at  a  time  when  the  pulpit  was  fixed  in  the  wall,  and  was  entered  from 
behind  !  I  never  gave  even  the  remotest  occasion  for  that  falsehood  ;  and  yet  it  is 
daily  repeated,  and  I  have  even  heard  of  persons  who  have  declared  that  they  were 
present  when  I  did  so,  and,  with  their  own  eyes,  saw  me  perform  the  silly  trick.* 

It  is  possible  for  a  person  to  repeat  a  falsehood  so  many  times  that  he  at  length 
imposes  upon  himself,  and  believes  that  he  is  stating  the  truth.  When  men  mean  to 
say  what  is  untrue  and  unkind,  they  are  not  very  careful  as  to  the  back  upon  which 
they  stick  the  slander.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  so  long  lived  under  a  glass  case 
that,  like  the  bees  which  I  have  seen  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  I  go  on  with  my  work, 
and  try  to  be  indifferent  to  spectators  ;  and  when  my  personal  habits  are  truthfully 
reported,  though  they  really  are  not  the  concern  of  anybody  but  myself,  1  feel 
utterly  indifferent  about  it,  except  in  times  of  depression,  when  I  sigh  "  for  a  lodge 
in  some  vast  wilderness,"  where  rumours  of  newspaper  men  and  interviewers  might 
never  reach  me  more.  I  am  quite  willing  to  take  my  fair  share  of  the  current 
criticism  allotted  to  public  men  ;  but  I  cannot  help  saying  that  I  very  seldom  read 
in  print  any  story  connected  with  myself  which  has  a  shade  of  truth  in  it.  Old 
Joe  Millers,  anecdotes  of  Rowland  Hill,  Sydney  Smith,  and  John  Berridge,  and  tales 
of  remotest  and  fustiest  antiquity,  are  imputed  to  me  as  they  have  been  to  men  who 
went  before,  and  will  be  to  men  who  follow  after.  Many  of  the  tales  told  about  me, 
even  to  this  day,  are  not  only  without  a  shadow  of  truth,  but  some  of  them  border  on 
blasphemy,  or  are  positively  profane.  On  the  whole,  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that 
the  trade  in  falsehood  is  rather  brisk,  or  so  many  untruths  would  not  be  manufagtured. 
Why,  I  actually  heard,  not  long  since,  of  a  minister,  who  said  that  a  certain  thmg 
occurred  to  him,  the  other  day  ;  yet  I  told  the  original  story  twenty  years  ago  ! 
When  I  related  it,  I  said  it  had  been  my  experience,  the  other  day,  and  I  believed  it 
was  so  ;  but  after  hearing  that  this  man  says  that  it  happened  to  him,  it  makes  me 
question  whether  it  really  did  occur  to  me  at  all.  I  think  it  is  a  great  pity  for  a 
preacher,  or  any  speaker,  to  try  to  make  a  story  appear  interesting  by  saying  that 
the  incident  related  happened  to  him,  when  it  really  did  not.  Scrupulous  truthfulness 
should  always  characterize  everyone  who  stands  up  to  proclaim  the  truth  of  God. 

*  As  recently  as  1897,  a  .professed  minister  of  the  gospel,  lecturing  in  the  United  States,  affirmed  that  he  was  present  at  New 
Park  street  Chapel,,  and  saw  Mr.  Spurgeon  slide  down  the  pulpit  banisters!  Of  course,  the  lie  was  contradicted  on  the  highest 
authority,  yet  probably  he  and  others  will  still  continue  to  tell  it. 


c.    H.    sturgeon's   autobiography.  369 

I  mentioned  to  my  New  Park  Street  deacons,  several  times,  my  opinion  that  the 
upper  panes  of  the  iron-iVamed  windows  had  better  be  taken  out,  as  the  windows 
were  not  made  to  open  ;  yet  nothing  came  of  my  remarks  ;  but  it  providentially 
happened,  one  Monday,  that  somebody  removed  most  of  those  panes  in  a  masterly 
manner,  almost  as  well  as  if  they  had  been  taken  out  by  a  glazier.  There  was 
considerable  consternation,  and  much  conjecture,  as  to  who  had  committed  the 
crime  ;  and  1  proposed  that  a  reward  of  five  pounds  should  be  offered  for  the 
discovery  of  the  offender,  who  when  found  should  receive  the  amount  as  a  present. 
The  reward  was  not  forthcoming,  and  therefore  I  have  not  felt  it  to  be  my  duty  to 
inform  against  the  individual.  I  trust  none  will  suspect  me  ;  but  if  they  do,  I  shall 
have  to  confess  that  I  have  walked  with  the  stick  which  let  the  oxygen  into 
that  stifling  structure.  In  a  very  short  time  after  I  began  to  preach  in  London, 
the  congregation  so  multiplied  as  to  make  the  chapel,  in  the  evening,  when  the  gas 
was  burning,  like  the  Black  Hole  of  Calcutta.  One  night,  in  1854,  while  preaching 
there,  I  exclaimed,  "  By  faith,  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down  ;  and  by  faith,  this  wall 
at  the  back  shall  come  down,  too."  An  aged  and  prudent  deacon,  in  somewhat 
domineering  terms,  observed  to  me,  at  the  close  of  the  sermon,  "  Let  us  never  hear 
of  that  again."  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  I  enquired  ;  "  you  will  hear  no  more  about 
it  when  it  is  djiic,  and  therefore  the  sooner  you  set  about  doing  it,  the  better."  The 
followincr  extract  from  the  church-book  shows  that  the  members  did  set  about  doing 
it  in  real  earnest  : — 

"Church-meeting,  30th  ^A-Ugust,  1854. 

"  Resolved, — That  we  desire,  as  a  church,  to  record  our  devout  and  grateful 
acknowledgments  to  our  Heavenly  Father  for  the  success  that  has  attended  the 
ministry  of  our  esteemed  Pastor,  and  we  consider  it  important,  at  as  early  a  period 
as  possible,  that  increased  accommodation  should  be  provided  for  the  numbers  that 
flock  to  the  chapel  on  Lord's-days  ;  and  we  would  affectionately  request  our 
respected  deacons  to  give  the  subject  their  full  and  careful  consideration,  and  to 
favour  us  with  their  report  at  the  church-meeting  in  October." 

A  considerable,  but  unavoidable  delay,  took  place,  in  consequence  of  the  vestry 

and  school-rooms  being  held  on  a  different  Trust  from  that  of  the  chapel,  so  that  it 

became   necessary   to   apply  to  the  Charity  Commissioners  before   including   those 

rooms  in  the  main  building.      After  fully   inv'estigating   the  circumstances,   they  did 

not  interpose  any  obstacle,  so  the  alterations  were  commenced,  early  in  1855,  and  in 

due   course   the   chapel   was    enlarged    as    proposed,   and    a    new    school-room    was 

erected  along  the  side  of  the  chapel,  with  windows  which  could  be  let  down,  to  allow 

those  who  were  seated  in  the  school  to  hear  the  preacher 

z 


CHAPTER    XXXIII 


Cljc  CljoUxa  2car  in  ioiitiou. 


Whether  we  gather  in  the  harvest  or  nut,  there  is  a  reaper  who  is  silen'ly  gatherim;  it  rje  y  hour.  Just 
now,  it  is  whispered  that  he  is  sharpening  his  sicl<le.  That  reaper  is  Death  !  You  may  look  upon  this 
great  city  as  the  harvest-field,  and  every  week  the  bills  of  mortality  tell  us  how  steadily  and  how  surely 
the  scythe  of  death  moves  to  and  fro,  and  how  a  lane  is  made  through  our  population,  and  those  who 
were  once  living  men  are  taken,  like  sheaves  to  the  garner,  carried  to  the  graveyard,  and  laid  aside. 
Yuu  cannot  stop  their  dying  ;  but,  oh,  that  God  might  help  you  to  stop  their  being  damned !  You 
cannot  stop  the  breath  from  going  out  of  their  bodies ;  but,  oh,  that  the  gospel  might  stop  their  souls 
from  going  down  ti  destruction !  It  can  do  it,  and  nothing  else  can  take  its  place.  Just  now,  the 
cholera  has  come  again.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  suppose,  about  it  being  here  already  in  some 
considerable  force,  and  probably  it  may  be  worse.  Tl:e  Christian  need  not  dread  it,  for  he  has  nothing 
to  lose,  but  everything  to  gain,  by  death  Still,  for  the  sake  of  others,  he  may  well  pray  that  God  would 
avert  His  hand,  and  not  let  His  anger  burn.  But,  since  it  is  here,  I  think  it  ought  to  be  a  motive  for 
active  exertion.  If  there  ever  be  a  time  when  the  mind  is  sensitive,  it  is  when  death  is  abroad.  I 
recollect,  when  first  I  came  to  London,  how  an.xiously  people  listened  to  the  gospel,  for  the  cholera  was 
rajiing  terribly.  There  was  little  scoffing  then.  All  day,  and  sometimes  all  night  long,  I  went  about 
from  house  to  house  and  saw  men  and  women  dying,  and,  oh,  how  glad  they  were  to  see  my  face ! 
When  many  were  afraid  to  enter  their  houses  lest  they  should  catch  the  deadly  disease,  we  who  had  no 
fear  about  such  things  found  ourselves  most  gladly  listened  to  when  we  spoke  of  Christ  and  of  things 
Divine.  And  now,  again,  is  the  minister's  time ;  and  now  is  the  time  for  all  of  you  who  love  souls. 
You  may  see  men  more  alarmed  than  they  are  already ;  and  if  they  should  be,  mind  that  you  avail 
yourselves  of  the  opportunity  of  doing  them  good.  You  have  the  Balm  of  Gilead  ;  when  their  wounds 
smart,  pour  it  in.  You  know  of  Him  who  died  to  save  ;  tell  them  of  Him.  Lift  high  the  cross  before 
their  eyes.  Tell  them  that  God  became  man  that  man  might  be  lifted  to  God.  Tell  them  of  Calvary, 
and  its  groans,  and  cries,  and  sweat  of  blood.     Tell  them  of  Jesus  hanging  on  the  cross  to  save  sinners. 

Tell  them  that— 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One." 

Tell  them  that  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him.  Tell  them 
that  He  is  able  to  sa"e  even  at  the  eleventh  hour,  and  to  say  to  the  dying  thief,  "To-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  .Me  in  Paradise." — C.  H.  S.,  in  Sermon  preached  at  the  Metropolitan   Tabernacle,  July  29,  1866. 

N  the  year  1854,  when  I  had  scarcely  been  in  London  twelve  months, 
the  neighbourhood  in  which  I  laboured  was  visited  by  Asiatic 
cholera,  and  my  congregation  suffered  from  its  inroads.  Family 
after  family  summoned  me  to  the  bedside  of  the  smitten,  and  almost 
every  day  I  was  called  to  visit  the  grave.  At  first,  I  gave  myself 
up  with  youthful  ardour  to  the  visitation  of  the  sick,  and  was  sent 
for  from  all  corners  of  the  district  by  persons  of  all  ranks  and  religions  ;  but,  soon, 
I  became  weary  in  body,  and  sick  at  heart.  My  friends  seemed  falling  one  by  one, 
and  I  felt  or  fancied  that  I  was  sickening  like  those  around  me.  A  little  more  work 
and  weeping  would  have  laid  me  low  among  the  rest ;  I  felt  that  my  burden  was 
heavier  than  I  could  bear,  and  I  was  ready  to  sink  under  it. 


3/2  C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 

I  was  returning  mournfully  home  from  a  funeral,  when,  as  God  v/ould  have  it, 
my  curiosity  led  me  to  read  a  paper  which  was  wafered  up  in  a  shoemaker's  window 
in  the  Great  Dover  Road.  It  did  not  look  like  a  trade  announcement,  nor  was  it, 
for  it  bore,  in  a  good  bold  handwriting,  these  words  : — 

"  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord,  tvhich  is  my  refuge,  even  the  Most  High, 
thy  habitation  ;  there  shall  no  evil  befall  thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh 
thy  dive  I  ling." 

The  effect  upon  my  heart  was  immediate.  Faith  appropriated  the  passage  as 
her  own.  I  felt  secure,  refreshed,  girt  with  immortality.  I  went  on  with  my  visita- 
tion of  the  dying,  in  a  calm  and  peaceful  spirit ;  I  felt  no  fear  of  evil,  and  I  suffered 
no  harm.  The  Providence  which  moved  the  tradesman  to  place  those  verses  in  his 
window,  I  gratefully  acknowledge  ;  and  in  the  remembrance  of  its  marvellous  power, 
I  adore  the  Lord  my  God. 

(In  a  pamphlet  entitled,  "  The  Best  Refuge  in  Times  of  Trouble,"  published 
about  the  time  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  "home-going,"  Mr.  W.  Ford,  of  19H,  Peabody 
Buildings,  Orchard  Street,  Westminster,  wrote  : — "  In  the  year  1854,  the  first  year  of 
Mr.  Spurgeon  in  London,  the  cholera  raged  in  the  locality  of  his  church,  and  the 
neighbourhood  where  he  resided.  The  parochial  authorities  were  very  thoughtful 
for  the  poor,  and  caused  bills  to  be  placed  at  the  corners  of  the  streets,  headed 
Cholera, — in  large  type, — informing  the  public  where  advice  and  medicines  would 
be  supplied  gratis.  At  that  time,  I  lived  in  the  Great  Dover  Road,  and  Mr. 
Spurgeon  lived  a  little  further  towards  Greenwich,  in  Virginia  Terrace.  Seeing  the 
bills  above-named  at  every  turning,  I  was  forcibly  impressed  that  they  were  very 
much  calculated  to  terrify  the  people.  With  the  concurrence  of  a  friend,  I  procured 
one,  and  wrote  in  the  centre  these  words  : — '  Because  thou  hast  made  the  Lord, 
which  is  my  refuge,  even  the  Most  High,  thy  habitation  ;  there  shall  no  evil  befall 
thee,  neither  shall  any  plague  come  nigh  thy  dwelling.'  This  bill  I  placed  in  my 
shop-window,  hundreds  read  it,  and  I  am  not  aware  of  one  jeer  or  improper  remark, 
— so  subdued  and  solemnized  were  the  people  by  the  awful  visitation.  Among  the 
readers  of  the  bill,  was  Mr.  Spurgeon.") 

During  that  epidemic  of  cholera,  though  I  had  many  engagements  in  the 
country,  I  gave  them  up  that  I  might  remain  in  London  to  visit  the  sick  and  the 
dying.  I  felt  that  it  was  my  duty  to  be  on  the  spot  in  such  a  time  of  disease  and 
death  and  sorrow.  One  Monday  morning,  I  was  awakened,  about  three  o'clock,  by  a 
sharp  ring  ot  the  door-bell.      I  was  urged,  without  delay,  to  visit  a  house  not  very 


C.     H.     SPURGEON  S     AUTOBIOGR/\PHY.  373 

far  from  London  Bridge.  I  went  ;  and  up  two  pairs  of  stairs  I  was  sliown  into  a 
room,  the  only  occupants  of  which  were  a  nurse  and  a  dying  man.  "  Oh,  sir  !  " 
exclaimed  the  nurse,  as  I  entered,  "about  half-an-hour  ago,  Mr.  So-and-so  begged 
me  to  send  for  you."  "What  does  he  want?"  I  asked.  "He  is  dying,  sir,"  she 
replied.  I  said,  "Yes,  I  see  that  he  is  ;  what  sort  of  a  man  was  he?"  The  nurse 
answered,  "  He  came  home  from  Brighton,  last  night,  sir  ;  he  had  been  out  all  day. 
I  looked  for  a  Bible,  sir,  but  there  is  not  one  in  the  house  ;  I  hope  you  have  brought 
one  with  you."  "Oh  !"  I  said,  "a  Bible  would  be  of  no  use  to  him  now.  If  he 
could  understand  me,  I  could  tell  him  the  way  of  salvation  in  the  very  words  of 
Scripture."  I  stood  by  his  side,  and  spoke  to  him,  but  he  gave  me  no  answer.  I 
spoke  again  ;  but  the  only  consciousness  he  had  was  a  foreboding  of  terror,  mingled 
with  the  stupor  of  approaching  death.  Soon,  even  that  was  gone,  for  sense  had  fled, 
and  I  stood  there,  a  few  minutes,  sighing  with  the  poor  woman  who  had  watched 
over  him,  and  altogether  hopeless  about  his  soul.  Gazing  at  his  face,  I  perceived 
that  he  was  dead,  and  that  his  soul  had  departed. 

That  man,  in  his  lifetime,  had  been  wont  to  jeer  at  me.  In  strong  language,  he 
had  often  denounced  me  as  a  hypocrite.  Yet  he  was  no  sooner  smitten  by  the  darts 
of  death  than  he  sought  my  presence  and  counsel,  no  doubt  feeling  in  his  heart  that 
I  was  a  servant  of  God,  though  he  did  not  care  to  own  it  with  his  lips.  There  I  stood, 
unable  to  help  him.  Promptly  as  I  had  responded  to  his  call,  what  could  I  do  but 
look  at  his  corpse,  and  mourn  over  a  lost  soul  ?  He  had,  when  in  health,  wickedly 
refused  Christ,  yet  in  his  death-agony  he  had  superstitiously  sent  for  me.  Too  late, 
he  sighed  for  the  ministry  of  reconciliation,  and  sought  to  enter  in  at  the  closed 
door,  but  he  was  not  able.  There  was  no  space  left  him  then  for  repentance,  for  he 
had  wasted  the  opportunities  which  God  had  long  granted  to  him.  I  went  home,  and 
was  soon  called  away  again  ;  that  time,  to  see  a  young  woman.  She  also  was  in  the 
last  extremity,  but  it  was  a  fair,  fair  sight.  She  was  singing, — though  she  knew  she 
was  dying, — and  talking  to  those  round  about  her,  telling  her  brothers  and  sisters  to 
follow  her  to  Heaven,  bidding  good-bye  to  her  father,  and  all  the  while  smiling  as  if 
it  had  been  her  marriage  day.  She  was  happy  and  blessed.  I  never  saw  more 
conspicuously  in  my  life,  than  I  did  that  morning,  the  difference  there  is  between 
one  who  feareth  God  and  one  who  feareth  Him  not. 


-:s 


ti 


DATE  DUE 


lu^^^^i 


^J(|fj|^n*  v4  (lu  a^  Jjlo  ™ 


^APNTCO  IN  U.S^ 


