DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


/ 


'f. 


-J®. 

■ii 

• :'a 

" t 


V^•.  ■■ 

"tt-i 


4 


.;■■'■  V 


B 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe29wesl 


'tv 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincohi-Coll^gf,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXIX. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Streett. 

MDCCLXXIV. 


1 


-■A- 


•■  ■■4  ' . ■ ""  • ' - _ . 

,.<■  ' ■ ' ■ h'  * ^ ’ 

'ti  . ■ ! ‘ • 


C 3 ] 


W:s /^  Ws'' 

Y- 


A N 

E X 

T R 

A C 

T 

0 F T H E 

Rev. 

Mr.  John 

Wesley’s 

J 0 

U R 

N A 

u 

From  November  25,  1 

746,  to  July 

20, 

1750. 

Number 

VII. 

Tuesday,  November  25,  1746. 

I Laboured  much  to  convince  one  who  had 
known  me  for  feveral  years,  that  (he  had  left 
her  frJl-lovCt  and  was  in  the  utmoft  danger  of 
A 2 lofn^ 


C 4 ] 

lofing  the  things  which  Jhe  had  wrought.  But  fliC 
was  proof  againft  argument  as  well  as  perfuafion, 
and  very  civilly  renounced  all  fellowflrip  with 
me,  “ Becaufe  (Are  faid)  I was  difaffefted  to  the 
government !”  O what  will  not  ihofe  either  be- 
lieve or  alTert,  who  are  rejolved  to  defend  a def- 
perate  caufe ! 

Sund.  30.  JohnJohes  (late  a zealous  Calvinift) 
preached  for  the  firft  time  at  the  Foundery.  I 
trull  he  will  never  reft,  till  he  who  died  for  all 
hath  cleanftd  him  from  all  unrighteonjhefs. 

Thurf.  Dec.  4.  I mentioned  to  the  fociety  my 
ciefign  of  giving  phyfic  to  the  poor.  About 
thirty  came  the  next  day  : and  in  three  weeks 
about  three  hundred.  This  tve  continued  for  fe- 
veral  years,  till  the  number  of  patients  ftill  in- 
creafing,  the  expence  was  greater  than  we  could 
bear.  Mean  time,  through  the  biefling  of  God, 
many  who  had  been  ill  for  months  or  years,  were 
leftored  to  perfefl  health. 

Mond.  15.  Moll  of  this  week  I fpent  at 
Lewifham,  in  writing  “ Lelfons  for  Children 
confifting  of  the  moft  practical  fcriptures,  with 
a very  few,  fhort,  explanatory  notes. 

Satur.  CO,  I had  a vitit  from  Mr.  Bland,  an 
accurate  mailer  of  the  Hebrew  tongue:  but  how 
exceeding  far  from  the  judgment  of  Mr.  Hut- 
chinfon  ! He  avers  (and  thinks  he  has  demon- 
ftrated,  in  a tra£l  on  that  head  lately  publilhedj 
that  both  the  vowel  and  accent  points,  are  abfo- 
lutely  elieiuial  to  the  Hebrew  language;  and  that 


[ 5 ] 

tliey  are  far  elder  than  Ezra,  yea  coeval  with  the 
giving  of  the  law  on  mount  JSinai. 

Alond.  29.  I refumed  my  vegetable  diet 
(which  I had  now  difcontinued  for  feveral  years) 
anti  found  it  of  ufe  both  to  my  foul  and  body. 
But  after  two  years,  a violent  flux  which  feized 
me  in  Ireland,  obliged  me  to  return  to  the  ufe  of 
animal  food- 

Wednef.  31.  I heard  an  amazing  Inftance  of 
the  providence  of  God.  About  fix  years  ago, 
Mr.  Jebner  (as  he  related  it  hirafelf)  and  all  his 
family,  being  eight  perfons,  were  in  bed,  be- 
tween ten  and  eleven  at  night.  On  a fudderi  he 
heard  a great  crack,  and  the  houfe  inflantly  fell, 
all  at  once,  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.  They 
tvere  all  buried  in  the  ruins.  Abundance  of  peo- 
ple gathered  together,  and  in  two  or  three  hours 
dug  them  out.  The  beds  in  which  they  had  lain, 
were  maflred  in  pieces,  as  vv^as  all  the  furniture 
of  the  houfe.  But  neither  man,  woman  nor 
child  w'as  killed  or  hurt.  Only  he  had  a httle 
fcratch  on. his  hand. 

Satur.  Jan.  3,  1747.  I called  upon  poor  Mr. 
C.  who  once  largely  tajle.d  of  the  good  word  and 
the  powers  oj  the  world  to  come.  I found  him 
very  loving — and  very  drunk,  as  he  commonly 
is,  day  and  night.  But  I could  fix  nothing 
upon  him.  “ He  may  fall  foully ; but  not 
fnally  /” 

* Sund.  11.  In  the  evening  I rode  to  Brent- 
A 3 ford ; 


[ 6 ] 


ford  ; the  next  day  to  Newbury,  and  Tuef.  13* 
to  the  Devizes.  The  town  was  in  an  uproar  from 
end  to  end,  as  if  the  French  werejull  entering  : 
and  abundance  of  fwelling  words  we  heard, 
oaths,  curfcs  and  threatnings.  The  moft  aftive 
man  in  birring  up  the  people,  we  were  informed, 
was  Mr.  J.  the  C.  he  had  been  indefatigable  in 
the  work,  going  all  the  day  from  houfe  to  houfe. 
He  had  alfo  been  at  the  pains  of  fetting  up  an 
advertifement  in  the  moft  public  places  of  the 
town,  “ Of  an  obnubilative,  pantomine  enter- 
tainment, to  be  exhibited  at  Mr.  Clark’s” 
(where  I was  to  preach.)  The  latter  part  of  it 
contained  a kind  of  double  entendre,  which  a 
modeft  perfon  cannot  well  jepeat.  1 began 
preaching  at  feven,  on,  The  grace  of  our  Lord 
JeJus  Chrif.  Many  of  the  mob  came  in, 
liftened  a little,  and  ftood  ftill.  No  one  opened 
his  mouth,  but  attention  fat  on  the  face  of  every 
hearer. 

* Wednef.  14.  I rode  on  to  Briftol,  and  fpent 
a week  in  great  peace.  Thurf.  22.  About  half 
hour  after  twelve  I took  horfe  for  Wick,  where 
I had  appointed  to  preach  at  three.  I was  riding 
by  the  wall  through  St.  Nicholas-gate  (my  horfe 
having  been  brought  to  the  houfe  where  I dined) 
juft  as  a cart  turned  fhort  from  St.  Nicholas- 
ftreet,  and  came  fwiftly  down  the  hill.  There 
was  juft  room  to  pafs  between  the  wheel  of  it 
and  the  wall  ; but  that  fpace  was  taken  up  by  the 
carman.  I called  to  him  to  go  back  or  I rauft 

ride 


[ 7 ] 

ride  over  him.  But  the  man,  as  if  deaf,  walked 
ftrait  forward.  This  obliged  me  to  hold  back  my 
horfe.  In  the  mean  time  the  fhaft  of  the  cart 
came  full  againfl:  his  flioulder,  with  fuch  a fliock 
as  beat  him  to  the  ground.  He  fhot  me  forward 
over  his  head,  as  an  arrow  out  of  a bow,  where 
I lay,  with  my  arms  and  legs,  I know  not  how, 
flretched  out  in  a line  clofe  to  the  wall.  The 
wheel  ran  by,  clofe  to  my  fide,  but  only  dirted 
my  cloaths.  I found  no  flutter  of  fpirit,  but  the 
fame  compofure  as  if  I had  been  fitting  in  my 
ftudy.  When  the  cart  was  gone  I rofe.  Abun- 
dance of  people  gathered  round,  till  a gentleman 
defired  me  to  flep  into  his  fhop.  After  cleaning 
myfelf  a little,  I took  horfe  again,  and  was  at 
Wick  by  the  time  appointed. 

I returned  to  Briltol  (where  the  report  of  my 
being  killed  had  fpread  far  and  wide)  time 
enough  to  praife  God  in  the  great  congregation, 
and  to  preach  on,  Thou,  Lord,  Jkalt  fave  both 
man  and  brajl..  My  fhoulders  and  hands,  and  fide 
and  both  my  legs  were  a little  bruifed.  My 
knees  fomething  more ; my  right  thigh  the 
moft,  which  made  it  a little  difhcult'to  me  to 
walk.  But  fome  warm  treacle  took  away  all  the 
pain  in  an  hour,  and  the  lamenefs  in  a day  or 
two. 

After  vifiting  the  little  focieties  in  Somerfet- 
fhire  and  Wiltfhire,  on  Thur.  29.  I preached  at 
Bearfield  in  my  way,  and  thence  rode  on  to  the 
Pevizes ; I found  much  pains  had  been  taken 
A 4 again 


[ 8 ] 

again  to  raife  a mob ; but  it  was  loft  labour.  All 
that  could  be  muftered  were  a few  ftraggling 
foldiers,  and  forty  or  fifty  boys.  Notwithftand- 
ing  thefe,  I preached  in  great  peace,  on,  All  have 
finned ^ and  comejhort  of  the  glory  of  God.  In  the 
morning,  Jan.  30.  I explained  and  applied.  He 
healelh  them  that  are  broken  in  heart.  We 
then  took  horfe,  in  the  midft  of  a quiet  civil 
multitude,  and  the  next  afternoon  came  to 
London. 

Mond.  Feb.  2.  I began  examining  the  claffes. 
Having  defired  the  leaders,  fucli  as  had  leifure, 
to  give  me  a ftiort  account  in  writing  of  thofe 
under  their  care,  among  many  others,  I received 
the  following  note. 


* Dear  SIR, 


“ T Hope  my  clafs  are  bending  one  way,  K. 

1 T,  A.  G,  A.  S,  M.  S,  M.  R,  E.  L,  and 

S.  S,  fecm  to  retain  their  confidence  in  the 
Lord.  W.  R,  L.  R,  S.  R,  H.  B,  I.  B,  the 
elder,  and  A.  B,  feem  to  be  ftiut  up  in  a fog. 


and  are  not  able  to  get  out  on  any  fide.  They  are 
very  dead  and  yet  ver)'  fore.  Nothing  feems  to 
do  them  any  good,  unlefs  it  be  fmooth  as  oil, 
and  yet  lharp  as  a razor. 

M.  S,  M.  O,  E.  E,  E.  B,  M.  H,  F.  B,  M. 
S,  J*  B,  and  J.  B,  the  ) ounger,  feem  to  be  in 
carneft,  feeking  the  Lord.  J.  T,  M.  H,  ap« 


pear 


[ 9 ] 

pear  to  have  a defire,  and  to  be  widely  feeking 
fomething. 

It  feems  to  me,  we  all  want  advice  that  is 
piain  and  cutting,  awakening  and  fhaking,  and 
haftni  ngus,  like  that  of  the  angel,  “ Efcape  for 
thy  life.  Look  not  behind  thee,  neither  tarry 
thou  in  all  the  plain.”  I find  the  Lord  often 
waking  me  as  with  thunder.  Yet  I find  a fpirit 
of  ftilnefs  and  lukewarmnefs  to  cleave  to  me 
like  the  fkin  to  my  flelh.  The  Lord  fhews  me  at 
times  how  infenfibly  it  Heals  upon  me,  and 
makes  me  tremble,  becaufe  I have  not  been  fear- 
ing always.  May  he  give  us  to  feel  the  true 
ftate  of  our  fouls ! Which,  I hope,  will  ever  be 
the  prayer  of 

Your  unworthy  fon  in  the  gofpel, 

John  Hague.” 

Ye  who  loved  and  profited  by  this  man  of 
God,  when  he  was  alive,  hear  what  being  dead 
ht  yet  fpeaketh, 

Tuef.  10.  My  brother  returned  from  the- 
north,  and  I prepared  to  fupply  his  place  there. 
Sund.  15.  1 was  very  weak  and  faint.  But  on 
Mond.  16.  I rofe  foon  after  three,  lively  and 
ftrong,  and  found  all  my  complaints  were  fled, 
away  like  a dream. 

* I tvas  wondring  the  day  before  at  the  mild- 
nefs  of  the  weather,  fuch  as  feldom  attends  me 
in  my  journies.  But  my  wonder  now  ceafed  : 
A 5 the 


[ ] 


the  wind  was  turned  full  north,  and  blew  fo  ex- 
ceeding hard  and  keen,  that  when  we  came  to 
Hatfield,  neither  my  companiorrs  nor  I had  much 
ufe  of  our  hands  or  feet.  After  refting  an  hour, 
we  bore  up  again,  through  the  wind  and  fnow, 
which  drove  full  in  our  faces.  But  this  w'as  only 
a fquall.  In  Baldork-field  the  ftorm began  in  earn- 
eft.  The  large  hail  drove  fo  vehemently  in  our 
faces,  that  we  could  not  fee,  nor  hardly  breathe. 
How'ever  before  two  o’clock  w'e  reached  Bal- 
dock,  where  one  met  and  conduced  us  fafe  to 
Potten. 

^ About  fix  I preached  to  a ferious  congrega- 
tion. Tuef.  17. We  fet  out  as  foon  as  it  was  well 
light.  But  it  was  really  hard  work  to  get  forward# 
For  the  frofl  would  not  well  bear  or  break.  And 
the  untracked  fnow  covering  all  the  roads,  we 
had  much  ado  to  keep  our  horfes  on  their  feet. 
Mean  time  the  wind  rofe  higher  and  higher,  till 
it  was  ready  to  overturn  both  man  and  beall. 
I^owever  after  a Ihort  bait  at  Bugden  we  pufhed 
,c^n,  and  w^ere  met  in  the  middle  of  an  open  field 
with  fo  violent  a ftorm  of  rain  and  hail,  as  we 
had.  not  had  before.  It  drove  through  our 
coats,  great  and  fmalJ,  boots  and  ever)^  thing, 
and  vet  froze  as  it  jell,  even  upon  our  eye- 
brows: fo  that  we  had  fcarce  either  ftrength 
or  motion  left,  when  we  came  into  our  inn  at 
Stilton. 

We  now  gave  up  our  hopes  of  reaching  Gran- 
thc.m,  the  fnow  falling  fafter  and  fafler.  How- 
ever 


[ ] 

ever  we  took  the  advantage  of  a fair  blaft  to  fet 
out,  and  made  the  heft  of  our  way  to  Stamford- 
heath.  But  here  a new  difficulty  arofe,  from 
the  fnow  lying  in  large  drifts.  Sometimes  horfe 
and  man  were  well  nigh  fwallowed  up.  Yet  in 
lefs  than  an  hour  we  were  brought  fafe  to  Stam- 
ford. Being  willing  to  get  as  far  as  we  could,  we 
made  but  a ffiort  flop  here  ; and  about  fun-fet 
came,  cold  and  weary,  yet  well,  to  a little  town 
called  Brig  cafterton. 

ednef.  i8.  Our  ferv’ant  came  up  and  faid, 
“ Sir,  there  is  no  travelling  to-day.  Such  a quan- 
tity of  fnow  has  fallen  in  the  night,  that  the 
roads  are  quite  filled  up.”  I told  him,  *■  At 
leaft  we  can  walk  twenty  miles  a day,  with  our 
horfes  in  our  hands.”  So  in  the  name  of  God 
w’e  fet  out.  The  north  eaft  wind  was  piercing  as 
a fword,  and  had  driven  the  fnow’  into  fuch  un- 
even heaps,  that  the  main  road  was  not  paffia- 
ble.  However  we  kept  on,  a foot  or  on  horfe-. 
back,  till  we  came  to  the  white  lion  at  Gran- 
tham. 

Some  from  Grimfty  had  appointed  to  meet 
us  here.  But  not  hearing  anv  thing  of  them,  (for 
they  were  at  another  houfe  by  miftake)  after  an 
hour’s  red,  we  fet  out  ftrait  for  Epworth.  On 
the  road  w'e  overtook  a clerg^^man  and  his  fer- 
vant ; but  the  tooth-ach  quite  fhut  my  mouth. 
We  reached  Newark  about  five.  Soon  after  we 
were  fet  down,  another  clergyman  came  and  en- 
quired for  our  fellow'- traveller.  It  was  not  long 
A 6 before 


t 12  ] 

^before  we  engaged  in  clofe  converfatlon.  He 
. told  me  fome  of  our  preachers  had  frequently 
preached  in  his  parifli.  And  his  judgment  was, 
1.  That  their  preaching  at  Hunfleet,  had  done 
fome  good,  but  more  harm.  Becaufe,  2.Thofe 
who  attended  it  had  only  turned  from  one  wick- 
ednefs  to  another;  they  had  only  exchanged 
fabbath-breaking,  fwearing  or  drunkennefs,  for 
flandering,  backbiting  and  evil-fpeaking  : and, 
3.  Thofe  who  did  not  attend  it,  were  provoked 
hereby  to  return  evil  for  evil.  So  that  the  former 
were,  in  effeft,  no  better ; the  latter  worfe 
than  before. 

The  fame  obje£lIon  (in  fubftance)  has  been 
made,  in  mod  other  parts  of  England.  It  there- 
fore deferves  a ferious  anfwer,  which  will 
equally  hold  in  all  places.  Whether  then  we  fpeak 
of  Hunfleet, Leeds,  Briftolor  London,it  is  allow- 
ed, “ 1.  That  our  preaching  has  done  fome  good ; 
common  fwearers,  fabbath  breakers,  drunkards, 
thieves,  fornicators,  having  been  reclaimed  from 
thofe  outward  fins But  it  is  affirmed,  “ 2. 
That  it  has  done  more  harm,  the  perfons  fo  re- 
claimed, only  changing  one  wickednefs  for  an- 
other: and  their  neighbours  being  fo  provoked 
thereby,  as  to  become  W'orfe  than  they  were 
be.ffire.” 

“Thofe  who  have  left  their  outward  fins,”  you 
affirm,  have  only  changed  drunkennefs  or  fab- 
bath-breaking for  back-biting  and  evil-fpeaking.” 
I anfwer,  if  you  affirm  this  of  them  all,  it  is  no- 

torioufiy 


t 13  3 

torloufly  falfe.  Many  we  can  name,  who  left 
curfing,  fwearing  and  back-biting,  dnmkennefs 
and  evil-fpeaking  all  together,  and  who  are  to 
this  day  juft  as  fearful  of  flandering,  as  they  are 
of  curfing  or  fwearing.  And  if  fome  are  not  yet 
enough  aware  of  this  fnare  of  the  devil,  we  may 
hope  they  will  be  e’re  long.  Mean  time  fee 
that  you  blefs  God  for  what  he  has  done,  and 
pray  that  he  would  deliver  them  from  this  death 
alfo. 

You  affirm  farther,  “ That  their  neighbours 
are  provoked  hereby,  to  return  evil  for  evil  ; 
and  fo  while  the  former  are  no  better,  the  latter 
are  wrofe  than  they  were  before.” 

I anfwer,  1.  Thefe  are  worfe  than  they  were 
before.  But  why  ? Becaufe  they  do  freffi  de- 
fpight  to  the  fpirit  of  grace  \ becaufe  they  defpife 
that  long-fufering  love  of  God,  which  would 
lead  them  (as  it  does  their  neighbours)  to  re- 
pentance. And  in  laying  theblame  ofthis  on  thofe 
who  will  no  longer  run  with  them  to  the  fame  ex- 
cefs  of  riot,  they  only  fulfil  the  fcriptures,  and  fill 
up  the  meafure  of  their  own  iniquity. 

I anfwer.  2.  There  is  ftill  no  proportion  at  all 
between  the  good  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
harm  on  the  other  ; for  they  who  reje£l  the 
goodnefs  of  God,  were  fervants  of  the  devil 
before;  and  they  are  but  fervants  of  the  devil 
ftill.  But  they  who  accept  it,  are  brought  from 
the  power  of  Satan,  to  ferve  the  living  and  true 
God. 


Thurf. 


[ H ] 


Thurf.  ig.  The  froft  was  not  fo  fharp  ; fo 
that  we  had  little  difficulty  till  we  came  to 
Haxey-Car.  But  here  the  ice  which  covered 
the  dykes  and  great  part  of  the  common,  would 
not  bear,  nor  readily  break.  Nor  did  we  know, 
there  being  no  track  of  man  or  brealt,  what  parts 
of  the  dykes  were  fordable.  However  we  com- 
mitted ourfelves  to  God  and  went  on,  we  hit  all 
our  fords  exaftly,  and  without  any  fall  orconGder- 
able  hindrance  came  to  Epworthin  two  hours, 
full  as  well  as  when  we  left  London. 

Sund.  9 2.  I preached  at  Gve  and  at  eight  in 
the  room  : after  evening  prayers,  at  the  crofs. 
I fuppofe  moft  of  the  grown  people  in  the  town 
were  prefent.  A poor  drunkard  made  anoife  for 
fome  time  : till  Mr.  Maw  (the  chief  gentleman 
of  the  townj  took  him  in  hand  and  quieted  him 
at  once, 

Mond.  2 2.  Leaving  Mr.  Meyrick  here,  I fet 
out  with  Mr.  Larwood,  and  a friend  from  Grimf- 
by.  At  two  I preached  at  Lafeby  in  the  way, 
to  a quiet  and  ferious  congregation*  We  reach- 
ed Grimfby  by  Gve,  and  fpoke  to  as  many  of  the 
fociety  as  could  conveniently  come  at  that  time. 
About  feven  I would  have  preached  to  a very 
large  audience  ; but  a young  gentleman  wnth  his 
companions  quite  drowned  my  voice,  till  a poor 
woman  took  up  the  caufe  and  by  reciting  a few 
paflages  of  his  life,  wittily  and  keenly  enough, 
turned  the  laugh  of  all  his  companions  full  upon 
him.  He  could  not  ftand  it,  but  halle'ned  away. 

When 


[ ^5  ] 

When  he  was  gone,  I went  on  with  little  inter- 
ruption, 

Tuef.  24.  I wrote  a few  lines  to  Mr.  C.  giv- 
ing him  an  account  of  his  kinfman’s  behaviour. 
He  obliged  him  to  come  llrait  to  me  and  alk  my 
pardon.  Since  that  time  we  have  had  no  dif- 
turbance  at  Grimfby. 

* At  noon  I examined  the  little  fociety  at  Tet- 
ney.  I have  not  feen  fuch  another  in  England. 
In  the  clafs  paper  (which  gives  an  account  of  the 
contribution  for  the  poor)  I obferved  one  gave 
eight-pence,  often  ten -pence  a week  : another, 
thirteen,  fifteen  or  eighteen-pence:  another 
fometimes  one,  fometimes  two  fhillings.  I afk- 
ed  MicahElmoor,  the  leader  (an  Ifraelite  indeed, 
who  now  refts  from  his  labour)  “ How  is  this  ? 
Are  you  the  richeft  lociety  in  England?’’  He 
anfwered,  “ I fuppofe  not';  but  all  of  us  who 
are  fingle  perfons,  have  agreed  together,  to  give 
both  ourfelves  and  all  we  have  to  God  : and  we  do 
it  gladly,  whereby  we  are  able  from  time  to  time 
to  entertain  all  the  flrangers  that  come  to  Tetney, 
who  often  have  no  food  to  eat,  nor  any  friend 
to  give  them  a lodging.” 

W e came  to  Hainton  foon  after  fun-fet.  I 
never  befoie  faw  fo  large  a congregation  here. 
I declared  to  them  all  (protellants  and  papiffs) 
The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl,  and  they 
feemed  to  be  indeed  (as  Homer  fays)  tma.  •r/h^ohrcc 
winged  words  ; that  flew  as  arrows  from  the  hand 
of  the  moft  high,  to  the  heart  of  every  hearer. 

Wed. 


[ ] 

Wed.  25.  I had  defigned  to  go  flrait  for  Ep» 
worth,  but  W.  Fenwick  begged  I would  call  on 
the  little  flock  at  Tealby.  Mr.  B,  (he  faid)  the 
minifter  of  the  place,  had  preached  againftthem 
with  the  utmoft  bitternefs,  had  repelled  them 
the  Lord’s  table,  and  zealoufly  endeavoured 
to  ftir  up  the  whole  town  againft  them.  I called 
there  about  feven,  and  began  to  talk  with  two 
or  three,  that  were  in  the  houfe  where  we  a- 
lighted.  Prefently  the  houfe  was  full  from  end  to 
end.  I flood  up  and  declared,  By  grace  ye  are 
Javed  thro'  faith.  Even  at  Hainton  I did  not  find 
fuch  a bleflTing  as  here.  Surely  this  day  was  the 
fcripture  fulfilled.  If  ye  be  reproached for  the  fake 
of  Chrijl  happy  are  ye  : For  the  fpirit  of  glory  and 
ofGodreJleth  upon  you. 

About  two  in  the  afternoon  I preached  at 
Ferry,  andin  the'evening  at  Epworth.  Thurf.  26. 
I left  them  all  in  peace  and  love,  and  rode  to 
Sykehoufe  whereWilliam  Shent  met  me,  and  one 
from  Acomb.  I preached  at  three  and  at  feven, 
and  we  were  not  a little  comforted. 

Frid.  27.  Honeft  muddy  M.  B.  conduced  me 
to  his  houfe  at  Acomb.  I now  found  out  (which 
I could  not  comprehend  before)  what  was  the 
matter  with  him.  He  and  one  or  two  more, 
fince  1 faw  them  lafl  had  been  fludying  the  pro- 
found Jacob  Behmen.  The  event  was  (as  might 
eafily  have  been  forfeen)  he  had  utterly  confound- 
ed their  intellefils,  and  filled  them  fo  full  of  fub- 

lime 


[ V ] 


lime  fpeculaiions,  that  they  had  left  fcripture 
and  common  fenfe  far  behind. 

I preached  at  feven  on  Repent  ye  and  believe 
the  gofpel.  The  congregation,  many  of  whom 
came  from  York,  was  furpizingly  quiet,  tho’ I 
ufed  the  utraofl;  plainnefs  of  ipeech,  feveral  of 
^ ork  came  again  at  five  in  the  morning.  After 
preaching  I fpoke  witli  a few,  who  were  defir- 
ous  to  join  heart  and  hand  together,  in  feeking 
the  kingdom  of  God. 

Sat.  28.  I called  at  Shipton,  on  Mr.  C.  the 
minifler  of  Acomb,  who  had  defired  to  fee  me  : 
and  after  half  an  hour,  both  agreeably  and  ufe- 
fully  fpent,  rode  on  to  Thirfk. 

^ Here  I rejoiced  with  T.  Brooke  and  his 
wife,  lights  fliining  in  a dark  place.  God  has 
lately  added  to  them  a third  ; one  formerly  fa- 
mous for  all  manner  of  wickednefs,  who  was 
cut  to  the  heart  while  hir.  Brooke  was  talking 
to  him,  and  went  down  to  his  houfe  juftified. 
This  had  flruck  the  whole  town  ; fo  that  when  I 
went  down  about  five,  to  preach  in  a vacant 
houfe,  it  was  quickly  filled,  within  and  without, 
the  juftice  being  one  of  the  congregation.  In 
the  morning  about  fix  I preached  again  to  a 
congregation  more  numerous  than  before.  Nor 
did  any  man  open  his  mouth,  either  at  the  time 
of  preaching  or  while  I walked  through  the 
town,  unlefs  it  w’ere  to  bid  me  God-fpeed,  or 
to  enquire,  when  I wmuld  come  again  ? 

* Sund,  March  1.  I came  to  Ofmotherley  about 

ten 


[ i8  ] 

ten  o’clock,  juft  as  the  minifter  (who  lives  fome 
miles  off)  came  into  town.  I fent  my  fervice  to 
him  and  told  him,  “ If  he  pleafed,  I would  alTift 
him,  either  by  reading  prayers  or  preaching.” 
On  receiving  the  meflage,  he  came  to  me  im- 
mediately, and  fald,  “ He  would  willingly  ac- 
cept of  my  afliftance.”  As  we  walked  to  church 
he  faid,  “ Perhaps  it  would  fatigue  you  too 
much,  to  read  prayers  and  preach  too,”  I told 
him,  “No:  I would  choofe  it,  if  he  pleafed 
which  I did  accordingly.  After  fervice  was  end- 
ed, Mr.  D.  faid,  “ Sir,  I am  forry  I have  not 
an  houfe  here  to  entertain  you.  Pray  let  me 
know  whenever  you  come  this  way.”  Several 
alking,  “ Where  I would  preach  in  the  after- 
noon ?”  One  went  to  Mr.  D.  again,  and  afked, 
“ If  he  was  willing  I fliould  preach  in  the 
church  ?”  He  faid.  Yes,  whenever  Mr.  Wefley 
pleafes.”  We  had  a large  congregation  at  three 
o’clock.  Thofe  who  in  time  paft  had  been  the 
moft  bitter  gainfayers,  feemed  now  to  be  melted 
into  love.  All  were  convinced,  we  are  no  pa- 
pifts.  How  wifely  does  God  order  all  things  in 
their  feafon  ! 

* Alond.  2.  I rode  to  Newcaftle.  The  next 
day,  I met  the  ftewards,  men  who  have  approv- 
ed themfelves  in  all  things-  They  are  of  one 
heart  and  of  one  mind.  I found  all  in  the  houfe 
of  the  fame  fpirit ; pouring  out  their  fouls  to 
God  many  times  in  a day  together,  and  breath- 
ing nothing  but  love  and  brotherly  kindnefs. 

March 


[ ^9  ] 

March  4.  Being  Afli-wednefday,  I fpent  fome 
hours  in  reading  the  exhortations  of  EphramSy- 
rus.  wSurely  never  did  any  man,  fince  David, 
give  us  fuch  a pifture  of  a broken  and  contrite 
heart. 

* This  week  I read  over  with  fome  young 
men,  a compendium  of  rhetoric  and  a fyllem  of 
ethics.  I fee  not,  why  a man  of  tolerable  under- 
flanding  may  not  learn  in  fix  months  time,  more 
of  folid  philofophy  than  is  commonly  learned  at 
Oxford,  in  four  (perhaps  feven)  years. 

Sund.  8.  I preached  at  Gatelhead,  and  declar- 
ed the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord.  In  the  even- 
ing, obferving  abundance  of  flrangers  at  the 
room,  I changed  my  voice  and  applied  thofe 
terrible  words,  I have  overthrown  fome  of  you  as 
I overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  the  rejl  of 
you  were  as  brands  plucked  out  of  the  burning ; 
yet  have  ye  not  turned  unto  me,  faith  the  Lord. 

*On  Monday,  Tuefday  and  Thurfday,  I exa- 
mined the  clalTes.  I had  been  often  told,  “ It 
was  impoffible  for  me,  to  diftinguifli  tbe  precious 
from  the  vile,  without  the  miraculous  difcern- 
ment  of  fpirits.”  But  I now  faw,  more  clearly 
than  ever,  that  this  might  be  done,  and  without 
much  difficulty,  fuppofing  only  two  things,  firff, 
courage  and  fteddinefs  in  the  examiner.  Se- 
condly, common  fenfe  and  common  honefty  in 
the  leader  of  each  clafs.  I vifit,  for  inftance, 
the  clafs  in  the  clofe,  of  w'hich  Robert  Peacock 
is  leader.  I afk,  “ Does  this,  and  this  perfon 

in 


L 20 


J 


in  your  clafs,  live  in  drunkennefs  or  any  out- 
ward fm  ? Does  he  go  to  church  and  ufe  the 
other  means  of  grace  ? Does  he  meet  you  as 
often  as  he  has  opportunity  ? Now  if  Robert 
Peacock  has  common  fenfe,  he  can  anfwer  thefe 
queftions  truly,  and  if  he  has  common  honefly, 
tie  will.  And  if  not,  feme  other  in  the  clafs 
has  both,  and  can  and  will  anfwer  for  him. 
Where  is  the  difficulty  then  of  finding  out,  if 
there  be  any  diforderly  walker  in  this  clafs  ? 
And  confequently,  in  any  other  ? The  queflion 
is  not,  concerning  the  heart,  but  the  life.  And 
the  general  tenor  of  this,  I do  not  fay,  cannot 
he.  known,  but  cannot  be  hid,  without  a miracle. 

Where  then  is  the  need  of  any  miraculous  dif- 
cernment  in  order  to  purge  one  of  thofe  fociet- 
les  ? Nay  where  is  the  ufe  of  it  ? For  if  1 had 
that  difeernment,  I am  to  pals  fentence  only 
ex  allegatis  & prcbalis  : not  according  to  what 
I miraculoufly  difeern,  but  according  to  what  is 
proved  in  the  face  of  the  fun. 

The  fociety  which  the  firft  year  confified  of 
above  eight  hundred  members,  is  now  reduced 
to  four  hundred.  But,  according  to  the  old  pro- 
verb, the  half  is  more  than  the  whole.  We  ffiall 
not  be  affiamed  of  any  of  thefe,  when  we  fpeak 
W’ith  ourenem.ies  in  the  gate. 

Frid.  13.  I found  Mr.  P.  and  I,  almoft  dif- 
couraged,  at  the  doftrine  of  abfolute  and  con- 
notative  nouns.  I umnder  any  one  has  patience 
to  learn  logic,  but  thofe  who  do  it  on  j^principle 


[ ] 

of  confcience  : unlefs  he  learns  it,  as  three  in 
four  of  the  young  gentlemon  in  the  univerfities 
do  : That  is,  goes  about  it  and  about,  without 
underllanding  one  word  of  the  matter. 

In  fome  of  the  following  days  I fnatched  a 
few  hours,  to  read  “ The  hilfory  of  the  puritans.” 

I {land  in  amaze.  Firft,  at  the  execrable  fpirit 
of  perfecution,  which  drove  ihofe  venerable 
men  out  of  the  church,  and  with  which  Queen 
Elizabeth's  clergy  were  as  deeply  tinflured  as 
ever  Queen  Mary’s  were:  fecondly,  at  the 
weaknel's  of  thofe  holy  confeffors,  many  of 
whom  fpcnt  fo  much  of  their  time  and  Ifrength, 
in  difpLiting  about  furpliccs  and  hoods,  or  kneel- 
ing at  the  Loi'd’s  fupper  ! 

^ Thurf.  19.  I conlidered,  “ What  would  I 
do  now,  if  I was  fure  I had  but  two  days  to 
live  ? All  outward  things  are  fettled  to  my  wifli. 
The  houfes  at  Brifl&l,  Kingfwood  and  Newcaf- 
tle  are  fafe.  The  deeds  whereby  they  are  con- 
veyed to  the  truffees,  took  place  on  the  ^th  in- 
Ifant.  My  will  is  made.  What  have  I more  to 
do,  but  to  commend  my  foul  to  my  merciful 
and  faithful  Creator  ? 

Some  days  I fpent  in  every  week,  in  examin- 
ing the  focieties  round  Newcallle.  And  great 
caufe  I found  to  rejoice  over  them.  Tuef.  24. 
I rode,  to  Blanchland,  about  twenty  miles  from 
Newcaftle.  The  rough  mountains  round  about 
were  dill  white  with  fnow.  In  the  midltof  them 
is  a (mall  winding  valley,  through  which  the 

Dorwcnt 


[ 22  ] 

Dorwent  runs.  On  the  edge  of  this  the  llttl* 
town  ftands,  which  is  indeed  little  more  than  a 
heap  of  ruins.  There  feems  to  have  been  a large 
cathedral  church,  by  the  vaft  walls  which  ftill 
remain.  I flood  in  the  church-yard,  under  one 
fide  of  the  building,  upon  a large  tomb-ftone, 
round  which  while  I was  at  prayers,  all  the  con- 
gregation kneeled  down  on  the  grafs.  They 
were  gathered  out  of  the  lead-mines  from  all 
parts ; many  from  Allandale,  fix  miles  off.  A 
row  of  children  fat  under  the  oppofite  wall,  all 
quiet  and  flill.  The  whole  congregation  drank 
in  every  word,  with  fuch  earneftnefs  in  their 
looks,  I could  not  but  hope,  that  God  will 
make  this  wildernefs  fing  for  joy. 

In  the  evening  I came  back  to  Newlands, 
where  alfo  John  Brown  has  gathered  a fociety. 

0 what  may  not  a man  of  fmall  natural  ta- 
lents do,  if  he  be  full  of  faith  and  love  ? 

Sund.  29.  After  preaching  at  South-biddick 
at  five  I haflened  to  Sunderland,  where  I'preach- 
ed  at  eight,  and  again  at  two,  in  the  main  ilreet 
toa  Kennington-Common  congregation.  I ad- 
mire the  fpirit  of  this  people.  From  the  firfl  day 

1 preached  here  to  this  hour,  1 have  not  feen  a 
man  behave  indecently.  Thofe  who  did  not 
approve,  quietly  went  away. 

Mond.  30.  I had  leifure  to  reflefl  on  the 
flrange  cafe  of  Francis  Coxon,  who  was  at  firfl 
the  grand  fupport  of  the  fociety  at  Biddick.  But 

after 


1 


[ 23  ] 


after  a time  he  grew  weary  of  well-doing,  com- 
plaining, “ That  I took  up  too  much  of  his 
time.”  He  then  began  to  fearch  after  curious 
knowledge,  and  to  converfe  with  thofe  who  are 
like-minded.  The  world  obferved  it,  and  courted 
his  company  again.  “ Now  he  was  not  fo  pre- 
cife.”  His  fchool  was  filled  with  children.  Many 
flowed  in,  and  he  faid,  “ Soul,  take  thy  eafe  for 
many  years.”  He  came  to  Newcaftle  with  John 
Reach  the  Saturday  after  I came ; but  had  no  lei- 
fure  to  call  upon  me.  At  night  they  fet  out  home- 
ward. He  was  walking  a little  before  his  compani- 
on, about  three  milesfromNewcaftle,inaway  he 
knew  as  well  as  his  own  houfe  floor,  when  John 
heard  him  fall,  and  alked,  What  is  the  matter  ? 
He  anfwered,  “ God  has  overtaken  me.  I am 
fallen  into  the  quarry,  and  have  broke  my  leg.” 
John  ran  to  fome  houfes  that  were  near,  and 
having  procured  help,  carried  him  thither. 
Thence  he  was  removed  to  another  houfe,  and  a 
furgeon  fent  for,  who  came  immediately.  He 
foon  recovered  his  fpirits,  and  afked  how  long  it 
would  be,  before  he  could  be  in  his  fchool 
again  ? And  on  Sunday,  Monday  and  Tuefday, 
was  full  of  the  world,  nor  was  God  in  all  his 
thoughts.  On  Wednefday,  the  furgeon  told 
him  honeftly,  “ He  thought,  he  could  not  live.” 
Then  he  awoke  out  of  fleep.  The  fnares  of 
death  came  about  him,  the  pains  of  hell  over- 
took him.  He  continued  all  Thurfday  and  Fri- 
day in  the  loweft  pit,  in  a place  of  darknefs  and 

in 


[ 24  ] 


111  the  deep  ; warning  all  to  beware  of  drawing 
back  unto  perdition,  and  calling  upon  God  with 
ftrong  cries  and  tears.  On  Sunday  he  found  a 
little  dawning  of  hope.  This  gradually  increafed 
all  the  day.  On  Monday,  he  knew  God  had 
healed  his  backfliding,  and  forrrow  and  fighing 
fled  away.  He  continued  all  day  in  fervent 
prayer,  mingled  with  praife  and  ftrong  thankf- 
giving.  “ This  night,  faid  he,  will  be  a glorious 
night  to  me.  hly  warfare  is  accomplifhed.  My 
fin  is  pardoned.”  Then  he  broke  out  again  into 
vehement  prayer.  About  eight  he  left  off  fpeak- 
ing,  and  foon  after,  without  any  flruggle  or  groan, 
gave  up  his  foul  to  God. 

Wednef.  April  i.  I rode  to  Winlinton-mills, 
a place  famous  above  many,  and  called  the  re- 
bels, “ To  lay  down  their  arms,  and  be  reconci- 
led to  God  through  his  Son.”  I faw  neither  old 
nor  young  that  behaved  amifs : for  the  dread  of 
the  Lord  was  upon  them. 

* Sund.  5.  We  fet  out  early,  and  about  eight, 
went  out  into  the  market-place  at  Hexham.  A 
multitude  of  people  foon  ran  together,  the 
greater  part,  mad  as  colts  untamed.  Many  had 
promifed  to  do  mighty  things.  But  the  bridle 
was  in  their  teeth.  I cried  aloud.  Let  the  zcicled 
for  fake  his  u'ay,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
thoughts.  They  felt  the  fharpnefs  of  the  two- 
edged  fword,  and  funk  into  ferioufnefs  on  every 
fide  : infoinuch  that  I heard  not  one  unkind 


1 


or 


[ 25  ] 

or  uncivil  word,  till  we  left  them  Handing  and 
Haring  one  at  another.  At  one  I preached  at 
Horfeley  ; and  about  five  in  the  evening  at 
Newcaflle. 

Mond.  6.  Having  been  informed,  there  were 
many  large  colleries  three  or  four  miles  north 
-and  north-weft  from  Durham,  Irode  to  a village 
called  Renton,  in  the  mid  ft  of  them,  and  pro- 
claimed The  Lord  God,  gracious  and  merciful. 
Abundance  of  people  gave  earneft  heed  to  every 
word  which  was  fpoken  ; kneeled  down  when  I 
prayed,  fung  (after  their  manner)  when  I fung, 
and  crouded  into  the  houfe  where  I went  in; 
crying  out,  one  and  all,  “ A,  they  were  only 
too  long  a coming ! Why  did  they  not  come 
fooner  ?” 

Tuef,  7.  Finding  the  people  about  Dent’s- 
hole  were  grown  dead  and  cold,  I preached  there 
at  twelve  o’clock  : if  haply  it  might  pleafe  God 
yet  again  to  breathe  on  the  dry-bones  that  they 
might  live. 

Wednef.  8.  I found  the  congregation  at 
Blanehland  abundantly  incveafed.  1 preached 
in  the  evening  at  Spen,  and  the  next  day  at  noon 
to  a ferious  congregation  at  Winlinton -mills  : 
a gentleman  who  had  talked  of  making  a diftur- 
bance,  finding  not  one  man  to  fecond  him. 

Frid.  10.  Having  fettled  all  the  focieties  in 
the  country,  I began  examining  that  of  New- 
caftle  again.  It  was  my  particular  concern,  to 
remove,  if  poftiftle,  every  Hindrance  oi  brotherly 
VoL.  XXIX.  B love. 


[ 26  ] 

love.  And  one  odd  one  I found  creeping  in 
upon  us,  which  had  already  occafioned  much 
evil : * namely,  a fancy,  that  Ife  mujl  not juJUfy 
our/dves  fome  of  the  fpawn  of  myftic  divinity.) 
Juft  contrar)^  to  the  fcriptiiral  injunftion.  Be 
ready  to  give  a reafon  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you. 
For  want  of  doing  this  in  time,  fome  offences 
were  now  grown  incurable.  I found  it  needful 
therefore  to  tear  up  this  by  the  roots : to  ex- 
plain this  duty  from  the  foundation,  and  to  re- 
quire all  who  deft  red  to  remain  with  us,  to 
jujiijy  themfdves,  whenever  they  were  blamed 
unjuftly  ; and  not  to  fwallow  up  both  peace  and 
love,  in  their  voluntary  humility. 

Sund.  12.  I preached  at  Gatefhead  in  the 
morning,  at  Swalwell  about  two;  and  at  the 
room  in  the  evening.  1 fcarce  ever  heard  fo  fine 
a defence  of  a weak  caufe,  as  was  Air.  S.'‘s  fer- 
mon  in  the  morning;  wherein  he  laboured 
much  to  prove,  the  unlawfulnefs  of  laymen’s 
preaching:  but  with  fuch  tcndernefs  and  good- 
nature, that  I almoit  wifhed  the  fermon  were 
printed,  for  a pattern  to  all  polemical  writers. 

April  19.  Being  Eafter  day,  I preached  in 
Gatefhead  for  the  laft  time:  afterwards  at  Swal- 
well and  at  Newcaflle  in  the  evening.  I could 
gladly  have  fpent  fix  weeks  more  in  thefe  parts  : 
but  my  time  being  now  expired,  I preached  my 
farewell  fermon  at  five.  On  Mond.  20.  A great 
part  of  the  congregation  (which  filled  the  room) 
were  fome  of  the  fineft  people  I had  ever  feen 

there. 


[ ^7  ] 

there.  Surely  God  is  working  a new  thing  in  the 
earth.  Even  to  the  rich  is  the  gofpel  preached! 
And  there  are,  of  thefe  alfo,  who  have  ears  to 
hear,  and  hearts  to  receive  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jefus. 

About  nine  I preached  to  a large  congrega- 
tion at  Renton,  and  before  fix  reached  Ofmo- 
therly.  Finding  Mr.  D.  (as  I expedfed)  had 
been  vehemently  attacked  by  the  neighbouring 
clergy  and  gentry,  that  he  might  be  expofed  to 
no  farther  diflBcuity  on  my  account,  I did  not 
claim  his  promife,  but  preached  on  a tomb-ftone 
near  the  church,  on.  The  Lord  is  rifen  indeed. 
* How  wifely  does  God  order  all  things!  Some 
will  not  hear  even  the  word  of  God  out  of  a 
church.  For  the  fake  of  thefe  we  are  often  per- 
mitted to  preach  in  a church.  Others  will  not 
hear  it  in  a church.  For  their  fakes  we  are  often 
compelled  to  preach  in  the  highways. 

Here  John  Nclfon  met  me.  On  Thurfday, 
Friday  and  Saturday,  he  had  preached  at  Acomb 
and  the  neighbouring  places:  on  Good-fridav, 
in  particular,  on  Heworth-moor,  to  a large  and 
quiet  congregation.  * On  Eafter  Sunday  at 
eight,  he  preached  there  again,  to  a large  num- 
ber offerious  hearers.  Towards  the  clofe  of  his 
difeourfe,  a mob  came  from  York,  hired  and 
headed  by  fome  (mifcalled)  gentlemen.  They 
flood  ftill,  till  an  eminent  Papift  cried  out, 
“Why  do  not  you  knock  the  dog’s  brains  out?” 
On  which  they  immediately  began  throwing  all 
that  came  to  hand,  fo  that  the  congregation  was 
B 2 quickly 


[ ^8  ] 

quickly  difperfed.  John  fpoke  a few  words,  and 
walked  towards  York.  They  followed  with 
Ihowers  of  bricks  and  ftones.  One  of  which 
ftruck  hinr  on  the  fhoulder,  one  on  the  back  ; 
and  a little  before  he  came  to  the  city,  part  of 
3 brick  bit  him  on  the  back  part  of  the  head, 
and  felled  him  to  the  ground.  When  he  came  to 
himfelf,  two  of  Acomb  lifted  him  up,  and  led 
him  forward  between  them.  The  gentlemen  fol- 
lowed throwing  as  before,  till  he  came  to  the 
city-gate,  near  which  lived  an  honeft  iradef- 
man,  w’ho  took  him  by  the  arm,  and  pulled  him 
into  his  houfe.  Some  of  the  rioters  fwore,  they 
would  break  all  his  windows,  if  he  did  not  turn 
him  out.  But  he  told  them  refoluiely,  “ 1 will 
not,  and  let  any  of  you  touch  my  houfe  at  your 
peril.  I fball  make  you  remember  it  as  long 
as  you  live.”  On  this  they  thought  good  to  re- 
tire. 

After  a furgeon  had  dred  the  wound  in  his 
head,  John  went  foftly  on  to  Acomb.  About 
five  he  w'cnt  out,  in  order  to  preach,  and  began 
fmging  an  hymn.  Before  it  was  ended,  the  fame 
(Tcntlemen  came  in  a coach  froniYork  with  a nu- 
merous  attendance.  They  threw  clods  and  ftones 
fo  fall  on  every  fide,  that  the  congregation  foon 
difpeifed.  John  walked  down  into  a little 
ground,  not  far  from  Thomas  Slaton's  houfe. 
Two  men  quickly  followed ; one  of  whom 
fwore  defperately,  he  would  have  his  life.  And 
he  fccmcd  to  be  in  good  earned.  He  druck  him 

fcvcral 


C "9  ] 

fev€ral  times,  with  all  his  force,  on  the  head  and 
breail:  and  at  length  threw  him  down,  and 
ftamped  upo-n  him,  till  he  left  him  for  dead. 
But  by  the  mercy  of  God,  being  carried  into  an 
houfe,  he  foon  came  to  himfelf;  and  after  a 
night’s  reft  was  fo  recovered,  that  he  was  able  to 
ride  to  Ofmotherly. 

Ttief.  2 1.  I called  atThirflc.  But  finding  die 
town  full  of  holiday  folks,  drinking,  curfing, 
fwearing  and  cock-fighting,  I did  not  ftop  at  all, 
but  rode  on  to  Borough-bridge,  and  in  the  after- 
noon to  Leeds. 

Wednef.  22.  I fpent  an  hour  with  Mr.  M. 
and  preft  him  to  make  good  his  affertion,  that 
our  preaching  had  done  more  harm  than  good. 
This  he  did  not  chufe  topurfue:  but  iiilarged 
on  the  harm  it  might  occafion,  in  fucceeding 
generations.  I cannot  fee  the  force  of  tliis  ar- 
gument. I dare  not  negleff  the  doing  certain, 
prefent  good,  for  fear  of  fome  probable  ill  confe- 
quences,  in  the  fucceeding  century. 

Sund.  26.  I met  the  Leeds-foclety  at  five: 
preached  at  feven,  on.  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride 
fay  come,  and  at  one  to  an  unwieldly  multitude, 
feveral  hundreds  of  whom  foon  went  awav,  it 
being  impoffible  for  them  to  hear.  Such 
another  congregation  I had  at  Birftal : yet 
here  I believe  my  voice  reached  ail  that  were 

Mond.  27.  I preached  at  Birftal,  at  Webfey- 
moor  and  at  Bradford,  and  regulated  the  focie- 
B 3 ties. 


[ 30  ] 

ties.  Tuef.  28.  One  of  Pudfey  would  take  no 
denial;  fo  I promifed  to  preach  there  at  eight 
o clock.  Coming  before  the  hour,  we  walked  to 
the  new  lioufe  of  the  Germans.  It  flands  on  the 
fide  of  a hill,  commanding  all  the  vale  beneath, 
and  the  ©ppofite  hill.  The  front  is  exceeding 
grand,  though  plain,  being  faced  with  fine, 
fmooth,  white  flone.  1 he  Germans  fuppofe  it 
will  coll  by  that  time  it  is  finifhed,  about  three 
thoufand  pounds.  It  is  well  if  it  be  not  nearer 
ten.  But  that  is  no  concern  to  the  Englifh 
brethrtn.  For  they  are  told,  (and  potently  be- 
lieve) that  “ all  the  money  will  come  from  be- 
yond  fea.” 

I preached  at  eight  at  the  place  appointed, 
and  thence  rode  to  Dewfbury,  where  I was  to 
preach  at  noon.  But  firft  I called  on  the  mini- 
fier,  Mr.  Robfon;  and  in  an  acceptable  time. 
Abundance  of  little  offences  had  arifen,  and 
been  carefully  magnified  by  thofe  who  fought 
fuch  occafions.  But  we  both  fpoke  our  minds 
without  referve.  And  the  fnare  was  prefently 
broken. 

After  fermon,  Mr.  R.  having  fent  a note  to 
defire  I would  call  upon  him  again,  I went  and 
pall  fuch  an  hour  as  I have  not  had  fince  Heft 
London.  We  did  not  part  without  tears.  Who 
knows  how  great  a work  God  can  w'ork  in  a 
fhort  time  ? 

Thurf.  30.  I rode  to  Kighley.  The  ten  per- 
fons  I joined  here,  are  increafed  to  above  an 

hundred. 


[ 31  ] 

hundred.  And  above  a third  of  them  can  re- 
joice in  God,  and  walk,  as  becomes  thegofpel. 

Friday,  May  i.  I read  prayers  and  preached 
in  Haworth  church,  to  a numerous  congrega- 
tion. Ill  the  evening  I preached  near  Skircoat 
Green,  and  baptized  Eliz.  K.  late  a quaker. 
Sat.  2.  I preached  at  Halifax,  to  a civil,  fenfe- 
lefs  congregation  ; at  noon  in  Gllderfam,  and 
in  the  evening  at  Armley. 

Sund.  3.  At  one  I preached  to  a vaft  congre- 
gation at  Hunfleet:  and  about  five,  to  a flill 
larger  at  Birflal,  I preached  on,  All  things  are 
ready : Come  to  the  marriage.  And  fome  1 truft, 
were  compelled  to  come  in. 

Mond.  4.  At  his  earnefi  requeft  I began  exa- 
mining thofe  that  are  called  W.  D’s.  focieties. 
At  three  I preached  at  Great  Harding;  in  the 
evening  at  Roughlee ; where  there  was  a large 
fociety.  But  fince  the  men  of  fmooth  tongue 
broke  in  upon  them,  they  are  every  man  afraid 
of  his  brother  : half  of  them  ringing  continually 
in  the  ears  of  the  reft,  “ No  works,  no  law,  no 
bondage.”  However  we  gathered  above  forty 
of  the  fcattered  fheep,  who  are  ftill  minded  to 
ftand  in  the  old  paths. 

Tuef.  c,  I preached  at  Roughlee  at  five: 
about  eleven  at  Hinden,  and  about  three  at  Wid- 
dap,  a little  village  in  the  midft  of  huge,  barren 
mountains,  where  alfo  there  was  a fociety.  But 
Mr.  B.  had  effeflually  difperfed  them,  fo  that  I 
found  but  three  members  left. 

B 4 


We 


[ 32  2 


We  rode  thence  about  five  miles  to  Stonefey- 
gate,  which  lies  in  a far  more  fruitful  country. 
Here  was  a larger  congregation  at  fix  o’clock 
than  I had  feen  fince  my  leaving  Birllal.  They 
filled  both  the  yard,  and  the  road  to  a confidera- 
ble  diftance,  and  many  were  feated  on  a long 
wall  adjoining;  which  being  built  of  loofe  fiones, 
in  the  middle  of  the  fermon,  all  fell  down  at 
once.  I never  faw,  heard,  nor  read  of  fiich  a 
thing  before.  The  whole  wall  and  the  perfons 
fitting  upon  it,  funk  down  together,  none  of 
them  fcrearning  out,  and  very  few  altering  their 
pofture.  And  not  one  was  hurt  at  all;  but  they 
appeared  fitting  at  the  bottom,  juft  as  they  fat 
at  the  top.  Nor  was  there  any  interruption  ei* 
ther  of  my  fpeaking,  or  of  the  attention  of  th^ 
hearers. 

Wed.  6.  I rode  to  Shore,  four  miles  fouth 
from  Stonefey,  lying  about  half  way  down  an 
huge,  fteep  mountain.  Here  I preached  at 
twelve  to  a loving,  fimple- hearted  people.  W e 
then  climbed  up  to  Todmorden-edge,  the  brow 
of  a long  chain  of  mountains,  where  1 called  a 
ferious  people  to  R/’penl  and  believe  the  gofpel. 

Thurf.  7.  We  left  the  mountains  and  came 
down  to  the  fruitful  valley  of  Rofendale.  Here 
I preached  to  a large  congregation  of  wild  men  ; 
but  it  pleafed  God  to  hold  them  in  chains.  So 
that  even  when  I had  done,  none  offered  any 
rudenefs,  but  all  went  quietlv  away. 

* We  came  to  Alanchefter  between  one  and 


two 


[ 33  J 

two.  I had  no  thought  of  preaching  here,  till  I 
was  informed,  John  Nelfon  had  given  public 
notice,  that  I would  preach  at  one  o’clock.  I 
was  now  in  a great  ifrait.  Their  houfe  would 
not  contain  a tenth  part  of  the  people  And 
how  the  unbroken  fpirits  of  fo  large  a town 
would  endure  preaching  in  the  llreet,  I knew 
not.  Befides  that  having  rode  a fwift  trot  for 
feveral  hours,  and  in  fo  fultry  a day,  I was  both 
faint  and  weary.-  But  after  confidering,  that  I 
was  not  going  a warfare  at  my  own  coft,  I walk- 
ed ftrait  to  Salford- Crofs.  A numberlefs  crowd 
of  people,  partly  ran  before,  partly  followed 
after  me.  I thought  it  heft  not  to  ling,  but  look- 
ing round  afked  abruptly,  “ Why  do  you  look 
as  if  you  had  never  feen  me  before?  Many  of 
you  have  feen  me  in  the  neighbouring  church, 
both  preaching  and  adminillring  the  facrament.” 
I then  began.  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  while  he  may  be 
found ; call  upon  him  while  he  is  near.  None 
interrupted  at  all  or  made  any  dillurbance,  till 
as  I was  drawing  to  a conclufion,  a big  man 
thruft  in,  with  three  or  four  more,  and  bad 
them  “ Bring  out  the  engine.”  Our  friends  de- 
fired  me  to  remove  into  a yard  juft  by  ; which 
I did,  and  concluded  in  peace. 

About  fix  we  reached  Davy-holme,  five  miles 
from  Manchefter,  where  I wa«  much  refrefhed 
both  in  preaching  and  meeting  the  focietv. 
Their  neighbours  here  ufed  to  difturb  them 
much.  But  a juftice  of  peace  v/ho  feared  God, 
B 5 granting 


[ 34  J 

granting  them  a warrant  for  the  chief  of  the 
rioters,  from  that  time  they  were  in  peace. 

Frid.  8.  I preached  at  Oldfield-brow  to  a 
much  larger  congregation,  though  many  ofthem 
had  been  hurt  by  doubtful  difputations.  But 
they  now  began  again  to  take  root  downward 
and  bear  fruit  upward. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Booth-bank  ; 
among  a quiet  and  loving  people.  But  a famous 
Baptifl  teacher,  Jofeph  Pickup  by  name,  had 
lately  occafioned  fome  difturbance  among  them. 
He  had  given  them  a particular  account,  of  a 
conference  he  had  had  with  me  on  the  road  ; 
“ What  he  faid,  and  what  I faid  : and  how  he 
had  flopt  my  mouth  with  the  feventeenth  arti- 
cle.” In  the  morning  I told  them  the  plain  facf. 

1 had  overtook  him  on  the  road,  and.  we  rode 
half  a bow-fhot  together,  but  did  not  exchange 
five  fentences  till  we  parted. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Mr.  Anderton’s 
near  Northwiche  : feveral  of  the  gay  and  rich 
were  there  ; I continued  praying  and  talking 
with  them  till  paft  two.  We  were  then  oblig- 
ed to  take  horfe  for  Allbury. 

Here  likewife  1 found  an  open  door,  though 
many  fine  people  were  of  the  congregation.  But 
they  behaved  as  people  fearing  God  ; as  feriouf- 
ly  as  the  poor  ploughmen. 

Sund.  10.  I preached  at  Aftbury  at  five ; aird 
at  feven  proclaimed  at  Cougleton-crofs, 

Chrijl,  our  wijdoin,  and  righteou/nefs,  andfanc- 
iification,  and  redemption.  It  rained  moft  of  the 

lime 


C 35  ] 

time  that  I was  fpeaking.  But  that  did  not  hin- 
der abundance  of  people  from  quietly  attending. 
Between  twelve  and  one  I preached  near  Mac- 
clesfield, and  in  the  evening  at  AVoodly-green. 

Mond.  11.  I preached  at  noon  about  a mile 
from  Afhton,  and  in  the  evening  at  Stahley-hall. 
Tuef.  13.  I rode  to  Bongs,  and  explained  to  a 
ferious  people,  the  parable  of  the  prodigal  fon. 
In  the  evening  I exhorted  them  at  Chinley, 
EarneJUy  to  contend  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to 
the  faints. 

Wed.  13.  I preached  at  noon  in  the  High- 
peak,  and  in  the  evening  at  Sheffield.  Thur. 
iq.  1 rode  to  Barley-hall.  As  foon  as  I had 
done  preaching,  William  Shent  told  me,  he  was 
juft  come  from  Leeds,  where  he  had  left  Mr. 
Perronet  in  a high  fever.  I had  no  time  to 
fpare.  However  at  three  in  the  morning,  on 
Frid.  1.3.  I fet  out,  and  between  feven  and  eight 
came  to  Leeds.  By  the  bleffing  of  God  he  re- 
covered from  that  hour. 

Being  willing  to  redeem  the  time,  I preach- 
ed at  noon,  and  then  hallened  back  to  Barlev- 
hall,  where  I preached  at  feven,  on  Glorfy  God 
with  your  bodies  and  your  fpirits,  which  art 
God's. 

Sat.  16.  I fpent  an  hour  or  ttvo  at  Notting- 
ham, and  then  rode  on  to  Markfield.,  At  eight 
I preached.  The  church  was  pretty  well  filled, 
and  God  gave  a bleffing  with  his  word. 

Sund.  17.  Defiring  to-  improve  the  time,  tve 

B 6 had. 


[ 3^  ] 

had,  I preached  at  eleven  in  the  morning,  and 
in  the  evening.  Mond.  i8.  I rode  to  Wednef- 
bury,  and  after  two  or  three  days  fpent  there 
and  at  Birmingham,  on  Thur.  21.  Came  to 
London. 

Sund.  31.  I preached  at  feven  in  Moorfields 
to  a large  and  well  behaved  congregation.  Mr. 
Baleman  defired  me  to  preach  a charily  fermon 
at  his  church,  St.  Bartholomew  the  Great,  in 
the  afternoon.  But  it  was  with  much  difficulty 
that  I got  in  ; not  only  the  church  itfelf,  but  all 
the  entrances  to  it,  being  fo  thronged  with  peo- 
ple ready  to  tread  upon  one  another.  The  great 
noife  made  me  afraid  at  firll,  that  my  labour 
would  be  in  vain.  But  that  fear  was  foon  over  ; 
for  all  was  Hill,  as  foon  as  the  fervice  began. 
I hope  God  gave  i»s  this  day  a token  for  good. 
If  he  will  work,  who  fhall  flay  his  hand  ? 

* Thur.  June  4.  I reduced  the  fixteen  flewards 
to  feven  : to  whom  were  given  the  following 
inflruflions. 

1.  You  are  to  be  men  full  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 
and  wifdom,  that  you  may  do  all  things,  in  a 
manner  acceptable  to  God. 

2.  You  are  to  be  prefent  every  Tuefday  and 
Thurfday  morning,  in  order  to  tranfaQihe  tem- 
poral affairs  of  tlie  lociety. 

3.  You  are  to  begin  and  end  every  meeting 
with  earned  prayer  unto  God,  for  a blcffing 
on  all  your  undertakings. 

4.  You  are  to  produce  your  accounts  the  firft 

Tuefday 


[ 37  } 

Tuefday  in  every  month,  that  they  may  be  trani^ 
cribed  into  the  ledger. 

5.  You  are  to  take  it  in  turn,  month  by  month 
to  be  chairman.  The  chairman  is  to  fee,  that  all 
the  rules  be  punflually  obferved,  and  immedi- 
ately to  check  him  who  breaks  any  of  them. 

6.  You  are  to  do  nothing  without  the  con- 
fent  of  the  minifler,  either  atlually  had,  or  rea- 
fonably  prefumed. 

7.  You  are  to  confider,  whenever  you  meet, 
“ God  is  here.”  Therefore,  be  deeply  ferious. 
Utter  no  trifling  word.  Speak,  as  in  his  pre- 
fence, and  to  the  glory  of  his  great  name. 

8.  When  any  thing  is  debated,  let  one  at 
once  fland  up  and  fpeak,  the  refl  giving  attentioim 
And  let  him  fpeak  juft  loud  enough  to  be  heard, 
in  love  and  the  fpirit  of  meeknefs. 

9.  You  are  continually  to  pray  and  endeavour, 
that  a holv  harmony  of  foul  may  in  all  tilings 
fubfift  among  yon  : that  in  every  ftep  you  may 
keep  the  unity  of  the  fpirit,  in  the  bond  of 
peace. 

10.  In  all  debates,  you  are  to  watch  over 
your  fpirits,  avoiding  as  fire,  all  clamour  and 
contention,  being  fmft  to  hear^Jlaw  tofpeak\ 
in  honour  every  man  preferring  another  before 
himfelf. 

11.  If  yoti  cannot  relieve,  do  not  grieve  the 
poor.  Give  them  foft  words,  if  nothing  elfe. 
Abftain  from  either  four  looks,  or  harfh  words. 
Let  them  be  glad  to  come,  even  though  they 

ihould 


[ 3S  ] 

fhould  go  empty  away.  Put  yourfelf  in  the 
place  of  every  poorman.  And  deal  with  hun  as 
you  would  God  fhould  deal  with  you. 

Thefe  inftruflions,  we  whofe  names  are  un- 
der-written (being  the  prefent  itewards  of  the  fo- 
ciety  at  London)  do  heartily  receive,  and  ear- 
neftly  defire  to  conform  to.  In  witnefs  where- 
of we  have  fet  our  hands. 

N.  B.  If  any  fteward  Ihall  break  any  of  the 
preceding  rules,  after  having  been  thrice  admo- 
niflied  by  the  chairman  (whereof  notice  is  to  be 
immediately  given  the  minifter)  he  is  no  longer 
fteward. 

* Sat.  6*  I appointed  to  fpeak  with  thofe  who 
had  applied  to  us  on  a phyfical  account.  I 
found  there  had  been  about  fix  hundred,  in  about 
fix  months.  More  than  three  hundred  of  thefe 
came  twice  or  thrice,  and  we  faw  no  more  of 
them.  About  twenty  of  thofe  who  had  con- 
ftantly  attended,  did  not  feem  to  be  either  bet- 
ter or  worfe.  Above  two  hundred  were  fenfi- 
bly  better.  And  fifty-one  throughly  cured.  The 
entire  expence  from  the  beginning  till  this  time, 
was  about  thirty  pounds. 

Sund.  14.  I preached  at  St.  Bartholomew’s 
again.  1 admire  the  behaviour  of  this  people. 
None  betrays  either  lightnefs  or  inattention. 
Surely  all  the  feed  fawn  here  will  not  be  loft. 

Mond.  15.  Our  conference  began,  and  end- 
ed on  Sat.  20.  The  minutes  of  all  that  paft 

therein. 


C 39  ] 

therein,  were  fome  time  after  tranfcribed  and 
publifhed. 

Sund.  21.  I preached  once  more  at  St.  Bar- 
tholomew’s, on  the  gofpe!  for  the  day,  the  flory 
of  Dives  and  Lazarus.  I was  conftrained  to 
fpeak  very  plain  and  ftrong  words.  But  God 
gave  the  audience  ears  to  hear:  fo  that  they  ap- 
peared as  far  from  anger  on  tlie  one  hand,  as 
from  fleepinefs  on  the  other. 

After  preaching  at  the  chappel  in  the  after- 
noon I fet  out  for  Brentford  with  Robert  Swin- 
dells. Tlie  next  day  we  reached  Marlborough ; 
where  one  in  the  room  beneath  us  was  fwearing 
defperately.  Mr.  Swindells  ftept  down  and- put 
into  his  hand  the  paper  intituled,  “ Swear  not 
at  all.”  He  thanked  him  and  promifed  to  fwear 
no  more.  And  he  did  not  while  he  was  in  the 
houfe , 

Tuef.  23.  We  took  horfe  at  three,  breakfaft- 
ed  at  Chippenham  and  dined  at  Kingfwood, 
whence  I walked  to  Brillol.  About  feven  I 
went  to  the  Old  Orchard,  where  were  rich  and 
poor,  a great  multitude.  We  had  a folemn 
and  a joyful  hour.  Surely  thefe  fields  are  white 
unto  the  harveft ! 

Wed.  24.  We  rode  to  Beercrocomb,  hoping 
to  reach  Taviftock  the  next  day.  So  we  fet 
out  at  three.  The  rain  began  at  four.  We 
reached  Coleftock  droping  wet,  before  feven. 
The  rain  ceafed  while  we  were  in  the  houfe, 
but  began  when  we  took  horfe,  and  attended  us 

all 


[ 40  ] 

all  the  way  to  Exeter.  While  we  flayed  here 
to  dry  our  cloaths,  I took  the  opportunity  of 
writing  “ A word  to  a freeholder.”  Soon  after 
th  ree  we  fet  out.  But  it  was  near  eight  before 
we  Could  reach  Oakhampton. 

frid.  26.  We  came  to  Taviflock  before  noon. 
But  it  being  market-day,  I did  not  preach  till 
five  in  the  evening.  The  rain  began  almoft  as 
foon  as  we  began  finging,  and  drove  many  out 
of  the  field.  After  preaching  (leaving  Mr.  Swin- 
dells there)  I went  on  for  Plymouth-Dock. 

* Within  two  miles  of  Plymouth  one  over- 
took and  informed  us,  that  the  night  before,  all 
ihe  dock  w^as  in  an  uproar  ; and  a conflable,  en- 
deavouring to  keep  the  peace,  was  beaten  and 
much  hurt.  As  we  were  entring  the  Dock,  one 
met  us  and  de fired  we  would  go  the  back  way. 
” For,  faid  he,  there  are  thoufands  of  people 
waiting,  about  Mr.  Hide's  door.”  We  rode  up 
flrait  into  the  midft  of  them.  They  fainted  us 
with  three  huzza’s,  after  which  I alighted,  took 
feveral  of  them  by  the  hand,  and  began  to  talk 
■with  them.  I vvould  gladly  have  part  an  hour 
among  them,  and  believe  if  I had,  there  had 
been  an  end  of  the  riot.  But  the  dav  being  far 
fpent  (for  it  was  part  nine  o’clock)  I was  perfuad- 
ed  to  go  in.  The  mob  then  recovered  their  fpi- 
rits,  and  fought  valiantly  with  the  doors  and 
windows.  But  about  ten  they  were  wearv  and 
went  every  man  to  his  own  home. 

Sat.  27.  I preached  at  four,  and  then  fpoke 

feveral^ 


[ 4*  i 

feverally  to  part  of  the  fociety.  As  yet  I have 
found  only  one  perfon  among  them,  who  knew 
the  love  of  God  before  my  brother  came.  No 
wonder  the  devil  Avas  fo  hill : for  his  goods  were 
in  peace. 

* About  hx  in  the  evening  I went  to  the 
place,  where  I preached  ibe  lah  year.  A little 
before  we  had  ended  the  hymn,  came  i/ie  lieute- 
nant, a famous  man,  with  his  retinue  of  foldiers, 
drummers  and  mob.  When  the  dmms  ceafed, 
a gentleman-barber  began  to  fpeak ; but  his 
voice  was  quickly  drowned  in  the  fhouts  of  the 
multitude,  Avho  grew  fiercer  and  fiercer,  as 
their  numbers  increafed.  After  waiting  about 
a quarter  of  an  hour,  perceiving  the  violence 
of  the  rabble  hill  increafing,  I walked  down  in- 
to the  thickeh  of  them,  and  took  the  captain  of 
the  mob  by  the  hand.  He  immediately  faid, 
“ Sir,  I will  fee  you  fafe  home.  Sir,  no  man 
fiiall  touch  you.  Gentlemen,  hand  off.  Give 
back.  I will  knock  the  firh  man  dowm  that 
touches  him.”  We  walked  on  in  great  peace  j 
my  conduflor  every  now  and  then  hretching 
out  his  neck  (he  was  a v^ery  tall  man)  and  look- 
ing round,  to  fee  it  any  behaved  rudely,  till  we 
came  to  Mr.  Hide’s  door.  We  then  parted  in 
much  love.  I hayed  in  the  hreet  near  half  an 
hour  after  he  was  gone,  talking  with  the  people, 
who  had  now  forgot  their  anger,  and  went  away 
in  high  good-humour. 

Sund  28.  I preached  at  five  on  the  Common 

-X  to 


C 42  ] 


to -a  well-behaved,  earnefl;  congregation;  and 
at  eight  near  the  Room,  on  Seek  ye  the  Lord, 
while  he  may  be  found.  The  congregation  was 
much  larger  than  before,  and  equally  ferious 
and  attentive.  At  ten  I went  to  church.  Mr. 
Barlow  preached  an  urefiil  fermon,  on  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a finner.  And  a thundring  one 
in  the  afternoon,  on  Where  their  worm  dieth  not, 
nor  their  Jire  is  not  quenched. 

* At  one  I preached  again  near  the  room  from 
thofe  words  in  the  gofpel  for  the  day.  Come,  for 
all  things  are  ready.  And  the  hearts  of  all  that 
were  round  about,  feemed  to  bow  down  before 
the  Lord.  I defigned  to  have  preached  on 
Stoke’s-hlll  at  five,  but  the  rain  would  not  per- 
mit. However  before  fix  I went  to  the  head  of 
the  town,  where  we  had  a large  and  venerable 
alfembly.  The  fear  of  God  feemed  to  fpread  it- 
felfover  all,  and  they  received  what  was  fpoken 
as  the  word  of  God.  Yet  once  more  he  hath 
opened  the  door,  that  the  gofpel  may  have  free 
courfc  here  alfo. 

Mond.  29.  I took  horfe  between  three  and 
four,  and  reached  Perrin-will,  three  miles  be- 
yond Truro,  about  fix.  I preached  to  a very 
large  congregation  at  feven,  and  the  word  was 
as  the  rain  on  the  tender  herb. 

Tuef.  30.  We  came  to  St.  Ives  before  morn- 
ing prayers,  and  w'alked  to  church  without  fo 
much  as  one  huzza.  How  ftrangely  has  one 
year  changed  the  fcene  in  Cornwall  ? This  is 

now 


[ 43  ] 

now  a peaceable,  nay,  honourable  flation. 
They  give  us  good  words  almoh  in  every  place. 
What  have  we  done,  that  the  world  fliould  be 
fo  civil  to  us  ? 

Wed.  July  i.  I fpoke  feverally  to  all  thofe 
who  had  votes  in  theenluing  eleftion.  - I found 
them  fuch  as  I defired.  Not  one  would  even 
eat  or  drink  at  the  expence  of  him  for  whom 
he  voted.  Five  guineas  had  been  given  to  W. 
C.  but  he  returned  them  immediately.  T.  M. 
pofitively  refufed  to  accept  any  thing.  And 
when  he  heard,  that  his  mother  had  received 
money  privately,  he  could  not  reft  till  fhe  gave 
him  the  three  guineas,  which  he  inftantly  fent 
back. 

; Thurf.  2.  Was  the  day  of  eleflion  for  parlia- 
meint-men.  It  was  begun  and  ended  without  any 
hurrv  at  all.  I had  a large  congregation  in  the 
evening,  among  whom  two  or  three  roared  for 
the  difquietnefs  of  their  heart:  as  did  many  at 
the  meeting  which  followed;  particularly  thofe 
who  had  loft  their  firfl  love. 

Sat.  4.  About  two  I preached  in  the  ftreet  at 
Redruth.  The  congregation  was  large  and 
deeply  attentive.  Indeed  there  are  now  fcarce 
any  in  the  town  (but  gentlemen)  who  are  not 
convinced  of  the  truth. 

At  feven  I preached  at  Stithians,  and  at  five 
in  the  morning.  Sund,  We  rode  thence  to 
St.  Agnes.  At  two  I preached  to  a large  multi- 
tude of  quiet  hearers,  many  of  whom  feemed 

deeply 


[ 44  ]' 

deeply  affefled.  Yet  foon  after  I had  done,  fome 
began  to  divert  themfelves  with  throwing  dirt 
and  clods.  Mr.  Shepherd's  horfe  tvas  frighted 
at  this,  and  as  one  of  them  {looped  down,  leap- 
ed clear  over  him.  I’he  man  fcreamed  amain, 
but  finding  himfelf  not  hurt,  he  and  his  com- 
rades poured  a fbower  of  flones  after  him. 
Knowing  nothing  of  the  matter,  I rode  foon 
after  through  the  midfl  of  them;  and  none  lift- 
ed up  a hand  or  opened  his  mouth. 

About  half  liour  after  five  I began  at  Gwenap. 
I was  afraid  my  voice  would  not  fuffice  for  fuch 
an  iinmeEfe  multitude.  But  mv  fear  was  ground- 
less, as  the  evening  was  quite  calm,  and  the 
people  all  attention. 

It  was  more  difficult  to  be  heard  in  meeting 
the  fociety,  amidft  the  cries  of  thofe  on  the 
one  hand,  who  were  pierced  through  as  with  a 
fword,  and  of  thofe  on  the  other,  svho  were  fil- 
led with  joy  unfpeakable. 

Mond.  6.  I preached  about  twelve  at  Bray. 
But  neither-the  houfe  nor  the  yard  would  con- 
tain the  congregation.  And  all  were  feiious. 
The  fcoffers  are  vaniffied  away.  I fcarcc  faw 
one  in  the  county. 

I preached  in  the  evening  at  Cambourn  to  an 
equally  ferious  congregation.  I looked  about 
for  John  Rogers  the  champion  who  had  fo  often 
fworn.  *'  I flrould  never  more  preach  in  that 
pariffi.”  But  it  feems,  he  had  given  up  the 

caufe, 


[ 45  ] 

caufe,  faying,  One  may  as  well  blow  againft 
the  wind.” 

Tuef.  7.  I preached  at  Si.  Ives.  Wed.  8.  at 
Sithney.  * On  Thurfday  the  Rewards  of  all  the 
focieties  met.  I now  diligently  inquired,  what 
exhorters  there  weie;iii  each  fociety  ? Whether 
they  had  gifts  meet  lor  the  work  ? Whether 
their  were  eminently  holy  r*  And  wheiher 
there  appeared  any  fruit  of  their  labour  ? I 
found  upon  the  whole,  1.  That  there  were  no 
lefs  than  eighteen  exhorters  in  the  county;  2. 
That  three  ol  thele  had  no  gifts  at  all  for  the 
work,  neither  natural,  nor  lupernatural ; 3. 

That  a fourth  had  neither  gifts  nor  grace,  but 
was  a dull,  empty,  felf-conceited  man:  4.  That 
a fifth  had  confiderable  gihs,  but  had  evddently 
made  Ihipwieck  of  the  grace  of  God ; thefe 
therefore  I determined  immediately  to  fet  afide, 
and  advife  our  focieties,  not  to  hear  them  ; 5. 
That  J.  B,  A.  L,  and  J.  W.  had  gifts  and  grace, 
and  had  been  much  bleft  in  the  work.  LaRly, 
That  the  reft  might  be  helpful  when  there  was 
no  preacher,  in  their  own  or  the  neighbouring 
focieties : provided  they  would  take  no  ftep 
without  the  advice  of  thofe  who  had  more  ex- 
perience than  themfelves. 

Frid.  10.  I preached  at  Gulval-crofs,  in  the 
midway,  between  Penzance  and  h-Iarazion. 
Sat.  11.  1 examined  the  clafles  at  St.  juft,  efta- 
blilhed  and  fettled  in  the  grace  of  God. 

Sund.  12.  At  five  I preached  at  St.  juft  : at 

twelve 


[ 46  ] 


twelve  to  the  largeft  congregation  I ever  faw  at 
Morva.  1 then  went  to  church  at  Zennor,  and 
when  the  fervice  was  ended,  preached  under  the 
church-yard  wall. 

Hence  I rode  to  Newlin,  a little  town  on  the 
fouth-fea,  about  a mile  from  Penzance.  At  five 
I walked  to  a rifing  ground,  near  the  fea-fhore, 
where  was  a fmooth,  white  fand  to  Hand  on. 
An  immenfe  multitude  of  people  was  gathered 
together  ; but  their  voice  was  as  the  roaring  of 
the  fea.  I began  to  fpeak,  and  the  noife  died 
away.  But  before  1 had  ended  my  praver,  fortae 
poor  wretches  of  Penzance  began  curfing  and 
fwearing,  an'd  thrufting  the  people  off  the  bank. 
In  two  minutes  I was  thrown  into  the  mldfl  of 
them;  when  one  of  Newlin,  a bitter  oppofer 
till  then,  turned  about  and  fwore, , “None  fhall 
meddle  with  the  man  ; I will  lofe  my  life  firfl.” 
Many  others  were  of  his  mind.  So  I walked  an 
hundred  yards  foiward,  and  finifhed  my  fermon 
without  any  interruption. 

Mond.  13.  I preached  at  Terdinny,  in  Ber- 
yan  parilh,  where  was  a large  and  earnefl  con- 
gregation, notwithflanding  the  wonderful  flories 
which  they  have  frequently  heard  related  in  the 
pulpit  for  certain  truths.  In  the  morning  I 
wrote  as  follows. 

Terdinnv,  July  iq,  lyqj- 

Rev.  SIR, 

IWas  exceedingly  furprized  when  I w'as  in- 
formed yeflerday,  of  your  -affirming  -ptab- 
1 lickly 


t 47  ] 

iickly  in  the  church,  in  the  face  of  a whole  con- 
gregation, “ Now  Wefley  has  fent  down  for  an 
hundred  pounds  ; and  it  mull  be  raifed  dire£lly. 
Nay, it  is  true.”  O fir,  is  this  polfible  ? Can  it  be 
that  you  fliould  be  fo  totally  void  (I  will  not  fay 
of  confcience,  of  religion,  but)  of  good-nature, 
as  to  credit  fuch  a tale  ? And  of  good  manners 
and  common  fenfe,  as  thus  to  repeat  it  ? 

I mull  beg,  that  you  would  either  jullify  or 
retraft  this ; (for  it  is  a point  of  no  fmall  concern) 
and  that  I may  know  what  you  propofe  to  do, 
before  I fet  out  for  London,  I am 
Rev.  SIR, 

Your  brother  and fervant  for  Chrif  s fake. 
But  he  never  favoured  me  wuth  an  anfwer. 

Sat.  25.  I was  welcomed  into  Port  Ifaac  by 
more  company  than  I expefled.  The  man  who 
had  fome  time  fince  headed  the  mob,  when 
thev  left  Edward  Grenfill  for  dead,  had  gathered 
all  his  troops,  and  received  us  as  foon  as  we  en- 
tred  the  fiill  llreet.  They  all  attended  us  to 
Mr.  Scantlebury’s  door,  who  (Mr.  T.  informed 
me)  defired  I would  lodge  athishoufe.  I knock- 
ed long  at  the  door,  but  no  one  anfwered  : at 
length,  the  mafler  of  the  houfe  appeared,  an 
hoary,  venerable  old  man.  I alked,  “ Prav,  is 
Mr.  T.  here  ?”  He  replied,  “ Mr.  T.  is  not  here. 
But  pray  what  may  thv  name  be  I anfwered, 
“ My  name  is  John  Wefley.”  He  faid,  “ I 
have  heard  of  thee.”  Perceiving  that  he  had 
no  more  to  fay,  I turned  back  to  another  houfe. 

The 


[ 48  ] 

The  mob  followed,  hollowing  and  fhouting ; but 
none  of  them  offered  to  flrike,  or  even  throw 
any  thing.  Only  their  captain,  after  fome  hard 
words,  lifted  up  his  flick  at  me  once  or  twice. 
But  one  of  his  companions  interpofed.  He  then 
went  quietly  away. 

After  fpending  half  an  hour,  we  rode  on  to 
Camelford.  We  flopt  at  a friend’s  houfe  near 
the  town,  and  between  four  and  five  walked  to 
Mr.  M.’s  who  had  often  defired,  that  if  Mr. 
Wefley  came,  he  would  preach  either  in  his 
houfe  or  bowling-green.  But  word  came  from 
the  mavor,  while  1 was  there,  “ That  if  I did 
preach,  he  would  profecute  him.”  f inding  no 
convenient  place  could  be  procured,  we  thought 
it  bell  to  go  on  to  Mr.  Bennet’s.  As  I walked 
through  the  town,  w'e  had  a large  train  to  at- 
tend us.  Only  one  Hone  llruck  me  on  the  fhoul- 
der.  f ifty  or  a hundred  waited  upon  us  about 
half  a mile  ; we  then  went  on  quieilv  to  Tre- 
geer. 

Sund.  26.  I preached  atTamerton  church  in 
the  morning,  Mary  Week  in  the  afternoon,  and 
St.  Ginny’s  in  the  evening.  Mond.  27.  in  the 
evening  1 preached  in  Trefmore  church,  and  at 
five  on  Tiiefday  and  Wednefday  morning. 
Tuefday  evening  I preached  in  Laneafl  church; 
on  Wednefday  noon,  on  St.  Stephen’s-down, 
near  Launcefton.  Thence  we  rode  to  Cockern- 
wells  ; and  on  Thurlday  in  the  afternoon,  came 
once  more  to  Beercrocomb. 


2 


Frid. 


[ 49  3 


Frid.  31.  About  noon  I preached  at  Taun- 
ton. Much  oppofition  was  expe£led,  and  feveral 
young  gentlemen  came,  as  it  feemed,  with  thA 
defign  ; but  they  did  not  put  it  in  execution. 
From  hence  we  rode  to  Bridgwater : and  even 
at  this  dry,  barren  place,  God  largely  watered  us 
with  the  dew  of  heaven.  After  preaching  I rode 
to  Middlefey,  intending  only  to  meet  the  fociety. 
But  notice  had  been  given,  that  I would  preach 
there.  So  I gave  an  exhortation  to  all  that  were 
prefent. 

Sat.  Aug.  1.  I preached  here  foon  after  four; 
about  noon  at  Waywdck,  and  in  the  evening  at 
Briftol. 

Sund.  2.  I preached  in  Kingfwood  at  eight ; 
in  the  afternoon  at  Connam  ; and  at  five  in  the 
Old  Orchard,  to  the  largeft  congregation  which 
I ever  remember  to  have  feen  at  Brihol.  What 
hath  God  wrought  in  this  city  ! x\nd  yet  perhaps 
the  hundredth  part  of  his  work  does  not  now 
apjrear. 

7'uef.  4.  I fet  out  for  Ireland.  We  rode  that 
day  (but  it  was  hard  labour)  to  Builth,  where  I 
preached  in  the  evening  on  the  prodigal  fon. 
Wednef.  5.  Taking  horfe  early  in  the  morning, 
we  rode  over  the  rough  mountains  of  Radnor- 
Ihire  and  Montgomeryfhire,  into  Ivlerioneth- 
fhire.  * In  the  evening  I was  furprized  with 
one  of  the  fineft  profpecis,  in  its  kind,  that  ever 
I faw  in  my  life.  We  rode  in  a green  vale, 
Ihadcd  with  rows  of  trees,  which  made  an  ar- 
VoL.  XXIX*  C hour 


[ 50  ] 


hour  for  feveral  miles  : the  river  laboured  along 
on  our  left  hand,  through  broken  rocks  of  every 
l^ze,  lhape  and  colour.  On  the  other  fide  of  the 
river,  the  mountain  rofe  to  an  immenfe  height, 
almoft  perpendicular ; and  yet  the  tall,  flreight 
oaks  flood,  rank  above  rank,  from  the  bottom  to 
the  very  top  ; only  here  and  there,  where  the 
mountain  was  not  fo  lleep,  were  interpofed 
paftures  or  fields  of  corn  ; at  a diftance,  as  far 
as  the  eye  could  reach,  as  it  were  by  way  of 
contrail, 

“ A mountain  huge  uprear’d 
“ Its  broad,  bare  back 

with  vail,  rugged  rocks  hanging  over  its  brow, 
that  feemed  to  nod,  portending  ruin. 

Thurf.  6,  Between  three  and  four  in  the  af- 
ternoon, we  with  fome  difficulty,  reached  Car- 
narvon. This  has  the  face  of  a fortified  town, 
having  walls  (fuch  as  they  are}  and  a callle  as 
confiderable  as  that  of  Cardiff.  Here  we  parted 
with  our  guide  and  interpreter,  Mr.  Philips,  Mr. 
Tucker  and  I fet  out  for  Holyhead.  We  in- 
tended to  crofs  over  into  Anglefey,  at  Baldon- 
ferry,  four  miles  from  Carnarvon.  But  not  be- 
ing able  to  inquire  our  t^’ay  (as  we  fpoke  no 
Welfii,  and  the  country  people  no  Engliffi}  we 
could  not  find  wliere  the  ferry  was,  till  we  faw 
ibe  boat  coming  over. 


We 


C ] 

We  went  into  the  boat  about  fun-fet,  and 
lodged  that  night  at  a little  inn  by  the  water- 
hde. 

Frid.  7.  We  made  a little  flop  at  Llangevenye, 
feven  miles  from  the  ferry.  We  fhould  have 
hired  a guide,  to  have  fteered  over  the  fands ; 
but  it  was  quite  out  of  my  mind,  till  we  came 
to  them.  So  we  went  (trait  a-crofs  and  came 
to  Holyhead,  without  any  (top  or  hindrance  at 
all. 

Satur.  8.  Finding  one  of  the  packet-boats 
ready,  we  went  on  board  about  eight  o’clock  in 
the  morning.  It  was  a dead  calm  when  we  row- 
ed out  of  the  harbour.  But  about  two  in  the  af- 
ternoon the  wind  fprung  up,  and  continued  till 
near  four  on  Sunday  morning,  when  we  were 
within  fight  of  the  Irifh  (hore. 

* I could  not  but  obferve,  1.  That  while  we 
tvere  failing  with  a fre(h  gale,  there  was  no 
wind  at  all  a mile  off ; but  a fhip  which  lay 
abrcaft  of  us  was  quite  becalmed,  till  we  left  her 
out  of  fight:  2.  That  a French  privateer,  which 
for  feveral  days  had  taken  every  (liip  which 
failed  on  that  coaft,  was  taken  and  brought 
into  Dublin  bay,  the  very  morning  we  arrived 
there. 

Before  ten  we  came  to  St.  George’s  key. 
Soon  after  we  landed,  hearing  the  bells  ringing 
for  church,  I went  thither  direftly.  Mr.  Lunell 
came  to  the  key  juft  after  I was  gone,  and  left 
word  at  the  houfe  were  our  things  were,  “ He 
C 2 would 


C 52,  ] 

would  call  again  at  one.”  He  did  fo,  and  took 
us  to  his  houfe.  About  three  I wrote  a line  to 
the  curate  of  St.  Mary’s ; who  fent  me  word, 
“ He  fliould  be  glad  of  my  alTiftance.”  So  I 
preached  there  (another  gentleman  reading 
prayers)  to  as  gay  and  fenfelefs  a congregation  as 
ever  I faw.  After  fermon  Mr.  R.  thanked  me 
very  affeftionately,  and  defired  I would  favour 
him  with  my  company  in  the  morning. 

Mond.  10.  I met  the  fociety  at  €ve,  and  at 
fix  preached  on  Repent  and  believe  the  goJpeL 
The  room,  large  as  it  was,  would  not  contain 
the  people,  who  all  feemed  to  tafte  the  good 
word. 

Between  eight  and  nine  I went  to  ^L•.  R. 
(the  curate  of  St.  Mary’s)  he  profeft  abundance 
of  good-will,  commended  my  fermon  in  ftrong 
terms,  and  begged  he  might  fee  me  again  the 
next  morning.  But  at  the  fame  time  he  expreft 
the  moll  rooted  prejudice  againfl  lay-preachers, 
cr  preaching  out  of  a church ; and  faid,  the 
archbilhop  ol  Dublin  was  refolved  to  fuffer  no 
fuch  irregularities  in  his  diocefe. 

I went  to  our  brethren,  that  we  might  pour 
eut  our  fouls  before  God.  I then  went  llrait  to 
wait  upon  the  archbilhop  myfelf.  But  he  was 
aone  out  of  town. 

In  the  afternoon  a gentlemen  defired  to  fpeak 
with  me.  He  was  troubled  tliat  it  was  not  with 
hun  as  in  times  pafi: ; when  at  the  age  of  four- 
teen, the  power  of  God  came  mightily  upon 

him, 


[ 53  ] 

him,  conftraining  him  to  rife  out  of  bed,  to 
pour  out  his  prayers  and  tears,  from  an  heart 
overflowed  with  love  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  For  fome  months  he  fcarce  knew  whe- 
ther he  was  in  the  body,  continually  walking 
and  talking  with  God.  He  has  now  an  abiding 
peace ; but  cannot  reft,  till  the  love  of  God 
again  fills  his  heart. 

Between  fix  and  feven  1 went  to  Marlbo- 
rough-ftreet.  The  houfe  wherein  we  preached, 
was  originally  defigned  for  a Lutheran  church, 
and  will  contain  about  four  hundred  people. 
But  four  or  five  limes  the  number  may  ftand  in 
the  yard.  Many  of  the  rich  were  there,  and 
many  minifters  of  every  denomination.  I 
preached  on  The  fcriplure  hath  concluded  all  un- 
der Jin,  and  fpoke  clofely  and  ftrongly.  But 
none  at  all  feemed  to  be  offended.  If  my  bro- 
ther or  I could  have  been  here  for  a few  months, 
I queftion  if  there  might  not  have  been  a larger 
fociety  here,  than  even  in  London  itfelf. 

Tuef.  11. 1 waited  on  the  archbiftiop  at  New- 
bridge, ten  miles  from  Dublin.  I had  the  favour 
of  converffng  with  him  two  or  three  hours ; in 
which  I anfwered  abundance  of  obje&ions.  In 
the  evening  I returned  to  Mr.  Lunell’s.  John 
Trembath  preached  at  Marlborough-ftreet,  to  a 
large  congregation  both  of  laity  and  clergy,  who 
behaved  with  much  decency. 

Wednef.  12.  I purpofely  delayed  examining 
C 3 the 


[ 54  ] 

the  clafles,  till  I had  gone  through  the  rules  ol 
\he  fociety,  part  of  which  I explained  to  them 
•at  large,  with  the  reafons  of  them,  every  morn- 
ing. 

'Ihurf.  13.  We  walked  in  the  afternoon  to  fee 
two  perfons  that  were  fick  near  Phoenix-park, 
That  part  of  it  which  joins  to  the  city,  is  fprink- 
led  up  and  down  with  trees,  not  unlike  Hyde- 
park.  But  about  a mile  from  the  town  is  a thick 
grove  of  old,  tall  oaks  ; and  in  the  centre  of 
this,  a round,  open  green  (from  which  are  vif- 
la’s  all  four  ways]  with  a handfome  Hone  pillar 
in  the  midft,  havinga  phcenix  on  the  top. 

I continued  preaching,  morning  and  evening, 
to  many  more  than  the  houfe  would  contain,  and 
had  more  and  more  reafon  to  hope,  they  would 
not  all  be  unfruitful  hearers. 

Frid.  14.  I procured  a genuine  account  of  the 
great  Irifh  malTacre  in  i6.ji.  Surely  never  was 
there  fuch  a tranfaftion  before,  from  the  begin- 
ning  of  the  world  ! More  than  two  hundred 
thoufand  men,  women  and  children  butchered 
within  a few  months  in  cool  blood,  and  with 
fuch  clrcumftances  of  cruelty,  as  make  one’s 
blood  run  cold  I It  is  well  if  God  has  not  a con- 
troverfy  with  the  nation,  on  this  very  account, 
to  this  day. 

Satur.  15.  I hayed  at  home  and  fpoke  to  all 
that  came.  But  I found  fcarce  any  Irilh  among 
them.  At  leah  ninety-nine  in  an  hundred  of  the 
native  Irilh,  remain  in  the  religion  of  their  fore- 
fathers. 


[ 55  D 

fathers.  The  proteftants,  whether  in  Dublin  or 
elfewhere,  are  almoft  all  tranfplanted  lately  from 
England.  Nor  is  it  any  wonder,  that  thofe  who 
are  born  papifts,  generally  live  and  die  fuch; 
when  the  proteftants  can  find  no  better  ways  to 
convert  them,  than  penal  laws  and  afts  of  par- 
liament. 

Sund.  i6.  We  went  to  St.  James’s  church  in 
the  morning  (there  being  no  fervice  at  St.  Pa- 
trick’s) and  in  the  afternoon  to  Chrift-church. 
When  I came  out  of  the  choir,  I could  not  but 
obferve  well-nigh  the  whole  congregation, 
drawn  up  in  rows  in  the  body  of  the  church, 
from  the  one  end  to  the  other.  I walked  through 
the  midft  of  them.  And  they  ftared  their  fill. 
But  fcarce  one  fpoke  either  good  or  bad. 

In  the  evening  1 had  a large  number  of  them 
in  Marlborough- ftreet  both  within  doors  and 
without. 

Mond.  17.  I began  examining  the  fociety, 
which  I finilhed  the  next  day.  It  contained  about 
two  hundred  and  fourfeore  members,  many  ot 
whom  appeared  to  be  ftrong  in  faith.  The  peo- 
ple in  general  are  of  a more  teachable  fpirit, 
than  in  moft  parts  of  England.  But  on  that  very 
account  they  muft  be  watched  over  with  the 
more  care,  being  equally  fufceptible  of  good  and 
ill  impreffions. 

Tuef.  18.  I was  informed,  that  Air.  Latrobe, 
the  Moravian  preacher,  had  read  in  his  pulpit, 
C q part 


[ ss  i 

part  of  the  " Short  View  of  the  Difference  be'« 
tween  the  Moravians  and  Us,”  with  the  addi- 
tion of  many  bitter  words.  Herein  he  did  ns 
unawares  a fignal  favour : giving  an  authentic 
proof,  that  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  them. 

Frid.  21.  I was  defired  to  fee  the  town  and 
the  college.  The  town  has  fcarce  any  public 
building,  except  the  parliament  houfe,  which  is 
not  at  all  remarkable.  The  churches  are  poor  and 
mean,  both  within  and  without.  St.  Stephen’s- 
green  might  be  made  a beautiful  place,  being 
abundantly  larger  than  Lincoln’s-inn-fquarc. 
But  the  houfes  round  about  it  (befides  that  fome 
are  low  and  bad)  are  quite  irregular,  and  unlike 
each  other.  And  little  care  is  taken  of  the 
green  itfelf,  which  is  as  rough  and  uneven  as  a 
common. 

The  college  contains  two  little  quadrangles, 
and  one  about  as  large  as  that  of  New-college  in 
Oxford.  There  is  likewife  a bowling-green,  a 
fmall  garden  and  a little  park  ; and  a new-built, 
handfome  library. 

I expefled  we  Ihould  have  failed  on  Satur.  22. 
but  no  packet-boat  was  come  in.  In  order  to 
make  the  beft  of  our  time,  I preached  this  day 
at  noon  as  well  as  in  the  evening.  It  was  not  for 
nothing  that  our  paffage  was  delayed.  Who 
knows  what  a day  may  bring  forth  ? 

Sund.  23.  The  room  was  fo  crouded  In  the 
morning,  that  1 thought  it  beft  to  begin  before. 

the 


C 57  J 

the  ufual  time  in  the  evening.  Yet  were  a mul- 
titude of  people  got  together,  in  the  houfe,  yard 
and  ftreet,  far  more  than  my  voice  could  reach. 

I cried  aloud  to  as  many  of  them  as  could  hear, 
All  things  are  ready : come  ye  to  the  marriage. 

I had  then  delivered  my  meflage.  Sc  before 
ten  we  took  boat,  and  about  eleven  reached  the 
fhip. 

The  wind  was  right  a-head.  Then  fucceeded 
a dead  clam.  So  that  we  did  not  get  out  of  the 
bay  till  Monday  evening,  nor  within  fight  of 
Wales  till  Wednef.  26.  By  this  means  we  had 
an  opportunity,  of  talking  largely  both  with  our 
fellow-paffengers,  and  the  failors,  many  of  whom 
received  our  words  with  gladnefs.  About  two  in 
the  afternoon  we  landed  at  Holy-head.  Between 
three  and  four  we  took  horfe,  and  came  in  the 
evening  to  Thomas  Thomas’s,  near  Ryd-y- 
Spardon.  He  had  before  defired  Jonathan 
Reeves  to  call  there  in  his  return.  But  we  were 
at  a great  lofs,  none  in  the  houfe  underftanding 
Englilh,  and  none  of  us  underftanding  Welfh  ; 
till  Mr.  Morgan,  a neighbouring  fchool-mafter 
came,  who  took  us  to  his  own  houfe ; and  in 
the  morning,  Thurf.  27.  rode  with  us  to  the 
paftage. 

We  reached  Carnarvon  before  ten,  Tannabull 
in  the  evening,  and  Lanidlos,  Frid.  28. 

Satur.  29.  About  noon  we  came  to  Builth.  At 
three  I preached  in  the  main  ftreet,  and  at  Garth 
C 5 in 


[ 58  ] 

in  the  evening,  where  I met  my  brother  going 
to  Ireland. 

Sund.  30.  He  preached  at  Builth  about  nine. 
Thence  we  went  to  Maefmynis  church.  But  it 
would  not  near  contain  the  congregation : fo 
that  d was  conltrained  to  preach  in  the  church- 
yard. Thence  I rode  to  Lanfenfried.  Here  alfo 
the  church  not  being  able  to  hold  the  people,  I 
came  out  to  a large  tomb-ftone,  under  a fhady 
tree,  and  proclaimed  the  grace  of  our  L>ord  Je- 
fus  Chrifl. 

One  of  the  audience  preft  me  much  to  preach 
•at  Clero  ; telling  me  Mr.  J.  had  often  faid,  “ I 
fhould  be  welcome  to  his  pulpit.”  Mond.  31.  I 
rode  thither  and  called  on  Mr.  J.  But  (as  I fup- 
pofed  it  would}  his  heart  failed.  I preached,  on 
a large  fmooth  meadow,  Chrijl  our  wijdom,  righ~ 
teoujnejs,  fanEliJication  and  redemption.  And  a 
multitude  of  people  were  gathered  from  all  parts, 
though  on  fo  fhort  a warning. 

We  fet  out  early.  Sept.  1.  and  after  a fhort 
flop  near  Crick-howell,  aimed  at  the  nearefl 
way,  over  the  mountains,  to  Cardiff.  But  it  was 
near  four  in  the  afternoon  before  we  could  reach 
a little  village  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  called  Rlfca. 
The  people  at  the  inn  here  were  civil  above 
meafure ; particularly,  a young,  genteel  man, 
who  was  fon  to  the  woman  of  the  houfe,  and 
lived  at  a fmall  diflance  from  it.  He  rode  with 
us  two  miles,  to  fhew  us  the  nearefl  way,  and  de-; 
fired,  if  we  came  again,  we  would  lodge  at  his 

houfe. 


C 59  ] 


houfe.  The  reafon  of  all  this  kindnefs  was,  that 
a year  or  two  ago  he  had  heard  me  preach  at 
Briftol. 

I reached  Cardiff  between  feven  and  eight, 
and  immediately  went  to  the  room.  My  ftrength 
juft  lafted  till  I had  done  preaching.  I was  then 
quite  ready  to  lie  down  and  reft. 

Wednef.  2. 1 fpent  fome  time  withT.  Proffer, 
who  had  filled  the  fociety  with  vain  janglings.  I 
found  the  fault  lay  in  his  head  rather  than  his 
heart ; he  is  an  honeft,  well-meaning  man  : but 
no  more  qualified  either  by  nature  or  grace  to 
expound  fcripture,  than  to  read  leftures  in  logic 
or  algebra. 

* Yet  even  men  of  fenfe  have  taken  this  dull 
myftical  man  to  be  far  deeper  than  he  is.  And  it 
is  very  natural  fo  to  do.  If  we  look  into  a dark 
pit  it  feems  deep.  But  the  darknefs  only  makes  it 
feem  fo.  Bring  the  light  and  we  fhall  fee  it  is 
very  Jhallow. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Fonmon.  But 
the  congregation  being  larger  than  the  chappel 
would  contain,  I was  obliged  to  preach  in  the 
court.  I was  myfelf  much  comforted,  in  comfort- 
ing the  weary  and  heavy-laden. 

Frid.  4.  There  was  a very  large  congregation 
at  Cardiff  caftle-yard  in  the  evening.  I after- 
wards met  the  fociety,  fpoke  plain  to  them, -and 
left  them  once  more  in  peace. 

Sat.  5.  In  my  road  to  Briftol,  I read  over  Q. 

C 6 Curtius, 


C 6o  ] 

Curtlus,  a fine  writer,  both  as  to  thought  and 
language.  But  what  an  hero  does  he  defcribe  ? 
Whofe  murder  of  his  old  friend  and  companion 
Clitus  (though  not  done  of  a fudden,  as  is  com- 
monly fuppofed,  but  deliberately,  after  forae 
hours  confideration)  was  a virtuous  aft,  in  com- 
parifon  of  his  butchering  poor  Philotas,  and 
his  good  old  father  Parmenio.  Yet  even  this 
was  a little  thing,  compared  to  the  thoufands  and 
ten-thoufands  he  flaughtered,  both  in  battle,  and 
in  and  after  taking  cities,  for  no  other  crime 
than  defending  their  wives  and  children.  I 
doubt  whether  Judas  claims  fo  hot  a place  in  hell, 
as  Alexander  the  Great. 

Thurf.  lo.  1 preached  at  Bath  about  noon, 
and  in  the  evening  at  Bearfield.  Frid.  ii.  We 
rode  to  Reading ; Mr.  Richards,  a tradefman  ia 
the  town,  came  to  our  inn,  and  intreated  me  to 
preach  at  a room  which  he  had  built  for  that 
purpofe  ; I did  fo  at  fix  In  the  morning,  and 
then  rode  on.  It  rained  all  the  way  till  we  came 
to  London. 

Sat.  19.  Mrs.  Baddlley  defired  me  to  go  up 
to  her  fon,  who  had  been  out  of  order  for  fome 
days.  For  one  or  two  years  he  was  a pattern  to 
all  the  family,  till  he  began  to  converfe  more 
with  good  fort  of  men.  He  then  grew  cooler  and 
cooler  in  the  ways  of  God,  and  in  a few  months 
quitted  the  fociety,  relolving,  he  faid,  to  “ keep 
to  his  church,  and  live  a foberlife,  and  that  was 
enough.”  That  was  too  much  in  a little  time. 
He  grew  tired  of  his  church  too,  and  dropt  that 

2 and 


.[  6i  ] 

and  fobriety  together.  He  was  now,  his  mo- 
ther  informed  me,  dead  as  a ftone  to  all  the 
things  of  God.  I fpake  a few  words,  and  went, 
to  prayer.  And  God  broke  his  heart.  He  con- 
tinued weeping  and  praying  all  the  day,  and  all 
the  night,  and  at  fi-K  in  the  morning,  fell  alleep. 

Tuef.  22.  I rode  to  Slioreham,  where  I 
preached  every  morning  in  the  houfe,  and  every 
evening  in  the  church.  But  the  fcafon  for  fruit 
is  not  yet. 

Sund.  27.  I preached  in  Moorfield?,  morning 
and  evening,  and  continued  fo  to  do  till  Novem- 
ber. I know  no  church  in  London  (that  in  Welt- 
llreet  excepted)  where  there  is  fo  ferrous  a con- 
gregation. 

Mond.  28.  I talked  with  one,  who  a little 
time  before,  was  fo  overwhelmed  with  affliftion 
that  Ihe  went  out  one  night,  to  put  an  end  to  it 
all,  by  throwing  herfelf  into  the  New-river.  As 
Ihe  went  by  the  Foundery  (it  being  a watch-night) 
fhe  heard  fome  "people  Tinging.  She  fiopt  and 
went  in:  (he  liftened  awhile,  and  Godfpoke  to 
her  heart.  She  had  no  more  defire  to  put  an  end 
to  her  life  ; but  to  die  to  fin  and  live  to  God. 

Tuef.  29.  I retired  to  Mrs.  Sparrow’s  atLewI- 
Iham,  where  alfo  I preached  every  evening. 
Sat.  Oft.  3.  I returned  to  London.  In  the  even- 
ing I buried  a young  man,  who  had  but  lately 
known  God.  But  from  that  time,  he  had  liv- 
ed much  in  a little  fpace.  His  foul  was  cloud- 
ed at  the  beginning  of  his  illnefs,  but  the 

clouds 


[ 62  ] 

clouds  foon  vanifhed  away,  and  he  continued  in 
the  calm  joy  of  faith,  till  his  fpirit  returned  to 
God. 

Frid.  9.  We  had  a watch-night  at  the  chappel. 
Being  weak  in  body,  I was  afraid  I could  not  go 
through  it.  But  the  longer  I fpoke,  the  more 
ftrength  I had:  infonmch  that  at  twelve  o’clock 
all  my  weannefs  and  weaknefs  weregone,  and  I 
was  as  one  refreflled  with  wine. 

The  former  part  of  the  next  week,  and  of 
fome  others,  I fpent  at  Newington  and  Lewi- 
fham  in  writing.  Frid.  16.  I went  with  two  or 
three  friends,  to  fee,  what  are  called,  the  elec- 
trical experiments.  How  muft  thefe  alfo  con- 
found thofe  poor  hall-thinkers,  who  will  believe 
nothing  but  what  they  can  comprehend  ? Who 
can  comprehend,  how  fire  lives  in  water,  and 
paffes  through  it  as  freely  as  through  air  ? How 
flame  i flues  out  of  my  finger,  real  flame,  fuch  as 
fets  fire  to  fpiritsof  wine  ? How  thefe  and  many 
more  as  flrange  phcenomena  arife  from  the  turn- 
ing round  a glafs-globe  ? It  is  all  myllery  : if 
haply  by  any  means  God  may  hide  pride  from 
man ! 

Tuef.  20.  I read  Dr.  Doddridge’.s  account  of 
Col.  Gardiner.  And  what  matters  it,  whether 
his  foul  was  fet  at  liberty  by  a fever,  or  a Locha- 
ber  axe  : feeing  he  is  gone  to  God. 

Thurf.  29.  T.  C.  who  had  been  with  the  bre- 
thren fome  years,  defired  to  fpeak  with  me.  He 
faid,  “ He  could  find  no  reft  any  where  elfe,  and 

was 


r 63  ] 

was  conftrainecl  to  return  where  he  was  firfl;  cal- 
led.” I believe  he  obeyed  that  conviftion  for  a 
month.  Unjiable  aszuater,  thou Jhalt  not  excel. 

Mond.  Nov.  2.  I preached  at  Windfor  at 
noon,  and  in  tlie  afternoon  rode  to  Reading. 
Mr.  J.  R.  had  juft  fent  his  brother  word,  “ That 
he  had  hired  a mob  to  pull  down  his  preaching- 
houfe  that  night  ” In  the  evening  Mr.  S.  Ri- 
chards overtook  a large  company  of  bargemen 
walking  towards  it,  whom  he  immediately  ac- 
cofted,  and  afked,  “ 11  they  would  go  with  him 
and  hear  a good  fermon  1”  Telling  them,  “ I will 
make  room  for  you,  if  you  were  as  many  more.” 
They  faid,  they  would  go  with  all  their  hearts. 
“ But  neighbours,  faid  he,  would  it  not  he  as 
well  to  leave  thofe  clubs  behind  you  ? Perhaps 
fome  of  the  women  may  be  flighted  at  them.” 
They  threw  them  all  away,  and  walked  quietly 
with  him  to  the  houfe,  where  he  fat  them  in  a 
pew. 

In  the  conclufion  of  my  fermon,  one  of  them 
who  ufed  to  be  their  captain,  being  the  head 
taller  than  his  fellows,  rofe  up,  and  looking 
round  the  congregation,  faid,  “ The  gentleman 
fays  nothing  but  what  is  good,  I fay  fo  ; and 
there  is  not  a man  here  that  fliall  dare  to  fay 
otherwife.” 

Thutf.  5.  I began  examining  the  claffes,  and 
every  perfon  feverally,  touching  that  bane  of  re- 
ligion, evil-fpeaking : as  well  as  touching  their 
manner  of  life  before  they  heard  this  preaching ; 

and 


[ 64  ] 

and  by-  "comparing  what  they  were,  with  what 
they  are  now,  we  found  more  abundant  caufe  to 
praife  God. 

Frid.  20.  I was  informed  of  a remarkable  pro- 
vidence, one  going  home  the  laft  watch-night, 
met  a woman  in  Black-friers,  W'ho  inquired, 
which  was  the  way  to  the  water-fide  ? She  faid, 
“ It  is  fo  late,  I doubt  you  will  get  no  boat.” 
The  woman  anfwered,  “ I don't  want  one.”  On 
this  fhe  ftopt  and  began  to  queftion  her  more 
clofely,  “ w'hat  fhe  was  going  to  do  ?”  After  a 
while,  fhe  confell  flie  was  going  to  drown  her- 
felf,  being  under  heavy  affliction.  But  fhe  was 
foon  brought  to  a better  mind,  and  feemed  re- 
folved  to  caff  her  care  on  him,  who  had  fo  fig- 
nally  cared  for  her. 

* Sund.  22. 1 fpent  an  hour  with  Mary  Cheefe- 
brook,  a flrange  monument  of  the  mercv  of 
God.  About  fix  years  ago,  fhe  was  without 
God  in  the  world,  being  a kept  miftrefs.  An 
acquaintance  brought  her  one  evening  to  the 
chappel  in  Wefl-fiieet,  where  God  gave  her  a 
new  heart.  She  fhed  abundance  of  tears,  fhe 
plucked  out  the  right  eye  and  caft  it  from  her: 
and  from  that  time  procured  for  herfelf  bv  hard 
labour  what  was  needful  for  life  and  godlinefs. 
She  miffed  no  opportunity  of  coming  to  the 
preaching;  often  after  a hafd  day’s  work,  at 
May-fair,  fhe  came  to  the  Foutidery  inflhe  even- 
ing, running  the  greater  part  ofthevay.  Every 
Saturday,  after  paying  her  little  debts,  fhe  gave 

away 


[■  65  ] 

away  all  the  money  that  remained  ; leaving  the 
morrow  to  take  thought  for  the  things  of  itfelf. 

Two  years  ago  flie  calched  a violent  cold, 
which  file  neglefled,  till  it  fettled  upon  her 
lungs.  I knew  nothing  of  her  illnefs  till  it  was 
paft  cure,  fne  being  then  worn  to  a fkeleton; 
Upon  my  mentioning  her  cafe  to  Mrs.  — — , 
fhe  fent  her  half  a guinea.  Molly  immediately 
fent  for  a poor  man,  a baker,  of  whom  fhe  had 
lately  taken  her  bread.  She  owed  him  about 
ten  fhillings.  But  an  earneft  difpuie  arofe  be- 
tween them.  For  the  man  would  tiot  take  the 
money,  faying,  “ She  wanted  it  more  than  he.” 
But  at  length  die  prevailed,  faying,  “ She  could 
not  die  in  peace,  if  Ihe  owed  any  man  any  thing.” 

But  I found  fomething  dill  lay  upon  her  mind. 
Upon  my  prefTmg  her  to  fpeak  freely,  fhe  told 
me,  it  was  concern  for  her  child,  a girl  about 
eight  years  old,  who  after  die  was  gone,  would 
have  no  friend  to  take  care  either  of  her  foul  or 
body.  I replied,  “ Be  at  red  in  this  thing  alfo.. 
1 will  take  care  of  the  child.”  From  that  time 
fhe  lay  (two  or  three  weeks)  quietly  waiting  for 
the  falvation  of  God. 

* Frid.  27.  Poor  Mr.  Simpfon  fpent  an  hour 
with  me,  diftreft  on  every  fide  ; drawn  up  to 
London  by  fair  and  fpecious  promifcs : and 
then  left  to  perifh,  unlefs  he  would  proinife, 
“ Never  more  to  pfeach  out  of  a church,” — 
Alas  ! What  a ine;hod  of  converfion  is  this  ? I 
love  the  church  too.  But  I would  no  more 

Jlarvi 


[ 6,6  ] 

Jlarve.  men  into  the  church,  than  them  int* 
it. 

Sat.  28.  Mr.  H.  one  of  the  firfl:  ten  who  met 
in  band  with  my  brother  and  me,  defired  to 
fpeak  with  me.  I had  not  exchanged  a word  with 
him  before,  fince  we  parted  at  Fetter-lane.  He 
faid,  “ About  fix  years  ago,  the  brethren  told 
him,  it  was  the  will  of  the  Lamb,  that  he  fiiould 
give  himfelf  to  the  public  work,  quitting  all  fe- 
cular  bufiiiefs.”  He  obeyed,  difcharged  his  men, 
fold  his  goods,  parted  with  his  houfe.  From 
that  time,  he  not  only  preached,  but  was  em- 
ployed in  places  of  the  greatefl  truft. 

“ About  two  years  ago,  having  many  doubts 
upon  his  mind  concerning  their  method  of  pro- 
ceeding, he  wrote  a long  letter  to  the  Count,  who 
feemed  to  take  it  well  ; and  he  continued  labour- 
ing as  before  both  in  preaching  and  in  the  go- 
vernment of  the  church. 

“ But  about  a month  ago,  he  was  ordered  to 
leave  offpreachingand  return  to  his  trade.  Hav- 
ing learned,  not  to  difpute,  but  obey,  he  hired  an 
houfe  and  fet  rrp  a fign.  Nevertheiefs  he  could 
not  be  eafy.  He  mufed  much  and  prayed  much, 
and  at  lad  refolved  to  come  to  me. 

He  Teemed  to  tell  me  all  his  heart,  both  at  this 
and  our  following  interviews.  If  he  only  feemed, 
let  him  look  to  it.  Ego  in  porta  navigo. 

Sund.  29.  About  fix  in  the  morning,  Mrs. 
Witham  llept  in  the  Lord.  A mother  in  IGael 

hall 


C 67  ] 

haft  thou  alfo  been,  and  thy  works  {hall  praiTe 
thee  in  the  gates.  Some  years  ago,  before  Ma 
Witham  died,  fhe  feemed  to  ftand  on  the  brink 
of  eternity.  But  God  renewed  her  ftrength,  till 
fhe  had  finifhed  the  work  which  he  had  given 
I her  to  do.  She  was  an  eminent  pattern  of  calm 
boldnefs  for  the  truth,  of  fimplicity  and  godly  fin- 
Cericy  ; of  unwearied  conftancy  in  amending  all 
the,  ordinances  of  God  : of  zeal  for  God  and 
for  all  good  works  ; and  of  felf-denial  in  every 
kind.  Blelfed  is  the  dead  that  hath  thus  lived 
and  died  in  the  Lord  ! For  fhe  refts  from  her 
labours,  and  her  works  follow  her. 

Mond  30.  I fet  out  early,  and  called  on  Mr. 
H.  at  Brentford,  who  rode  on  with  me  to  Bafing- 
floke  that  night.  We  were  throughly  wet  with 
the  heavy  rain,  which  intermitted  in  the  night, 
but  began  again  before  \ve  took  horfe  in  the 
morning, 

Tuef.  Dec.  1.  About  noon  we  reached  Stock- 
bridge.  The  rain  then  changed  into  fnow.  See- 
ing no  profpe£f  of  fair  weather,  after  refling  a 
while,  we  fet  out  in  the  midft  of  the  ftorm.  It 
blew  fuch  a hurricane,  as  I have  fcarce  known 
in  England,  and  that  full  in  our  teeth,  fo  that 
our  horfes  reeled  to  and  fro,  and  had  much  ado 
to  keep  their  feet.  The  fnow  likewlfe  drove  fo 
vehemently  in  our  faces,  in  riding  over  the 
open  downs,  where  for  fever^l  miles  there  was 
neither  houfe,  nor  tree,  nor  flirub  to  fhelter, 
that  it  was  hard  labcrur  to  get  forward.  But  i n 

about 


[ 68  ] 

about  an  hour,  the  iky  cleared  up,  and.  wc  rode 
on  comfortably  to  Salifbur)-. 

From  the  concurring  account  of  many  tvitnef- 
fcs,  who  fpoke  no  more  tlran  they  perfonally 
knew,  I now  learned  as  much  as  is  hitherto 
brought  to  light  concerning  the  fall  of  poor  Jvir. 
H . 

Twelve  )'ears  ago  he  was,  without  all  queftion, 
filled  with  faith  and  the  love  of  God.  He  was 
a paitern  of  humility,  meeknefs,  fcrioufnefs, 
and  above  all,  offdf-denial  ; fo  that  in  all  Eng- 
land I knew  not  his  fellow. 

It  were  eafy  to  point  out  the  feveral  fleps, 
whereby  he  fell  from  his  fiedfaltnefs  ; even  till 
he  fell  into  a courfe  of  adulter^’,  yea,  and  avow- 
ed it  in  the  face  of  the  fun! 

Thurf.  3.  I took  my  leave  of  this  uncomfort- 
able place  and  fet  out  for  Brifiol.  But  the  hea- 
vy rains,  together  with  the  melting  fnow,  had 
made  the  lower  parts  of  the  road  fcarce  paffable. 
However  we  made  a fhift  to  reach  Philip’s  norton 
that  night,  and  Brifiol  the  next  day. 

Mond.  iq.  We  had  a glorious  hour,  with  a 
few  that  know  the  Lord.  We  then  rode  to 
Bearfield,  where  I preached  at  noon,  with  a deep 
fenfe  of  his  prefence.  Some  who  were  laughing 
when  I began,  hid  their  faces  foon,  being  afham- 
ed  to  be  feen  in  tears.  We  rode  on  in  the  after- 
noon, and  came  the  next  evening,  throughly 
weary  and  wet  to  Reading. 

Mond.  2t.  I w'ent  to  Newington.  Here,  in 

the 


I 69  ] 


the  intervals  of  writing-,  I read  the  deaths ' of 
fome,  of  the  order  de  la  Trappe.  I am  amazed 
at  the  allowance  which  God  makes  for  invinci- 
ble ignorance.  Notwithllandlng  the  mixture  of 
fnpci  ilition,  w'hich  appears  in  every  one  of 
thefe,  yet  what  a hrong  vein  of  piety  runs 
through  all]’  What  deep  experience  of  the  in- 
w'ard  wo.'k  of  God.?  Of  righteoufnefs,  peace  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  GhoR  ? 

Being  not  convinced,  that  I had  yet  delivered 
my  own  foul,  with  regard  to  that  unhappy  man, 
on  Tnef.  22.  I wrote  once  more  to  Mr.  H.  as 
follows. 


London,  Dec.  22,  ^747- 

Dear  Brother^ 

1.  T X 7HEN  you  was  at  Oxford  with  me,  four- 
» » teen  or  fifteen  years  ago,  you  was  holy 
and  unblameable  in  all  manner  of  converfation. 
I greatly  rejoiced  in  the  grace  of  God  which  \\’as 
given  unto  you,  which  wasoften  a hleffing  to  my 
own  foul.  Yet  even  then  you  had  frequently 
ftarts  of  thought  which  were  not  of  God,  though 
they'  at  firft  appeared  fo  to  be.  But  you  was  hum- 
hle  and  teachable : you  was  eafily  convinced, 
andthofe  imaginations  vanifhed  away. 

2.  More  titan  twelve  years  ago,  you  told  me, 
“ God  had  revealed  it  you,  that  you  fltould  marry 
my  youngell  fiRer.”  I w'asmuch  furprized,  being 

well 


[ 70  ] 

Weft*  afTured  that  you  v^’^as  able  to  receive  our 
l^onV 5 faying,  (fo  you  had  continually  teftified) 
and  to  be  an  eunuch  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  s 
Joke.  But  you  vehemently  affirmed,  “ Tlie  thing 
Was  of  God  : you  was  certain  it  was  his  will. 
God  had  made  it  plain  to  you  that  you  muft 
many,  and  that  (he  was  the  very  perron.”  You 
affied  and  gained  her  confent,  and  fixt  the  cir- 
cumflances  relating  thereto. 

3.  Hence  I date  vour  fall.  Here  were  feveral 
faults  in  one.  You  leaned  altogether  to  your 
own  underflanding,  not  confulting  either  me, 
who  was  then  the  guide  of  your  foul,  or  the  pa- 
rents of  your  intended  wife,  till  you  had  fettled 
the  whole  affair.  And  while  vou  followed  the 
voice  of  nature,  you  faid  “ it  was  the  voice  of 
God.” 

4.  In  a few  days  you  had  a counter  revelation, 
“ That  you  was  not  to  marrv  lier,  btit  her  fifter.” 
This  lalf  error  was  far  worfe  than  the  firif.  But 
you  was  now  quite  above  conviction.  So,  in 
fpite  of  her  poor,  aftoniffied  parent,  of  her  bro- 
thers, of  all  your  vows  and  promifes,  you  ffiortly 
after  jilted  the  younger,  and  married  the  elder 
filler.  The  other,  who  had  honoured  you  as  an 
angel  from  heaven,  and  flill  loved  you  much  too 
well  ffor  you  had  Hole  her  heart  from  the  God  of 
her  youth)  refufed  to  be  comforted.  She  fell 
into  a lingering  illnefs,  which  terminated  in  her 
death.  And  doth  not  her  blood  flill  cry  unto 

God 


C 71  ] 

God  from  the  earth  ? Surely  it  is  iipou  your 
I head. 

I 5.  Till  this  time  you  was  a pattern  of  lowli- 
nefs,  meeknefs,  feriouiuefs  and  continual  adver- 
! tence  to  the  prefence  of  God.  And  above  all* 

, of  felf-denial  in  every  kind,  and  of  fuflering  all 
j thiirgs  with  joyful nefs.  But  there  was  now  a 
( worm  at  the  root  of  the  gourd.  Yet  it  did  not 

Iprefently  wither  away  ; but  for  two  years  or 
more  after  vour  marriage  you  behaved  nearly  the 
fame  as  before. 

Then  anger  and  furlinefs  began  to  appear,  par- 
ticularly toward  your  wife.  But  it  was  not  long 
j before  von  was  fenfible  of  this,  and  you  feemed 
to  have  conquered  it. 

6.  You  went  up  to  London  ten  years  ago. 
After  this  you  began  to  fpeak  on  any  head,  not 
with  your  ufual  diffidence  and  felf-abafement, 
but  with  a kind  of  confidence  in  your  own  judg- 
[ ment,  and  an  air  of  felf  fufficiency.  A natural 
Gonfequence  was,  the  treating  with  more  fharpnefs 
and  contempt  thofe  who  oppofed  either  your 
j judgment  or  pra£iice. 

7.  You  came  to  live  at  London.  You  then  for 
! a feafon  appeared  to  gain  ground  again.  You 
affed  in  concert  with  my  brother  and  me,  heard 
our  advice  and  fometimes  followed  it.  But  this 
continued  only  till  you  contrafted  a freffi  ac- 
i quaintance  with  fome  of  the  brethren  of  d’etter- 
I lane.  Thenceforward  you  was  quite  fhut  up  to 
I us ; we  had  no  manner  of  influence  over  you  ; 
I 2 ytHt 


[ n ] 

you  was  more  and  more  prejudiced  asainft  us, 
and  would  receive  nothing  which  we  laid. 

8.  About  fix  years  ago  you  removed  to  Salif- 
bury,  and  began  a fociety  there.  For  a year  or 
two  you  tvent  with  them  to  the  church  and  facra- 
ment,  and  fimply  preached  faith  working  by 
Jove.  liod  was  with  you,  and  they  increafed  both 
in  number,  and  jn  the  knowledge  and  love  of 
God. 

About  four  years  fince  you  broke  off  all  fricnd- 
Ihip  with  us;  you  would  not  fo  much  as  make 
X-ife  of  our  hymns,  either  in  public  or  private, 
but  laid  them  quite  afide,  and  took  the  German 
hymn-book  in  their  Head. 

You  would  not  willingly  fuffer  anv  of  your 
people  to  read  any  thing  which  we  wrote.  You 
angrily  caught  one  of  my  fermons  out-of  your 
fervant’s  hand ; faying,  ‘‘You  would  have  no 
fuch  books  read  in  your  houfe.”  In  much  the 
fame  manner  you  fpoke  to  Mrs.  Wlniemarfh, 
when  you  found  her  reading  one  of  the  Appeals. 
So  that  as  far  as  in  you  lay,  )ou  fixt  a great  gulf 
between  us  end  you  (which  remains  to  this  day, 
notwiihfianding  a few  fteps  lately  made  towards 
a re-union.) 

About  the  fame  time  you  left  off  going  to 
church,  as  well  as  to  the  facrament.  Your  fol- 
lowers very'  foon  trod  in  your  Heps  ; and  not 
content  with  negletting  the  ordinances  of  God, 
they  began,  after  your  example,  to  dcfpife  them, 
and  all  that  continued  to  ufe  them : fpeaking 

with 


[ 73  3 

with  equal  contempt  of  the  public  fervice,  of 
private  prayer,  of  baptifm,  and  of  the  Lord’s 
fupper. 

From  this  time  alfo  you  began  to  efpoufe  and 
teach  many  uncommon  opinions : as,  “ that 
there  is  no  refurreflion  of  the  body,  that  there  is 
no  general  judgment  to  come;  and  that  there  is 
no  hell,  no  worm  that  never  dieth,  no  fire  that 
never  fhall  be  quenched.” 

9.  Your  ferioufnefs  and  advertence  to  the  pre- 
fence of  God  now  declined  daily.  Ypu  could 
talk  on  any  thing  or  nothing,  juft  as  others  did. 
You  could  break  a jeft,  or  laugh  at  it  heartily; 
and  as  for  falling,  abftinence  and  felf-denial, 
you,  with  the  Moravians,  “ trampled  it  under- 
foot.” 

In  the  following  paragraphs  I recited  to  him 
the  things  he  had  done,  with  regard  to  more 
than  one,  or  two,  or  three  women:  concluding 
thus ; 

And  now  you  know  not  that  you  have  done 
any  thing  amifs  ! You  can  eat  and  drink  and  be 
merry  ! You  are  every  day  engaged  with  variety 
of  company,  and  frequent  the  coffee-houfes! 
Alas,  my  brother,  what  is  this  ? How  are  you 
above  meafure  hardened  by  the  deceitfulnefs  of 
fin  ? Do  you  remember  the  ftory  of  Santon 
Barfifa  ? I pray  God  your  laft  end  may  not  be 
like  bis ! O how  have  you  grieved  the  Spirit  of 
God  ? Return  to  him  with  weeping,  falling  and 
VoL.  XXIX.  D 


mourning. 


C 74  ] 

mourning.  You  are  in  the  very  belly  of  hell  j 
orrly  the  pit  hath  not  yet  fhut  its  mouth  upon 
you.  Arife,  thou  deeper,  and  call  upon  thy 
God  ! Perhaps  he  may  yet  be  found.  Becaufe 
he  dill  bears  with  me,  I cannot  defpair  (or you. 
But  you  have  not  a moment  to  lofe.  May  God 
this  inftant  ftrike  you  to  the  heart,  that  you 
may  feel  his  wrath  abiding  on  you,  and  have 
no  reft  in  your  bones  by  reafon  of  your  fin,  till 
all  your  iniquities  are  done  away  ! 

Frid.  25.  We  met  at  four,  and  folemnly  re- 
joiced in  God  our  Saviour.  I found  much  re- 
vival in  my  own  foul  this  day  : and  fo  did  many 
others  alfo.  Both  this  and  the  following  days, 

I ftrongiy  urged,  the  wholly  giving  up  ourfelves 
to  God,  and  renewing  in  every  point  our  cove- 
nant, that  the  Lord  Ihould  be  our  God. 

* .Sat.  26.  I called  on  one,  with  whofe  mo- 
ther I had  prayed,  a little  before  her  death.  I 
knew  not  till  now,  how  fhe  came  to  defire  me  of 
all  perfons,  to  pray  with  her.  It  feems  her  daugh- 
ter, who  was  of  a lion-like  fpirit,  came  to  me 
fome  time  before,  and  told  me,  fhe  had  juft 
been  a quarrelling  with  her  aunt,  on  my  account, 
and  was  fo  angry  that  (he  ftruck  her.  I told  her, 
“ Then  go  and  alk  her  pardon.”  She  went 
home,  ran  to  her  aunt,  and  alked  her  pardon. 
While  they  were  hanging  upon  each  other,  both 
in  tears,  her  mother  came  in,  being  afraid  they 
were  fighting.  She  cried  out,  “ Sifter,  what  is 
Sally  doing  to  you?”  She  replied, “ She  has  been 

juft 


C 75  3 

juft  alking  me  pardon.”  “ I never  knew  her  to  do 
fuch  a thing  fince  flie  was  born,”  faid  her  mo- 
ther : ” Sally,  who  taught  you  that  ?”  “ My 
minifter,”  faid  Sally.  All  were  ftruck,  and  their 
enmity  was  at  an  end. 

January  i,  1748.  We  began  the  year  at  four 
in  the  morning,  with  joy  and  thankfgiving.  The 
fame  fpirit  was  in  the  midft  of  us,  both  at  noon 
and  in  the  evening.  Surely  we  fhall  at  length 
prefent  ourfelves  a living  facrifice,  holy,  accept- 
able to  God. 

Wed.  6.  I converfcd  an  hour  with  counfellor 
G.  many  years  eminent  for  an  utter  difregard  of 
all  religion.  He  had  lately  contrafted  an  ac- 
quaintance with  Mr.  R.  in  confequence  of  which, 
he  foon  fet  upon  his  wife.  She  told  him,  “ Sir, 
here  is  a fuller  anfwer  to  your  objeftions,  than 
I am  able  to  give  and  defircd  him  ferioufly  to 
read  the  Earneft  Appeal.  He  did  fo,  and  was 
throughly  convinced,  that  there  is  reality  in  re- 
ligion. 

I believe  he  told  me  all  that  was  in  his  heart. 
He  flayed  till  the  watch-night  fervice  was  ended, 
and  appeared  much  affedled.  Let  but  a little 
feed  be  fown,  and  God  is  able  to  give  it  an  in- 
creafe. 

* Sat.  16.  Upon  reviewing  the  account  of  the 
fick,  we  found  great  reafon  to  praife  God.  With- 
in the  year,  about  three  hundred  perfons  had  re- 
ceived medicines  occafionally.  About  one  hun- 
dred had  regularly  taken  them,  and  fubmltted  to 
h)  2 a proper 


C 75  ] 


a proper  regimen.  More  than  ninety  of  thefe 
were  entirely  cured  of  difeafes  they  had  long  la- 
boured under.  And  the  expence  of  medicines 
for  the  entire  year,  amounted  to  fome  (hillings 
above  forty  pounds. 

* Sund.  17.  I made  a public  colleftion  towards 
a lending-ftock  for  the  poor.  Our  rule  is,  to 
lend  only  twenty  (hillings  at  once,  which  is  re- 
payed  weekly  within  three  months.  I began 
this  about  a year  and  half  ago : thirty  pounds 
fixteen  (Ixillings  w^ere  then  collected.  And  out 
of  this,  no  lefs  than  two  hundred  and  fifty-(ive 
perfons  have  been  relieved  in  eighteen  months. 
Dr.  W.  hearing  of  this  defign,  fent  a guinea  to- 
ward it;  as  did  an  eminent  deift  the  next  morn- 
ing. 

Mond.  25.  I preached  at  four,  and  afterward 
fet  out  for  Brentford.  Thence  I rode  to  Wind- 
for  and  preached  about  noon.  We  lodged  at 
Morrel-green,  and  came  to  FKherton  on  Tuef- 
oay,  about  two  o’clock. 

Mr.Hall  having  heard  I was  coming,  had  given 
(Irlft  orders,  that  no  one  (hould  be  let  in.  The 
inner  door  he  had  locked  himfelf,  and  (I  fuppofej 
taken  away  the  key.  Yet  when  I knocked  at 
tlie  outer  gate,  which  was  locked  alfo,  William 
Sims  opened  the  w'icket.  I walked  ftrait  in. 
A girl  (food  in  the  gate-way,  but  turned  as  foon 
as  Ihe  faw  me.  I followed  clofe  at  her  heels,  and 
went  in  after  her,  at  a back-door.  I a(ked  the 
maid,  “ Where  is  Mr,  H.?  She  faid,  “ In  the 

parlour,” 


f 77  ] 

parlour,”  and  went  in  to  him.  I followed  her, 
and  found  him  fitting  with  my  Tifter.  But  he 
prefently  rofe  and  went  up  flairs.  He  then  fent 
William  Sims  down,  and  bid  him,  “ Tell  my 
brother,  he  has  no  bufinefs  in  my  houfe.”  After 
a few  minutes,  I went  to  a houfe  in  the  town, 
and  my  filler  came  to  me.  In  about  an  hour 
Ihe  returned  home.  But  he  fent  word  to  the 
gate,  “ She.  might  go  to  the  place  whence  Ihe 
came.” 

I met  a little  company,  gathered  up  out  of  the 
wreck,  both  in  the  evening  and  at  five  in  the 
morning,  and  exhorted  them,  to  go  on  in  the  bi- 
ble  way,  and  not  to  be  wife  above  that  is  written. 

Thurf.  28.  I commended  them  to  the  grace 
of  God,  and  fet  out  for  De.veiel  Long-bridge. 
About  ten  o^clock  we  were  met  by  a loaded  wag- 
gon, in  a deep,  hollow  way.  There  was  a nar- 
row path  between  the  road  and  the  bank.  I flep- 
ped  into  this,  and  John  Trembath  followed  me. 
When  the  waggon  came  near,  my  horfe  began 
to  rear,  and  to  attempt  climbing  up  the  bank. 
This  frighted  the  horfe  which  was  clofe  behind, 
and  made  him  prance  and  throw  his  head  to  and 
fro,  till  the  bit  of  the  bridle  catched  hold  of  the 
cape  of  my  great  coat,  and  pulled  me  backward 
off  my  horfe.  I fell  as  exa£l  on  the  path  between 
the  waggon  and  the  bank,  as  if  one  had  taken 
me  in  his  arms,  and  laid  me  down  there.  Both 
our  horfes  flood  flock  flill,  one  juft  behind  me, 
^ 3 die 


[ 78  ] 

the  other  before.  So,  by  the  LlefTing  of  God,  1 
rofe  unhurt,  mounted  again  and  rode  on. 

At  twelve,  I preached  at  Deverel ; in  the 
evening  at  Bearfield  ; and  on  Frid,  29,  came  to 
Briflol. 

Mond.  Feb.  1.  I received  an  account  of  Mr. 
Towers  of  Leeds,  who  had  even  prayed,  that  he 
might  not  know  his  fins  forgiven  (as  believing  it 
was  the  higheft  prefumption.)  But  notwithlland- 
ing  this,  as  he  lay  one  night  upon  his  bed,  he 
did  receive  the  knowledge  of  falvation,  by  the 
remilfion  of  fins.  And  he  declared  it  boldly,  to 
the  confufion  at  leaft,  if  not  conviftion  of  thofe 
who  denied  the  truth. 

Sat.  6.  I preached  at  eight  in  the  morning  at 
Bath,  and  in  the  evening  at  Coleford.  The  col- 
liers of  this  place  were  durknf/s  indeed.  But 
now  they  are  light  in  the  Lord. 

Tuef.  9.  I met  about  fixty  of  the  fociety  in 
Brifiol,  to  confult  about  inlargingthe  room  ; and 
indeed  fecuring  it ; for  there  was  no  fmall  dan- 
ger of  its  falling  upon  our  heads.  In  two  or  three 
days,  two  hundred  and  thirty  pounds  were  fub- 
fcribed.  We  immediately  procured  experienc- 
ed builders  to  make  an  efiimate  of  the  expence. 
And  I appointed  five  fiewards  (befides  thofe  of 
the  fociety)  to  fuperintend  the  svork. 

Frid.  12.  After  preaching  at  Oakhill  about 
noon,  I rode  to  Shepton,  and  found  them  all  un- 
der a flrange  conflernation.  A mob,  they  faid, 
was  hired,  prepared  and  made  fufficiently  drunk, 

in 


[ 79  ] 

in  Older  to  do  all  manner  of  mlfchief.  1 began 
preaching  between  lour  and  five.  None  hinder- 
ed or  interrupted  at  all.  We  had  a blefied  op- 
portunity, and  the  hearts  of  many  were  exceed- 
ingly comforted.  I wondered  what  was  become 
of  the  mob.  But  we  were  quickly  informed, 
they  miftook  the  place,  Imagining  I fhould  alight 
(as  I ufed  to  do)  at  William  Stone’s  houfe,  and 
had  fummoned  by  drum  all  their  forces  together 
to  meet  me  at  my  coming.  But  Mr.  Swindells 
innocently  carrying  me  to  the  other  end  of  the 
town,  they  did  not  find  their  millake  till  I had 
done  preaching;  fo  that  the  hindering  this, 
which  was  one  of  their  defigns,  was  utterly  dif- 
appointed. 

However  they  attended  us  from  the  preach- 
ing-houfe  to  William  Stone’s,  throwing  dirt, 
ftones  and  clods  in  abundance  ; but  they  could 
not  hurt  us,  only  Mr.  Swindells  had  a little  dirt  on 
his  coat,  and  I a few  fpecks  on  my  hat. 

* After  we  were  gone  into  the  houfe,  they  be- 
gan throwing  great  Hones,  in  order  to  break  the 
door.  But  perceiving  this  would  require  fome 
time,  they  dropped  that  defign  for  the  prefent. 
They  firft  broke  all  the  tiles  on  the  pent-houfe 
over  the  door,  and  then  poured  in  a (bower  of 
Hones  at  the  windows.  One  of  their  captains, 
in  his  great  zeal,  had  followed  us  into  the  houfe, 
and  was  now  (liut  in  with  us.  He  did  not  like 
this,  and  would  fain  have  got  out  ; but  it  was 
notpolTible.  So  he  kept  as  clofe  to  me  as  he 
D 4 could, 


[ 1 

could,  thinking  himfdf  fafe,  when  he  was  near 
me.  But  flaying  a little  behind,  when  I went 
up  two  pair  of  flairs,  and  flood  clofe  on  one  fide, 
where  we  were  a little  fheltered,  a large  flone 
flruck  him  on  the  forehead,  and  the  blood 
fpouted  out  like  a flream.  He  cried  out.  “ O 
fir,  are  we  to  die  to  night  ? Wh  at  mufl  I do  ? 
What  mufl  I do  ? What  mud  I do  ?”  I faid, 
“ Pray  to  God.  He  is  able  to  deliver  you  from 
all  danger.”  He  took  my  advice,  and  began 
praying  in  fuch  a manner,  as  he  had  fcarce  done 
ever  fince  he  was  born. 

Mr.  Swindells  and  I then  went  to  prayer  : 
after  which  I told  him,  “ We  mufl  not  flay 
here.”  “ We  mufl  go  down  immediately.”  He 
faid,  “ Sir,  we  cannot  flir,  you  fee  how  the 
flones  fly  about.”  I walked  flrait  through  the 
room,  and  down  the  flairs ; and  not  a flone 
came  in,  till  we  were  at  the  bottom.  The  mob 
had  jufl  broke  open  the  door,  when  ^'e  came 
into  the  lower  room  ; and  exa£lly  while  they 
burfl  in  at  one  door,  we  walked  out  at  the  other. 
Nor  did  one  man  take  any  notice  of  us,  though 
we  were  within  five  yards  of  each  other. 

'I’hey  filled  the  houfe  at  once,  and  propofed 
fetting  it  on  fire.  But  one  of  them  happening 
to  remember  that  his  own  houfe  was  next,  with 
much  ado  perfuaded  them  not  to  do  it.  Hear* 
jng  one  of  them  cry  out,  “ They  are  gone  over 
the  grounds,”  I thought  the  advice  was  good. 
So  we  went  over  the  grounds  to  the  farther  end  of 

the 


C 8i  ] 


the  town,  where  Abraham  Jenkins  waited,  and 
undertook  to  guide  us  to  Oakhill. 

I was  riding  on  in  Shepton-lane,  it  being  now 
quite  dark,  when  he  cried  out,  “ Comedown: 
come  down  from  the  bank.”  I did  as  I was  bid  ; 
but  the  bank  being  high,  and  the  fide  very  near 
perpendicular,  1 came  down  all  at  once,  my 
horfe  and  I tumbling  one  over  another.  But 
we  both  rofe  unhurt.  In  lefs  than  an  hour  we 
came  to  Oakhill,  and  the  next  morning  to 
Briftol. 

Sund.  14.  At  feven  I preached  at  Bedminfter. 
At  Kingfwood  I began  between  eight  and  nine. 
At  Connam  about  two  (where  I read  prayers 
alfo)  and  in  Briftol  at  five.  After  the  focietv 
was  the  love-feaft : at  which  my  foul  was  re- 
freflied ; but  my  body  was  worn  out,  fo  that  I 
could  hardly  fpeak  to  be  heard  : nor  did  I reco- 
ver my  voice  for  feveral  days. 

Mond.  15.  I fet  out  for  Ireland.  We  came 
to  the  New  Pafiage  at  ten.  After  waiting  about 
five  hours,  we  found  (which  they  did  not  care 
to  confefs)  that  the  boat-men  did  not  dare  to 
venture  out.  It  blew  a ftorm.  We  then  rode 
to  the  Old  Pafiage:  but  the  boat  was  juft  gone 
off. 

Tuef.  16.  They  talked  of  pafting  early.  But 
the  ftorm  was  too  high.  1 then  walked  to  Auft, 
where  I preached  about  ten,  to  a fmall,  feriou^ 
congregation.  Between  four  and  five,  the  wind 
fomewhat  abating,  a boat  ventured  out  and  carried: 

r>  5 


C 82  ] 


US  over.  We  pafTed  through  Chepdow  foon  af- 
ter fun-fet,  and  pufhed  on,  though  it  grew  dark, 
and  the  untracked  fnow  lay  thick  upon  the 
ground.  About  eight  we  reached  the  Star,  a 
good,  though  fmall  inn,  five  long  miles  from 
Chepflovv. 

Itfnowed  all  night.  On  Wednef.  17.  We  fefc 
out  before  day  ; but  found  it  bad  travelling,  there 
being  no  path  to  be  feen,  neither  foot- If ep  of 
man  or  bead.  However  in  four  or  five  hours  we 
reached  Abergavenny,  and  Brecknock  before 
three  in  the  afternoon. 

Our  landlady  here  almoff  forced  us  to  take  a 
guide.  And  it  was  extremely  well  (he  did.  For 
the  fnow  had  fo  entirely  covered  the  roads,  that 
our  guide  himfelf  mifiook  the  tvay  more  than 
once.  So  that  if  he  had  not  been  with  us,  we 
fhould  without  doubt  have  lodged  upon  die 
mountains. 

I preached  in  the  evening  at  Builth,  and  at 
noon  the  next  day;  at  Garth  in  the  evening,  and 
twice  on  Friday. 

Satur.  20.  I preached  in  \Iaefmennys  church 
in  the  afternoon  ; at  Garth  morning  and  even- 
ing. 

Sund.  21.  I preached  in  the  morning  in  Lan- 
zunfried  church.  The  fervice  at  Builth  was  not 
over  till  pafl  two,  I then  began  in  the  church- 
yard, notwithflanding  the  nonh-ealf  wind,  to 
call  finners  to  repentance.  More  than  all  the 
town  were  gathered  together  in  tfrat  pleafant 

vale. 


C 83  ] 

vale,  and  made  the  woods  and  mountains  echo 
while  they  fung, 

Ye  mountains  and  vales, 

In  praifes  abound  ! 

Ye  hills  and  ye  dales 
Continue  the  found  : 

Break  forth  into  finging 
Ye  trees  of  the  wood  : 

For  Jefus  is  bringing 
Loft  fmners  to  God. 

In  the  evening  I preached  again  at  Garth, 
and  on  Mond.  22.  at  five  in  the  morning.  A 
little  before  fun-rife  we  took  horfe,  it  being  a 
clear  fharp  froft.  We  had  waited  four  days  in 
hopes  the  fnow  would  melt,  fearing  the  drifts  of 
it  would  lie  deep  upon  the  mountains  : particu- 
larly as  we  journeyed  northward.  But  quite  con- 
trary to  our  expeflation,  the  farther  northward 
we  went,  the  lefs  fnow  we  found,  fo  that  if 
fcarce  hindered  us  after  the  firft  day.  About  ele- 
ven we  came  to  Lanidlos.  At  the  earneft  re- 
queft  of  one  who  lived  there,  I preached  at 
noon  in  the  market-place,  to  fuch  a congre- 
gation as  no  one  could  expeft  at  an  hour’s  warn- 
ing. 

It  was  as  miith  as  we  could  do  to  reach  Mac- 
huntleth  that  night.  It  fnowed  again  from  about 
midnight  till  morning ; fo  that  no  path  w^as  to  be 
D 6 feen 


[ 84  ] 

feen  for  feveral  miles : however  we  found  our 
way  to  Tannabull,  and  paft  the  fands  in  the  af- 
ternoon, being  determined  to  reach  Carnarvon, 
if  poffible.  And  fo  we  did,  notwithftandingray 
horfe’s  lofing  a (hoe  ; but  not  till  between  nine 
and  ten  at  night. 

Wednef.  24.  We  haftened  on  to  Holy-head. 
But  all  the  {hips  were  on  the  other  fide.  Thut  f. 
25.  No  packet-boat  being  come,  I gave  notice  of 
preaching  in  the  evening.  The  hearers  were 
many  more  than  the  room  could  contain.  And 
they  all  behaved  withdecencv. 

Frid.  26.  I preached  again  in  the  evening. 
Mr.  E.  the  minifter  came  in  towards  the  clofe. 
He  was  fpeaking  warmly  to  our  landlord,  when 
Mr.  Swindells  went  to  him,  and  fpoke  a few  mild 
words.  Mr.  E.  alked  him,  to  flep  with  him  to 
his  lodgings,  where  they  had  a long  and  friendly 
converfation. 

Satur.  27.  Mr.  Swindells  informed  me,  that 
Mr.  E.  would  take  it  a favour  if  I would  write 
fome  little  thing,  “ To  advife  the  Methodifts, 
not  to  leave  the  church,  and  not  to  rail  at  their 
miniflers.*’  1 fat  down  immediately  and  wrote 
“ A Word  to  a Methodift,”  which  Mr.  E.  tranf- 
lated  into  W elfh,  and  printed. 

Sund.  28.  In  the  evening  I read  prayers  at  our 
inn,  and  preached  to  a large  and  ferious  au- 
dience. I did  the  fame  on  Monday  andTuef- 
day  evening.  Perhaps  our  flay  here  may  not  be 
in  vain. 


1 never 


C 85  ] 


I never  knew  men  make  fuch  poor,  lame  ex- 
cufes,  as  thefe  captains  did  for  not  failing.  It 
put  me^in  mind  of  the  epigram, 

“ There  are,  if  rightly  I may  think, 

“ Five  caufes,  why  a man  fhould  drink. 

Which  with  a little  alteration  would  juft  fuit 
them. 

There  are,  unlefs  my  memory  fail^ 

Five  caufes,  why  we  fhould  not  fail. 

The  fog  is  thick  : the  wind  is  high  : 

It  rains : or  may  do  by  and  by  : C 

Or any  other  reafon  why.  > 

Wedf.  March  2.  Finding  no  more  probability 
of  failing  now  tbran  the  ftrft  day  we  came  to 
Holy*head,  we  rode  into  the  country,  to  fee  for 
Mr.  William  Jones,  who  had  fome  acquaintance 
with  my  brother.  We  procured  a guide  to  fhew 
iis  the  way  to  his  houfe.  But  all  we  learnt  there 
was,  that  he  was  not  at  home.  We  lodged  at 
the  Bull’s-head.  All  the  family  came  up  to 
prayers,  and  we  had  a quiet  and  comfortable, 
-night. 

Thurf,  3.  Mr.  Flolloway,  a neighbouring  ex- 
cifeman,  invited  us  to  breakfaft  with  him.  He 
once  began  to  run  well ; and  now  refolved  to 
fet  out  afrefk.  I truft  W'e  were  fent  to  him  for 
good. 


* His 


[ 86  ] 


^ His  wife  bitterly  oppofed  this  way,  till  one 
day,  as  fhe  was  fitting  in  her  houfe,  a flafh  of 
lightning  killed  a cat  which  fat  jufi  by  her,  and 
ftruck  her  to  the  earth,  fcorching  her  flefh  in 
many  parts,  and  yet  not  at  all  fingeing  her  cloaths. 
V/hen  Ihe  came  to  herielf,  fhe  cotdd  not  but  ac- 
knowledtje  the  loud  call  of  God  ; but  her  fieri- 
onfncfs  did  not  continue  long  ; her  acquaintance 
foon  laughed  her  out  of  it. 

Yet  God  called  her  again  in  dreams  and  vifi- 
ons  of  the  night.  She  thought,  fire  was  Handing 
in  the  open  air,  when  one  appeared  in  the  clouds 
exceeding  glorious,  above  the  brightnefs  of  the 
fun;  file  foon  after  faw  a fecond,  and  then  a 
third.  One  had  a kind  of  fpear  in  hi.s  hand  ; the 
fecond,  a heefom,  wherewith  he  was  going  to 
fweep  the  earth;  the  third,  an  hour-glafs,  as 
though  the  time  was  firort.  This  fo  deeply  af- 
fefled  her,  that  (he  began  from  that  time  to  feek 
God  with  her  .whole  heart. 

At  noon  we  went  to  Air.  Morgan’s,  where  I 
lodged  in  Augufi  laft.  About  two  we  met  Air. 
Jones  and  Mr.Williams,  a clergyman  from  South 
Wales,  at  Ryd  y-Spardon.  After  Mr.  W.  had 
preached  in  Welfli,  I preached  in  EngliOi. 
Many  underftood  me,  and  felt  the  power  of  God. 

Frid.  4.  We  went  to  Llandaniel,  a mile  or 
two  from  Baldon-ferry.  Here,  again  Air.  W. 
preached  in  Welfh  and  1 in  Englilh.  I was  much 
pleafed  with  this  loving,  artlefs  people,  and  rea- 
dily 


[ 87  ] 

dily  compiled  with  their  requed,  of  preaching 
again  in  the  afternoon, 

SatLir.  5.  A-t  two  I preached  at  Ryd-y-Spardon 
to  a little,  earned  company,  who  were  ready  to 
devour  every  v/oid.  We  fpent  the  evening  very 
agreeably  with  Mr.  Jones  at  Trefoll  wm. 

* Sund.  6.  Wc  went  to  Llangefrye  church, 
though  we  underdood  little  of  what  we  heard, 
O what  a heavy  curie  was  the  confurion  of 
tongues!  And  how  grievous  are  ihe  efTetfs  of  it ! 
All  the  birds  of  the  air,  all  the  beads  of  the  field 
underdand  the  language  of  their  own  fpecies. 
Man  only  is  a Barbarian  to  man,  unintelligible 
to  his  own  brethren  ! 

* In  the  afternoon  I preached  at  Llanfehengel, 
about  fix  miles  fouth  wed  of  Llangefrye.  I have 
not  feen  a people  fo  deeply  afFefled  fince  we 
came  into  Anglefey;  their  cries  and  tears  con- 
tinued a long  time  without  any  intermidion.  O 
that  we  could  declare  to  them,  in  their  own 
tongue,  the  wonderful  works  of  God  ! 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Glanygorfe. 
When  I had  done,  Mr.  Jones  repeated  inWelfh, 
(as  he  likewife  did  in  the  afternoon)  the  fubdance 
of  what  I had  faid.  The  next  morning  we  re- 
turned to  Holy-head,  and  found  there  all  the 
packet-boats  which  we  had  left. 

I was  determined  not  to  day  another  day 
at  an  inn.  So  in  the  afternoon  I took  a 
lodging  in  a private  houfe,  not  a bow-lhot  dif- 

tant 


2 


[ 88  ] 

tarit  from  the  town,  and  removed  thither  w’ithont 
delay. 

My  congregation  this  evening  was  larger  than 
ever.  And  feveral  of  the  gentry  agreed  to  come 
the  next.  But  it  was  a little  too  late  ; for  at  mid* 
night  the  wind  came  fair,  and  before  one  we 
failed  out  of  the  harbour.  Tuef.  8.  Having  a 
gentle  gale,  it  foon  lulled  me  fall  alleep.  I w'as 
w'aked  before  five  by  a violent  llorm  ; this  con- 
tinued two  or  three  hours  longer,  and  left  us 
wdthin  fight  of  Hoath,  with  a fmall  breeze,  which 
brought  us  to  the  Black-rock,  about  four  in  the 
afternoon. 

We  hired  horfes  here  and  rode  to  Dublin,  Mr. 
Meriton,  Swindells  and  I.  We  came  to  our 
houfe  in  Cork-llreet,  (vulgarly  called  Dolphins- 
barn-lane)  while  my  brother  was  meeting  the  fo- 
ciety.  But  it  was  fome  time  before  my  voice 
could  be  heard,  for  the  noife  of  the  people, 
fliouting  and  praifing  God.  The  remaining  days 
of  the  week  I difpatched  all  thebufinefs  I could, 
and  fettled  wdth  my  brother  all  things  relating  to 
the  work. 

Sund.  13.  My  brother  preached  both  morning 
and  evening,  expefling  to  fail  at  night  : but  be- 
fore night  the  wind  turned  full  call,  and  fo  con- 
tinued all  the  w'eek. 

Mond.  14.  I began  preaching  at  five  in  the 
morning,  an  unheard-of  thing  in  Ireland.  I ex- 
pounded part  of  the  firll  chapter  of  the  Afts, 

which 


[ 89  ] 

which  I purpofe,  God  willing,  to  go  through  in 
order. 

Wednef.  i6.  I inquired  into  the  ftate  of  the 
fociety.  Moft  pompous  accounts  had  been  fent 
me  from  time  to  time,  of  the  great  numbers  that 
were  added  to  it ; fo  that  I confidently  expefiled 
to  find  therein  fix  or  feven  hundred  members. 
And  how  is  the  real  faft  ? I left  three  hundred 
and  ninety-four  members  ; and  I doubt,  if  there 
are  now  three  hundred  and  ninety-fix  ! 

* Let  this  be  a warning  to  us  all,  hov/  we  give 
into  that  hateful  cullom  of  painting  things  be- 
yond the  life.  Let  us  make  a confcience  of 
magnifying  or  exaggerating  any  thing.  Let  us 
rather  fpeak  under  than  above  the  truth.  We, 
of  all  men,  fhould  be  punftual  in  all  w'e  fay, 
that  none  of  our  w’ords  may  fall  to  the  ground. 

Sund.  20.  I preached  at  eight  on  Oxmantown- 
green.  We  expefiied  noife;  but  there  was  none  : 
the  whole  congregation  w'as  as  quiet  and  flill  as 
that  in  Brifiol  or  London. 

In  the  afternoon  my  brother  embarked.  I 
preached  about  three  in  Marlborough-ftreet,  and 
in  the  evening  at  our  own  houfe  in  Cork-lfreet. 

Wednef.  23.  I talked  w-ith  a warm  man,  who 
was  always  very  zealous  for  the  church  when  he 
was  very  drunk,  and  juft  able  to  ftammer  out  the 
Irifh  proverb,  “ No  gown,  no  crown.’’  He  was 
quickly  convinced,  that  whatever  we  were, 
he  was  himfelf  a child  of  the  devik  We  left 

• hina 


[ 90  ] 

lilm  full  of  good  refolutlons,  which  held  feveral 
days. 

I preached  at  Newgate  at  three  ; but  found 
no  ftirring  at  all  among  the  dry  bones. 

Frid.  25.  I preached  in  Marlborough-llreet  at 
five  to  the  largeft  congregation  I have  yet  feen 
in  a morning.  At  two  1 began  in  Ship-Ilreet, 
where  were  many  of  the  rich  and  gen- 
teel. I was  exceeding  weak  in  body,  having 
been  examining  clafies  all  the  day.  But  I fdt  it 
not  after  I had  fpoke  two  fentences.  I was 
flrengthened  both  in  body  and  foul- 

I fin i filed  the  clafies  the  next  day,  and  found 
them  juft  as  I expeded.  I left  three  hundred 
and  ninety-four  perfons  united  together  in  Au- 
guft.  I bad  now  admitted  between  twenty  and 
thirty,  who  had  offered  therafelves  fince  my  re- 
turn to  Dublin.  And  the  whole  number  was 
neither  more  nor  lefs  than  three  hundred  and 
ninety-fix. 

Sund.  27.  It  rained  moft  of  the  day,  fo  that 
1 was  conftrained  to  preach  in  the  houfe  only,  , 
viz.  at  our  owm  houfe,  morning  and  evening, 
and  at  Marlborough-ftreet  in  the  afternoon. 

Tuef.  29.  1 preached  in  Skinner’s-alley  at  j 
five,  to  a large  and  quiet  congregation.  I preach-  | 
ed  in  Newgate  at  two  in  the  common  hail,  the 
jailor  refufing  us  the  room  where  we  ufed  to 
preach;  but  that  is  not  the  worft.  I fee  no  fruit  l 
of  our  labour. 

Wed.  30.  I rode  to  Philip’s-town,  the  {hire-  ■ 

tow  n 


[ 91  I 

town  of  the  King's  county.  I was  obliged  to  go 
into  the  ftreet,  which  was  foon  filled  with  thofe 
who  flocked  from  every  fide  : to  whom  I de- 
clared Jefus  Chriji,  our  wifdom,  rigkteoufnefs, 
fanBijicaiion  and  redemption. 

Thurf.  31.  One  would  have  difluaded  me 
from  preaclring  at  five,  being  fure  none  would 
rife  fo  foon.  But  I kept  my  hour,  and  had  a 
large  and  ferious  congregation.  After  preaching 
I fpoke  feverally  to  thofe  of  the  fociety,  of  whom 
forty  were  troopers.  At  noon  I preached  to 
(1  think)  the  largefl  congregation  I had  feen 
fince  I came  from  Buihh.  God  did  then  make 
a clear  offer  of  eternal  life  to  all  the  Inhabitants 
of  Philip’s-town.  But  how  few  retained  thefe 
good  impreflions  one  week  ? Or  would  efl’efclual- 
ly  come  to  him,  that  they  might  have  life? 

In  the  evening  1 preached  at  Tullamore,  to 
mofl  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town.  Abundance 
of  them  came  again  at  five  in  the  morning.  But 
he  that  endureth  to  the  end  fliall  be  fared. 

Prid.  April  1.  I preached  at  Clara,  to  a vafl 
number  of  well-behaved  people  ; although  fome 
of  them  came  in  their  coaches,  and  were  (I  was- 
informed)  of  the  befl:  quality  in  the  country. 
Hov/  few  of  thefe  would  have  returned  empty,, 
if  they  had  heard  the  word  of  God,  not  out  of 
curiofity  merely,  but  from  a real  defire  to  know 
and  do  his  will  ? 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Temple-Macque- 
tcer,  and  again  at  five  in  the  morning.  About 

one 


[ 9*  } 

one  (Sat.  2.)  we  came  to  Moat,  the  pleafaiUeft 
town  I have  yet  feen  in  Ireland.  Here  I preach- 
ed to  an  handful  of  ferlous  people,  and  then  haf- 
lened  on  to  Athlone.  At  fix  I preached  from 
the  window  of  an  unfinifhed  houfe  oppofite  to 
the  Market-houfe  (which  would  not  have  con- 
tained one  half  of  the  congregation)  on  Ye  know 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrijl,  1 fcarce  ever 
faw  a better  behaved,  or  more  attentive  congre- 
gation. Indeed  fo  civil  a people  as  the  Irifli  in  ge-  : 
neral,  I never  faw  either  in  Europe  or  America. 

Sund.  3.  I preached  at  five  to,  at  leaft,  three 
hundred  hearers.  I walked  from  thence  10  fee  a 
poor  woman  that  was  Tick,  about  a mile  from  the 
town  : about  an  hundred  and  fifty  people  ran 
after  me.  After  I had  prayed  with  the  fick  per- 
fon,  being  unwilling  fo  many  people  (hould’go 
empty  away,  I chofe  a fmooth,  grafiy  place 
near  the  road,  where  we  all  kneeled  down  to 
prayer,  after  which  we  fung  a pfalm,  and  I gave 
them  a fiiort  exhortation.  At  eleven,  we  went 
to  church  and  heard  a plain,  ufeful  fermon.  At 
two,  I preached  on  the  Connaught  fide  of  the 
bridge,  where  there  are  only  (they  informed  me) 
five  or  fix  families  of  proteftants.  Such  a com- 
pany of  people  (many  faid)  had  never  before 
been  feen  together  at  Athlone;  many  coming 
from  all  the  country  round,  and  (for  the  prefent)  | 
receiving  the  word  with  joy.  I preached  again  1 
at  fix  in  the  fame  place,  and  to  nearly  the  fame  1 
(only  a little  larger)  congregation:  the  greater  1 

part  I 


[ 93  ] 

part  wliereof  (notwithflanding  the  prohibition  of 
: their  pri'eftsj  I afterward  found  were  papifts. 
f * Mond.  4.  I preached  once  more  at  five ; 

! and  a great  part  of  the  congregation  was  in  tears. 

; Indeed  almofi  all  the  town  appeared  to  be  mov- 
ed, full  of  good-will  and  defires  of  fah'ation. 

! But  the  waters  fpread  too  wide  to  be  deep.  I 
I found  not  one  under  any  flrong  conviftion, 
^ much  lefs  had  any  one  attained  the  knowledge 
of  falvation,  in  hearing  above  thirty  fermoiis. 
So  that  as  yet  no  judgment  could  be  formed  of 
: the  future  work  of  God  in  this  place. 

I took  horfe  at  ten,  and  about  twelve  preach- 
ed at  Moat  to  a little  larger  congregation  than 
I before.  I could  not  but  obferve  the  zeal  of 
f thefe  young  difciples  ; they  were  vehemently 
angry  at  a man’s  throwing  a cabbage-ftalk.  Let 
them  keep  their  courage  till  they  fee  fuch  a fight 
as  that  at  Walfal,  or  Shepton. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tyrrel’s-pafs, 
■and  found  great  enlargement  of  heart.  But 
iiwhen  the  fociety  met,  I was  quite  exhaufted ; fo 
that  I difmift  them,  after  a fhort  exhortation. 

Tuef.  5,  Our  room  was  filled  at  five.  After 
■ preaching  i examined  the  clafies.  I found  a 
’ furprizing  opennefs  among  them.  When  I afk- 
ed  one  in  particular,  “ How  he  had  lived  in 
time  paft  ?”  He -fpread  abroad  his  hands  and  faid 
with  many  tears,  “ Here  I (land,  a grey-headed 
monfier  of  all  manner  of  wickednefs;”  which  I 
I rerily  believe,  had  it  -been  defired,  he  would 

' have 

iJ 


[ 94  ] 

have  explained  before  them  all.  Much  in  the 
fame  manner  fpoke  one  who  came  from  Con- 
naught, but  with  huge  affliction  and  difmay  ; 
we  determined  to  wrellle  with  God  in  lier  behalf, 
which  we  did  for  above  an  hour;  and  he  heard 
the  prayer,  fo  that  her  foul  was  filled  with 
joy  unfpeakable.  Mr.  Jonathan  Handy,  great- 
ly borrowing  before,  was  alfo  now  enabled  to  re- 
joice in  God  : and  four  other  peifons  were  cut 
to  the  heart,  and  cried  aloud  to  him  that  is 
mighty  to  fave. 

Wed,  6.  I baptized  feven  perfons  educated 
among  the  quakers.  In  the  afternoon  we  rode 
to  Philip’s  town,  but  the  feene  w’as  changed- 
The  curiofity  of  the  people  was  fatisfied,  and 
few  of  them  cared  to  hear  any  more. 

* As  boon  as  I mounted  my  hoifc,  he  began 
to  fnort  and  run  backteard  wdihout  any  vihble 
caufe,  one  whipt  him  behind,  and  I before,  but 
it  profited  nothing : he  leaped  to  and  fro,  from 
fide  to  fide,  till  he  came  over-againfl  a gateway, 
into  which  he  ran  backward,  and  tumbled  head 
over  heels.  I rofe  unhurt.  He  then  went  on 
■quietly. 

At  Tullamore  in  the  evening,  well  nigh  all 
the  town,  rich  and  poor,  were  gathered  toge- 
ther, I ufed  great  plainnefs  of  fpeech  in  apply- 
ing thofe  words.  All  have  Jinned,  and  come Jhort  oj 
the  glory  oJ  God.  The  next  day,  being  Good- 
friday,  I preached  at  five,  to  a large  and  feri- 
•ous  congregation.  Between  one  and  tw'o,  1 

preacher 


preached  at  Clara,  and  then  rode  to  Athlone. 

I preached  at  fix,  on  Ought  not  Cknjl  to  have 
Juffered  theft  things,  and  after  that  to  enter 
into  his  glory  f So  general  a dra'A'ing  I never 
knew  among  anv  people,  fo  that  as  yet  none 
even  Jeans  to  oppofe  the  truth. 

Sat.  p.  I preached  in  Connaught,  a few  miles 
from  Athlone.  Many  heard-,  but  I doubtyc/i! 
nothing. 

The  Shannon  comes  within  a mile  of  the 
houfe  where  I preached.  1 think  there  is  not 
fitch  another  river  in  Europe;  it  is  here  ten  or 
twelve  miles  over,  though  fcarce  thirty  miles 
from  its  fountain-head.  There  are  many  iflands 
in  It,  once  well  inhabited,  but  now  moftly  defo- 
late.  In  ahnoft  every  one  is  the  ruins  of  a 
church;  in  one,  the  remains  of  no  lefs  than 
feven.  I fear.  God  hath  ftlll  a controverfy 
with  this  land,  becaufe  it  is  defiled  with  blood. 

April  lo.  Eafter-day  ; never  was  fuch  a con- 
gregation feen  before  at  the  facrament  in  Ath- 
•ione.  I preached  at  three.  Abundance  of  Pa- 
pifts  flocked  to  hear ; fo  that  the  prieft,  feeing 
his  command  did  not  avail,  came  in  perfon  at 
fix,  and  drove  them  away  before  him  like  a flock 
of  flreep. 

Mond.  11.  I preached  at  five  the  terrors  of 
the  Lord,  in  the  llrongefi  manner  I was  able. 
But  ftill  they  who  are  ready  to  eat  up  every 
word,  do  not  appear  to  digef  any  part  of  it. 

, In  the  evening  there  appeared  more  emotion 


[ 96  ] 

in  the  congregation  than  ever  I had  feen  before. 
But  it  was  in  a manner  I never  faw  : not  in  one 
here  and  there,  but  In  all.  Perhaps  God  is 
working  here  in  a way  we  have  not  known,  go-  ' 
on  with  a fiow  and  even  motion  through  , 
the  whole  body  of  the  people,  that  they  may  all  | 
remember  themfelves  and  be  turned  unto  the  ' 
Lord. 

Tuef.  12.  I rode  to  Clara,  where  I was  quick- 
ly informed,  that  there  ivas  to  begin  in  an  hour’s  , 
time  a famous  cock-fight,  to  which  almoft  all  : 
the  country  was  coming  from  every  fide.  Hop- 
ing to  engage  fome  part  of  them  in  a better  em- 
ploy. I began  preaching  in  the  ftreet  as  foon  as  ; 
polhble.  One  or  two  hundred  flopped,  and 
iiflened  a while,  and  pulled  off  their  hats,  and 
lorgot  their  diverfion. 

The  congregation  at  Tullamore  in  the  even- 
ing was  larger  than  ever  before,  and  deep  at- 
tention fat  on  every  face.  Toward  the  latter 
end  of  the  fermon,  there  began  a violent  florm 
of  hail.  I defired  the  people  to  cover  their 
heads,  but  the  greater  part  of  them  would  not; 
nor  did  any  one  go  away  till  I concluded  my 
difcourfe. 

Wed.  13.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Tyr- 
rel’s-pafs.  The  congregation  here  alfo  was  larger 
than  ever ; and  the  word  of  God  feemed  to 
take  deeper  root  here  than  in  any  other  part  of 
this  country. 

Thurf.  14.  The  houfe  was  full  at  five.  In 

the 


[ 97  ] 

the  evening  many  of  the  neighbouring  gentle- 
men were  prefent,  but  none  mocked.  That  is 
not  the  cuftom  here;  all  attend  to  what  is 
fpoken  in  the  name  of  God  ; they  do  not  under- 
ftand  the  making  fport  with  facred  things  ; fo 
that  whether  they  approve  or  no,  they  behave 
with  ferioiifnefs. 

Frid.  15.  I rode  to  Edinderry.  Abundance 
of  people  were  quickly  gathered  together.  Hav- 
ing been  difturbed  in  the  night  by  Mr.  Swin- 
dells, who  lay  with  me  and  had  a kind  of  apo- 
ple£fic  fit,  I was  not  at  all  well  about  noon, 
when  I began  to  preach,  in  a large  walk,  on 
one  fide  of  the  town,  and  the  fun  fhone  hot 
upon  my  head,  which  had  been  aking  all  the 
day  ; but  I forgot  this  before  I had  fpoken  long, 
and  when  1 had  finifhed  my  difcourfe,  I left  all 
my  wearinefs  and  pain  behind  and  rode  on  in 
perfeft  health  to  Dublin. 

Sat.  16.  I found  great  reafon  to  praife  God 
for  the  work  wrought  among  the  people  in  my 
abfence.  But  flill  there  is  no  fuch  work  as  I 
look  for.  I fee  nothing  yet  but  drops  before  a 
fhower. 

Sund.  17.  I preached  at  Skinner’s-Alley,  both 
morning  and  evening.  About  four  I went  to 
St.  Luke’s  church,  being  very  near  us.  When 
I came  out,  1 had  a large  attendance,  even  in 
the  church-yard,  hallowing  and  calling  names. 
I am  much  milfaken,  if  many  of  the  warmeft 
zealots  for  the  church,  would  ever  come  within 
the  doors,  if  they  were  thus  to  run  the  gauntlet 

VoL.  XXIX.  E every 


[ 98  ] 

every  time  they  came.  Would  they  not  rather 
fleep  in  a whole  fkin  ? 

* Wed.  20.  I fpent  an  agreeable  hour  with 
Mr.  Miller,  the  Lutheran  minifler.  From  him 
I learned,  that  the  earneft  religion  which  I 
found,  in  fo  many  parts  of  Germany,  is  but  of 
late  date,  having  taken  its  rife  from  one  man, 
Auguft  Harman  Francke  ! So  can  God,  if  it 
pleafeth  him,  enable  one  man,  to  revive  his  | 
work  throughout  a whole  nation.  i 

Sat.  23.  I read  fome  hours,  an  extremely  dull  i 
book.  Sir  James  Ware’s  antiquities  of  Ireland. 

By  the  vaft  number  of  ruins  which  are  feen  in 
all  parts,  I had  always  fufpefted  ^vhat  he  fhews 
at  large,  namely,  that  in  ancient  times  it  was  more 
populous  tenfold  than  it  is  now  ; many  that  were 
large  cities,  being  now  ruinous  heaps  ; many 
Ihrunk  into  inconfiderable  villages. 

I vifited  one  in  the  afternoon  who  was  ill  of  a 
fever,  and  lay  in  a very  clofe  room.  While  I 
was  near  him,  I found  myfeif  not  well.  After  my 
return  home,  I felt  my  ftomach  out  of  order. 

But  I imagined  it  w’as  not  worth  any  notice,  and 
would  pafs  off  before  the  morning. 

Sund.  24.  I preached  at  Skinner’s  Alley  at  five, 
and  on  Oxmantown-Green  at  eight,  I was  weak 
in  body,  but  w-as  greatly  revived  by  the  feriouf- 
nefs  and  earneftnefs  of  the  congregation.  Refolv- 
ing  to  improve  the  opportunity,  I gave  notice  of 
preaching  there  again  in  the  afternoon  ; which  I 
did  to  a congregation  much  more  numerous,  and 

equally 


[ 99  ] 

equally  attentive.  As  I came  home  I was  glad 
to  lie  down,  having  a quinfey  attended  wdth  a 
fever.  However,  when  the  fociety  met,  I made 
a Ihift  to  creep  in  among  them.  Immediately 
my  voice  was  reftored.  I fpoke  without  pain, 
for  near  an  hour  together.  And  great  was  our 
rejoicing  over  each  other ; knowing  that  God 
would  order  all  things  well. 

Mond.  25.  Finding  my  fever  greatly  increaf- 
ed,  I judged  it  would  be  heft  to  keep  my  bed, 
and  to  live  a while  on  apples  and  apple-tea.  On 
Tuelday  I was  quite  well,  and  fhould  have  preach- 
ed, but  that  Dr,  R.  (who  had  been  with  me 
twice)  infilled  on  my  reding  for  a time. 

* I read  to-day  what  is  accounted  the  molt 
correft  hillory  of  St.  Patrick  that  is  extant.  And 
on  the  matureft  confideration,  I was  much  in- 
clined to  believe,  that  St.  Patrick  and  St.  George 
were  of  one  family.  The  whole  dory  fmells 
flrong  of  romance.  To  touch  onlv  011  a few 
particulars.  I objeft  to  his  fird  fetting  out. 
The  bifhop  of  Rome  had  no  fuch  power  in  the 
beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  as  this  account 
fuppofes.  Nor  would  his  uncle,  the  bifiiop  of 
Tours,  have  fent  him  in  that  age  to  Rome  for  a 
commidion  to  convert  Ireland  ; having  himfelf 
as  much  authority  over  that  land,  as  any  Italian 
bifltop  whatever.  Again,  if  God  had  fent  him 
thither,  he  w'ould  not  fo  long  have  buried  his 
talent  in  the  earth.  I never  heard  before  of  an 
apodle  fleeping  thirty-five  years,  and  beginning 
E 2 to 


[ ] 

to  preach  at  threefcore.  But  his  fuccefs  flaggers 
me  the  mofl  of  all ; no  blood  of  the  martyrs  is 
here  : no  reproach,  no  fcandal  of  the  crofs  ; no 
perfecuiion  to  thofe  that  will  live  godly.  No* 
thing  is  to  be  heard  of  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end,  but  kings,  nobles,  warriors  bowing 
down  before  him.  Thoufands  are  converted, 
without  any  oppofition  at  all  : twelve  thoufand 
at  one  fermon.  If  thefe  things  were  fo,  either 
there  was  then  no  devil  in  the  world,  or  St. 
Patrick  did  not  preach  the  gofpel  of  Chrift. 

* Wed.  27.  In  the  evening  I read  the  letters; 
my  voice  being  weak,  but  I believe  audible.  As 
I was  reading  one  from  S.  G.  a young  woman 
dropt  down,  and  cried  out  exceedingly.  But 
in  a few  minutes  her  forrow  was  turned  into  joy, 
and  her  mourning  into  praife. 

* Thurf.  28.  Was  the  day  fixt  for  my  going 
into  the  country.  But  all  about  me  began  to 
cry  out,  “ Sure  you  will  not  go  to-day  ? See  how’ 
the  rain  pours  down  ?”  I told  them,  “ I mtifl 
keep  my  word,  if  poflible.”  But  before  five, 
the  man  of  whom  I had  befpoke  an  horfe  fent 
w'ord,  “ His  horfe  fhould  not  go  out  in  fuch  a 
day.”  I fent  one  who  brought  him  to  a better 
mind.  So  about  fix  I took  horfe.  About  nine 
I called  at  Killcock.  The  old  landlord  was  ill  of 
the  gout ; and  his  wife  of  a complication  of  dif- 
tempers.  But  when  I told  her,  “ The  Lord 
loveth  whom  he  chafteneth,  and  all  thefe  are 
tokens  of  his  love.”  She  burll  out  “ O Lord,  I 

offer 


[ 101  ] 


offer  thee  all  my  fufferings,  my  pain,  my  fick- 
nefs.  If  thou  lovefl;  me,  it  is  enough.  Here  1 
am  : take  ^nd  do  with  me  what  thou  wilt !” 

Between  one  and  two  we  came  to  Kinnegad. 
My  ftrength  was  now  pretty  well  exhaufted  ; fo 
that  when  we  mounted  again,  after  refting  an 
hour,  it  was  as  much  as  I could  do,  to  fit  my 
horfe.  We  had  near  eleven  Irifh  (meafured) 
miles  to  ride,  which  are  equal  to  fourteen  Eng- 
liOi.  I got  over  them  pretty  well  in  three  hours, 
and  by  fix  reached  Tyrrel-pafs. 

At  feven  I recovered  my  flrength,  fo  as  to 
preach  and  meet  the  fociety  : which  began  now 
to  be  at  a (land,  with  regard  to  nuinber:  but 
not  with  regard  to  the  grace  of  God. 

Frid.  2g,  I rode  to  Temple-Macqueteer,  and 
thence  toward  Athlone.  We  came  at  leaft  an 
hour  before  we  were  expefted.  Neverthelefs 
we  were  met  by  many  of  our  brethren.  The 
firft  I faw,  about  two  miles  from  the  town,  were 
a dozen  little  boys  running  with  all  their  might, 
fome  bare-headed,  fome  bare- footed  and  bare- 
legged: fo  they  had  their  defire  of  fpeaking  to 
me  firft,  the  others  being  ftill  behind. 

Sat.  30.  I found  the  roaring  lion  began  to 
fhake  himfelf  here  alfo.  Some  papifts  and  two 
or  three  good  proteftant  families  were  cordially 
joined  together,  to  oppofe  the  work  of  God  ; 
but  they  durft  not  yet  do  it  openly,  the  ftream 
running  fo  ftrong  againft  them. 

Sund.  May  1.  Great  part  of  the  town  was  pre- 
E 3 fent 


[ 102  ] 

fent  at  five,  and  I found  began  to  fetl  what  was 
fpoken.  Yet  fiill  the  imprefiion  is  not  made  as 
in  other  places,  on  one  here  and  there  only. 
But  the  main  body  of  the  hearers  feem  to  go  on 
together  with  an  even  pace. 

About  two  I preached  on  the  Connaught  fide 
of  the  bridge,  to  an  attentive  multitude  both  of 
proteftants  and  papifls:  whofe  priefl,  perceiving 
he  profited  nothing,  at  five  came  himfelf.  I 
preached  on  Is  there  no  balm  inGilead?  And  could 
not  help  applying  to  the  papifts  in  particular.  I 
am  fatisfied  many  of  them  were  almofi  perfuaded 
to  give  themfelves  up  to  the  great  Phyfician  of 
fouls. 

Tuef.  3.  I rode  to  Birr,  twenty  miles  from 
Athlone,  and  the  key  of  the  felTions-houfe  not 
biting  to  be  found,  declared  The  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jefus  Chriji  in  the  ftreet,  to  a dull,  rude, 
fenfelefs  multitude.  Many  laughed  the  greater 
part  of  the  time.  Some  went  away  juft  in  the 
middle  of  a fentence.  And  yet  when  one  cri- 
ed out  (a  Carmelite  frier,  clerk  to  the  prieftj 
“ You  lie,  you  lie.”  The  zealous  proteftants 
cried  out,  “ Knock  him  down.”  And  it  was  no 
fooner  faid  than  done.  I faw  fome  buftle,  but 
knew  not  what  was  the  matter,  till  the  whole 
was  over. 

In  the  evening  we  rode  tX)  Balliboy.  There 
being  no  houfe  that  could  contain  the  congrega- 
tion, 1 preached  here  alfo  in  the  ftreet.  I was 
afraid,  in  a new  place,  there  would  be  but  few 

in 


[ 10  3 ] 

in  the  morning ; but  there  was  a confiderable 
number,  and  Inch  a blelhng  as  I had  fcarce  found 
fince  I landed  in  Ireland. 

Wednef.  4.  I rode  to  Clara,  and  preached  to 
a fmall  company,  who  were  not  afraid  of  a ftor- 
my  day.  I fpenc  half  an  hour  after  fermon 
with  a few  feiious  people,  and  then  rode  to  Tul- 
iaraore. 

One  who  looks  on  the  common  Irifh  cabblns, 
might  imagine  Saturn  flill  reigned  here  : 

Cum frigida  parvas 

Praberet  fpdunca  domes  \ ignemq-,  laremqi 

Et  pecus  iS?  dominos  communi  clauderet  umbra. 

Communi  umbra  indeed  : for  no  light  can  come 
into  the  earth  or  llraw-built  cavern,  on  the  maf- 
ter  and  his  cattle,  but  at  one  hole,  which  is  both 
window,  chimney  and  door. 

Thurf.  g.  Though  ray  flux  continually  in- 
creafed,  (which  tvas  caufed  by  my  eating  a bad  egg 
at  Birr]  yet  I was  unwilling  to  break  my  word, 
and  fo  made  fhift  to  ride  in  the  afternoon  to 
Mountmelick.  I had  not  feen  fuch  a congrega- 
tion before,  fmee  I fet  out  from  Dublin.  And  the 
greater  part  did  not  ftand  like  flocks  and  flones, 
but  feemed  to  underfland  what  I fpake  of  wor- 
fhipping  God  in  fpirit  and  in  truth. 

Frid.  6.  More  people  came  at  five,  than  I had 
feen  at  that  hour  in  any  part  of  Ireland.  And  I 
E 4 found 


[ 104  J 

found  my  heart  fo  moved  towards  them,  that  in 
fpite  of  weaknefs  and  pain,  I inforced  for  more 
than  an  hour,  thofe  folemn  words,  The  king- 
dom of  God  IS  at  hand  : repent  ye  and  believe  the 
gofpel. 

Hence  I rode  to  Philip’s-town,  a poor,  dry, 
barren  place.  I pray  God  the  firft  may  not  be 
laft. 

Satur.  7.  I fet  out  in  the  morning,  and  after 
refling  two  hours  at  Tullamore,  and  two  or  three 
more  at  Moat,  I rode  on  to  Athlone,  and 
preached  at  fix,  on  He  healelh  them  that  are  bro- 
ken in  heart.  1 felt  no  wearinefs  or  pain  till  I 
had  done  fpeaking,  but  then  found,  I could  not 
meet  the  fociety,  being  ill  able  to  walk  the 
length  of  the  room.  But  God  gave  me  rcfrefliing 
fleep, 

Sund.  8.  I preached  at  five,  though  I could 
not  well  Hand.  I then  fet  out  for  Aghrim,  in  the 
county  of  Galway,  thirteen  Connaught,  i.  e. 
Yorldhire  miles  from  Athlone.  The  morning 
prayers,  fo  called,  began  about  twelve ; after 
which  we  had  aM'arm  fermon  againft  enthufiafts. 
I could  not  have  come  at  a better  time.  For  I 
began  immediately  after,  and  all  that  were  in  the 
church,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor  flopped  to 
hear  me.  In  explaining  the  inward-  kingdom  of 
God,  I had  a fair  occafion  to  confider  what  we 
had  juft  heard;  and  God  renewed  my  ftrength, 
and  I trull,  applied  his  woid  to  the  hearts  of  moll 
of  the  hearers. 


Mr, 


r »o5  ] 


Mr.  S.  a neighbouring  juftice  of  peace,  as  foon 
as  I had  done,  defired  me  to  dine  with  him. 
After  dinner  I haftened  back  to  Athlone,  and 
began  preaching  about  fix  ; five  clergymen  were 
of  the  audience,  and  abundance  of  Romaniils. 
Such  opportunity  I never  had  before  in  thefe 
parts. 

Mond.  9.  Having  not  had  an  hour’s  found 
fleep  from  the  time  I lay  down  till  I rofe,  I was 
in  doubt,  whether  I could  preach  or  not ; how- 
ever I went  to  the  market-place  as  ufual  ; and 
found  no  want  of  flrength,  till  I had  fully  de- 
clared the  redemption  that  is  in  Jefus  Chrijl. 
I had  defigned  afterwards  to  fettle  the  fociety 
throughly  ; but  I was  not  able  to  fit  up  fa 
long. 

Many  advifed  me,  not  to  go  out  at  night,  the 
wind  being  extremely  cold  and  bluftering.  But 
I could  in  no  tvife  corifent  to  fpare  myfelf,  at 
fuch  a time  as  this.  I preached  on.  Come  unto  me^ 
all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden.  And  I 
found  myfelf  at  lead  as  well  when  I had  done,  as 
I was  before  I begun. 

Tuef.  10.  With  much  difficulty  I broke  away 
from  this  immeafurably-loving  people  and  not 
fo  foon  as  1 Imagined  neither;  for  when  we 
drew  near  to  the  turnpike,  about  a mile  from  the 
town,  a multitude  waited  for  us  at  the  top  of  the 
hill.  They  fell  back  on  each  fide,  to  make  us 
way,  and  then  joined  and  clofed  us  in.  After 

finging 


[ ] 

finging  two  or  three  verfes,  I put  forward,  when 
on  a fudden  I was  a little  furprized,  by  fuch  a 
cry  of  men,  women  and  children,  as  I never 
heard  before.  Yet  a little  while,  and  we  fhall 
meet,  to  part  no  more  ; and  forrow  and  fighing 
fhall  flee  away  for  ever. 

* Inftead  of  going  flrait  toTullamore,  f could 
not  be  eafy,  without  going  round  by  Coolylough ; 
I knew  not  why  ; for  I did  not  know  then  that 
Mr.  Handy’s  wife,  who  bad  been  brought  to  bed 
a few  days,  had  an  earneft  defire  to  fee  me  once 
more  before  I left  ihe  kingdom.  She  could  not 
avoid  praying  for  it,  though  her  fifter  checked 
her  again  and  again,  telling  her,  “ It  could  not 
be.”  Before  the  debate  was  concluded,  I came 
in.  So  they  wondered,  and  praifed  God. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tullamore,  and 
at  five  in  the  morning.  I was  then  glad  to  lie 
down.  In  the  afternoon,  Wednef.  it.  I rode 
once  more  to  Mountmelick.  The  congregation, 
both  in  the  evening  and  the  next  morning,  was 
larger  than  before. 

After  preaching  a grey-headed  man  came  to 
me,  bitterly  lamenting,  that  he  had  lived  many 
years  without  knowing  that  he  had  need  of  a 
phyfician.  Immediately  came  another,  who  had 
been  a harmlefs  man  as  any  in  the  towm  ; he 
would  have  fpoke,  but  could  not.  I then  fpoke 
to  him  ; but  not  two  minutes  before  he  funk 
to  the  ground.  So  I perceived  I had  not 

fpent 


[ 107  ] 

fpent  my  little  ftrength  here,  as  one  that  beatetk 
the  air. 

* I took  the  ftrait  road  from  hence  to  Dublin. 
Here  likewife  I obferved  abundance  of  ruined 
buildings ; but  I obferved  alfo,  that  fome  of 
them  were  never  finifhed  ; and  fome  had  been 
pulled  down  by  thofe  who  built  them.  Such  is 
the  amazing  ficklenefs  of  this  people.  Almoft 
every  one  who  has  his  fortune  in  his  own  hands, 
Diruit,  cedijicaf,  7nufat  quadrata  rotundis,  and 
leaves  thofe  monuments  of  his  folly  to  all  fuc- 
ceeding  generations. 

I reached  Dublin  lii  the  evening,  faint  and 
weary  ; but  the  two  next  days  I refted.  Sund, 
15.  Finding  my  ftrength  greatly  reftored,  I 
preached  at  five,  and  at  eight  on  Oxmantown- 
green.  1 expefled  to  fail  as  foon  as  I had  done  j 
but  the  captain  putting  it  off  (as  their  manner  is) 
gave  me  an  opportunity  of  declaring  the  gofpel 
of  peace  to  a flill  larger  congregation  in  the 
evening.  * One  of  them,  after  liftning  fome 
time,  cried  out,  fhaking  his  head,  “ Ay,  he  is  a 
Jefuit ; that’s  plain.”  To  which  a popifh  prieft, 
who  happened  to  be  near,  replied  aloud,  “ No, 
he  is  not.  I would  to  God  he  was.” 

Mond.  16.  Obferving  a large  congregation 
in  the  evening,  and  many  flrangers  among  them, 

I preached  more  roughly  than  ever  I had  done 
in  Dublin,  on  thofe  awful  words,  What  is  a iimi 
projited,  if  he  Jhould  gain  the  whole  zvorld  and  lofe 
his  own  foul? 

E 6 


TiieC 


C ] 

Tuef.  17.  I fpoke  ftrong  and  plain  words 
again,  both  in  the  morning  and  evening : and 
fliould  not  have  regretted  my  being  detained, 
had  it  been  only  for  the  bleffings  of  this  day. 

Wednef.  18.  We  took  Ihip.  The  wind  was 
fmall  in  the  afternoon,  but  exceeding  high  to- 
wards night.  About  eight  I laid  me  down  on  the 
quarler-deck.  I wa's  foon  wet  from  head  to  foot, 
but  I took  no  cold  at  all.  About  four  in  the 
morning  we  landed  at  Holy-head,  and  in  the 
evening  reached  Carnarvon. 

Frid.  20.  I rode  with  Mr.  C.  Perronet  to 
Machuntletb,  and  the  next  day,  Satur.  21.  to 
Builth.  I had  no  defire  to  go  further,  as  it 
rained  hard ; but  Mr.  Philips  preft  us  to  go  on 
to  Garth.  We  came  thither  juft  as  they  were 
fingiiig  before  family-prayer  ; fo  I took  the  book 
and  preached  on  thofe  words,  Behold,  to  fear  ihe 
Lord,  that  is  wifdom,  and  to  depart  from  evil,  that 
is  underfanding. 

Sund.  22,  At  eight  I preached  at  Garth,  after- 
wards in  Maefmennys  church,  and  at  Builth  in 
the  afternoon.  We  propofed  going  this  evening 
to  John  Price’s  at  Mertha ; but  fearing  he 
might  be  at  the  fociety  (two  miles  from  his 
houfe)  we  went  round  that  way,  and  came  while 
the  exhorter  was  in  the  midft  of  his  fermon.  I 
preached  when  he  had  done.  About  eight  we 
came  to  Mertha,  and  flept  in  peace. 

Mond.  23.  We  were  on  horfeback  at  four 
o’clock,  and  at  four  in  the  afternoon  came  to 

Cardiff. 


[ 109  ] 

Cardiff.  The  rain  obliged  me  to  preach  in  the 
room.  Tuef.  14.  I breakfafted  at  Fonmon, 
dined  at  Wenv'o,  and  preached  at  Cardiff  in  the 
evening.  Wednef.  25.  We  fet  out  after  preach- 
ing, and  in  the  afternoon  came  to  Bridol, 

Whitfunday,  May  29.  Our  firft  fervice  began 
about  four,  at  the  Weaver’s-hall.  At  feven  I 
preached  in  the  Old  Orchard.  At  ten  I began 
in  Kingfwood  : where  at  two  (the  houfe  being 
too  final]  for  the  congregation,  I preached  un- 
der the  fycamore-tree.  At  five  I preached  in  the 
Old  Orchard,  and  then  rode  to  Kingfwood, 
where  we  concluded  the  day  with  a love-feafl. 

Mond.  30.  I preached  at  three  in  the  Old 
Orchard,  and  in  the  evening  at  Bath.  Tuef.  31. 
In  the  evening  I preached  at  Reading,  and 
Wednef.  June  1.  I reached  London. 

Satur.  4.  I was  fent  for  by  Capt.  H.  one  who 
had  been  firongly  prejudiced  againft  us.  But  the 
arrows  of  the  Almighty  now  ccnftrained  him 
to  cry  out,  “ Lord,  fend  by  whom  thou  wilt 
fend  !” 

Sund.  3.  I preached  in  Moorfields  both  morn* 
ing  and  evening.  There  had  been  much  tumult 
there  the  laft  Sunday  : but  all  was  quiet  now  ; 
and  the  power  of  God  feemed  even  to  compel 
finners  to  come  in. 

Sund.  12.  1 defigned  preaching  in  the  fields 
at  feven ; but  the  thunder,  and  lightning,  and 
rain  prevented.  At  eleven  I preached  in  St. 

Bartho- 


[ no  ] 

Bartholomew’s  church.  Deep  attention  fat  on 
every  face,  while  1 explained  and,  by  the  grace 
of  God,  preft  home  thofe  words.  Thou  art  not 
far fro  m the  kingdom  of  God. 

* Mond.  13.  I fpent  an  hour  or  two  with  Dr. 
Pepufch.  He  afferted,  “ that  the  art  ofmufic  is 
loft  : that  the  ancients  only  underftood  it  in  its 
perfeftion  ; that  it  was  revived  a little  in  the 
reign  of  King  Henry  VIII.  by  Tallys  and  his  co- 
temporaries ; as  alfo  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Eli- 
zabeth, who  was  a judge  and  patronefs  of  it : 
that  after  her  reign  it  funk  for  fixty  or  feventy 
years,  till  Purcell  made  fome  attempts  to  reflore 
it : but  that  ever  fince  the  true,  ancient  art,  de- 
pending on  nature  and  mathematical  principles, 
had  gained  no  ground,  the  prelent  mailers  hav- 
ing no  fixed  principles  at  all.” 

Wednef.  15.  I preached  once  more  at  St. 
Bartholomew’s.  How  ftrangely  is  the  fcene 
changed  ! What  laughter  and  tumult  was  there 
among  “ the  beft  of  the  parifii,”  when  we 
preached  in  a London  church  ten  years  ago  ? 
And  now  all  are  calm  and  quietly  attentive, 
from  the  leaft  even  to  the  greateft! 

Sund.  19.  The  congregation  in  Moorfields 
was  greatly  increafed,  both  morning  and  after- 
noon ; and  their  ferioufnefs  increafed  with  their 
number,  fo  that  it  was  comfortable  even  to  fee 
them.  In  the  evening,  to  eafe  me  a little  in  my 
journey,  as  I had  not  yet  recovered  my  ftrength. 

Colonel 


[ ] 

Colonel  Gumley  carried  me  in  his  chair  to 
Brentford. 

Mond.  20.  I preached  at  Reading  at  noon,  to 
a ferious,  well-behaved  congregation,  and  in  the 
afternoon  rode  to  Hungerford.  Tuef.  21.  I 
preached  in  the  Old  Orchard  at  Briftol,  on,  Re- 
joice in  the  Lord,  ye  righteous. 

Frid.  June  24.  The  day  we  had  appointed  for 
opening  the  fchool  at  Klngfwood,  I preached 
there  on,  Train  up  a child  in  the  way  that  he 
Jhould go,  and  when  he  is  old,  he  will  not  depart 
from  It.  My  brother  and  I adminiftered  the 
Lord’s  flipper  to  many  who  came  from  far. 
We  then  agreed  on  the  general  rules  of  the 
fchool,  which  we  publifhed  prefently  after. 

Mond.  27.  I rode  to  Wall-bridge  near  Stroud, 
and  preached  at  one  to  a lively  congregation. 
About  two  we  fet  out  for  Stanley.  I fcarce  ever 
felt  the  fun  fo  fcorching  hot  in  England.  I be- 
gan preaching  in  Farmer  Finch’s  orchard  (there 
not  being  room  in  the  houfe)  between  feven 
and  eight,  and  the  poor,  earneff  people  devoured 
every  word. 

Tuef.  28.  I rode  to  Evefham,  and  exhorted 
them  io  Jlrengthen  the  things  that  remained,  which 
were  ready  to  die.  Wednef.  29.  We  took 
horfe  at  foitr,  and  calling  at  Studley,  found  a 
woman  of  a broken  heart,  mourning  continu- 
ally after  God,  and  fcarce  able  to  fpeak  without 
tears.  About  one  I began  preaching  in  the  open 

air 


[ 112  ] 

air  at  Birmingham  ; at  the  fame  time  it  began 
raining  violently,  which  continued  about  a quar- 
ter of  an  hour  ; but  did  not  difturb  either  me 
or  the  congregation. 

At  half  an  hour  after  fix  I preached  at  Wed- 
nefbury,  to  an  exceeding  large  congregation; 
and  every  man,  woman  and  child  behaved  in  a 
manner  becoming  the  gofpel. 

Thurf.  30.  We  fet  out  between  three  and 
four,  and  reached  Nottingham  in  the  afternoon. 
Frid.  July  1.  I rode  to  Sheffield,  and  preached 
in  the  evening  at  the  end  of  the  houfe  to  a quiet 
congregation. 

Satur.  July  2.  I rode  to  Epworth,  and 
preached  to  a large  congregation,  many  of  them 
ftablifhed  in  the  grace  of  God. 

Sund.  3. 1 preached  in  the  room  at  five,  but  at 
nine,  on  my  ufual  hand  at  the  crofs.  The 
clouds  came  juft  in  time  (it  being  a warm,  fun- 
fhiny  morning)  to  fhade  me  and  the  congrega- 
tion ; but  at  the  fame  time  both  the  light  and 
power  of  the  Moft  High  were  upon  many  of  their 
fouls. 

* I was  quite  furprized  when  I heard  h'lr.  R. 
preach.  That  foft,  fmooth,  tuneful  voice,  which 
he  fo  often  employed  to  blafpheme  the  work  of 
God,  was  loft,  without  hope  of  recovery  ; all 
means  had  been  tried,  but  none  took  place.  He 
now  fpoke  in  a manner  fhocking  to  hear;  and 
impoffible  to  be  heard  diftinftly  by  one  quarter 
of  the  congregation. 


Mr. 


C ^^3  ] 

Mr.  Hayes,  the  re£lor  reading  prayers,  I had 
once  more  the  comfort  of  receiving  the  Lord’s 
fupper  at  Epworth.  After  the  evening  fervice,  I 
preached  at  the  crofs  again,  to  almoft  the  whole 
town.  * I fee  plainly,  we  have  often  judged 
amifs,  when  we  have  meafured  the  increafe  of 
the  work  of  God,  in  this  and  other  places,  by 
the  increafe  of  the  fociety  only.  The  foclety 
here  is  not  large;  but  God  has  wrought  upon 
the  whole  place  ; fabbath-breaking  and  drunken- 
nefs  are  no  more  feen  in  thefe  llreets ; curfing 
and  fwearing  are  rarely  heard.  Wickednefs 
hides  its  head  already.  Who  knows  but  by  and 
by  God  may  utterly  take  it  away  ? 

* I was  peculiarly  pleafed  with  the  deep  feri- 
oufnefs  of  the  congregation  at  church,  both 
morning  and  evening.  And  all  the  way  as  we 
walked  down  the  Church-lane,  after  the  fermon 
was  ended,  I fcarce  faw  one  perfon.look  on  ei- 
ther fide,  or  fpeak  one  word  to  another. 

Mond.  4.  I rode  to  Hainton.  The  congrega- 
tion here  was  but  fmall,  which  was  chiefly  ow- 
ing to  the  miferable  diligence  of  the  poor  reftor. 
Art  thou  alfo  to  die  ? And  to  give  an  account 
to  God  of  every  word  and  work  ? 

Tuef.  5.  We  rode  to  Coningfby  on  the  edge 
of  the  Fens.  Mr.  B.  a baptift  rainifter,  had 
wTote  to  me  at  London,  begging  me  to  lodge 
with  him  whenever  I came  to  Coningfby.  But 
he  was  gone  out  of  town  that  very  morning. 

However 


[ 114  ] 

However  one  rode  after  him  and  brought  him 
back  in  the  afternoon.  I was  fcarce  fet  down  in 
his  houfe  before  he  fell  upon  the  point  of  bap- 
tifin.  I waved  the  difpute  for  feme  time,  but 
finding  there  was  no  remedv,  I came  clofc  to 
the  queftion,  and  we  kept  to  it  for  about  an 
hour  and  half.  From  that  time  we  let  the  mat- 
ter reft,  and  confirmed  our  love  towards  each 
other. 

At  feven  I preached  in  the  ftreet  to  one  of 
thelargeft  congregations  I had  feen  in  Lincoln- 
fhire.  In  the  morning,  Wednef.  6.  we  had  ano- 
ther quiet  and  comfortable  opportunity.  We 
thence  rode  to  Ludborough,  where  I preached 
at  eleven,  and  in  the  afternoon  to  Grimfby. 

At  feven  I preached  in  that  large  room,  but  it 
was  not  near  large  enough  to  contain  the  con- 
gregation. Many  ftood  on  the  flairs  and  in  the 
adjoining  rooms,  and  many  below  in  the  ftreet. 
The  fear  of  God  has  lately  fpread  in  an  uncom- 
mon degree  among  this  people  alfo.  Nor  has 
Mr.  P.  been  able  to  prevent  it,  though  he  bit- 
terly curfes  us,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

Thurf.  7.  Immediately  after  preaching  I rode 
to  Lafeby,  and  preached  at  feven  to  a fmall, 
earneft  congregation.  We  ftepped  no  more  till 
we  came  to  Epworth,  where  we  had  a joyful 
meeting  in  the  evening. 

Frid.  8.  I took  horfe  immediately  after  preach- 
ing, and  rode  to  Mr.  Stovin’s  of  Crowle.  I be- 
gan preaching  foon  after  eight;  but  fo  wild  a 

congre- 


[ 1^5  ] 


congregation  I had  not  lately  feen.  However,  as 
I Hood  within  the  juftice’s  garden,  they  did  not 
make  any  difturbance. 

About  noon  I preached  at  Sykehoufe.  The 
little  fociety  here  alfo  feemed  to  partake  of  the 
general  revival.  We  took  horfe  at  ten,  and  foon 
after  eight  came  to  Boroughbridge. 

Satur.  9.  Setting  out  between  two  and  three, 
we  reached  Ncwcaftle  about  three  in  the  after- 
noon. Sund.  10.  I began  exhorting  all  that 
loved  their  own  fouls,  folemnly  to  renew  their 
covenant  with  God  : the  nature  of  which  I ex- 
plained at  large,  on  the  mornings  of  the  enfuing 
w'eek. 

I had  defigned  preaching  between  eight  and 
nine  in  Sandgate.  But  the  rain  drove  us  into  the 
room.  In  the  afternoon  I preached  on  the  firft 
leffon,  David’s  conquefl;  of  Goliah.  But  the 
houfe  would  in  no  wife  contain  the  people,  fo 
that  many  were  forced  to  go  away. 

On  Wednef.  Thurf.  and  Frid.  I examined  the 
clafies,  and  found  not  only  an  Increafe  of  num- 
ber, but  likewife  more  of  the  life  and  power 
of  religion  an>ong  them,  than  ever  I had  found 
before. 

The  fame  thing  I obferved  in  all  the  country 
focieties,  among  which  I fpent  one  or  more 
nights  every  week. 

Sund.  1 7.  We  had  a glorious  hour  in  the  morn- 
ing. At  half  hour  part  eight,  I preached  in  the 

Caftle-gartli, 


[ ii6  ] 


Caftle-garth,  and  again  at  four  in  the  afternoon, 
to  a vaft  multitude  of  people. 

Mond.  i8.  I began  my  journey  northward, 
having  appointed  to  preach  in  Morpeth  at  noon. 
As  foon  as  1 had  fung  a few  verfes  at  the  crofs, 
a young  man  appeared  at  the  head  of  his  troop, 
and  told  me  very  plainly  and  roughly,  “ You 
fhall  not  preach  there.”  I went  on;  upon  which 
he  gave  the  fignal  to  his  companions,  who  pre- 
pared to  force  me  into  better  manners.  But  they 
quickly  fell  out  among  themfelves.  Mean  time 
I began  my  fermon,  and  went  on  without  any 
confiderable  interruption,  the  congregation  foft- 
ning  more  and  more,  till  towards  the  clofe,  the 
far  greater  part  appeared  exceeding  ferious  and 
attentive. 

* In  the  afternoon  we  rode  to  Widdrington, 
which  belonged  to  the  Lord  Widdrington,  till 
the  rebellion  in  1716.  The  people  flocked  in 
from  all  parts,  fo  that  the  congregation  here  was 
larger  than  at  Morpeth.  It  was  a delightful  even- 
ing and  a delightful  place,  under  the  Ihade  of 
tall  trees  : and  every  man  hung  upon  the  word  ; 
none  flirred  his  head  or  band,  or  looked  to  the 
right  or  left,  while  I declared  in  ftrong  terms, 
The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jefus  Chrift. 

Tuef.  19.  We  rode  to  Alemouth,  a fmall  fea- 
port  town,  famous  for  all  kind  of  wickednefs. 
The  people  here  are  finners  convi£l ; they  have 
nothing  to  pay,  but  plead  guilty  before  God. 
Therefore  I preached  to  them  without  delay 

Jefus 


[ ^^7  ] 

Jefus  Chrift  for  wifdom,  righteoufnefs,  fanftifi- 
cationand  redemption. 

After  dinner  we  rode  to  Alnwick,  one  of  the 
largeft  in-land  towns  in  the  county  of  Northum- 
berland. At  feven  I preached  at  the  crofs  to  as 
large  a congregation  as  at  Newcaftle  on  Sunday 
evening.  This  place  feemed  much  to  refemble 
Athlone  ; all  were  moved  a little,  but  none  very 
much.  The  waters  fpread  wide  but  not 
deep.  But  let  the  Lord  work  as  it  feemeth 
him  good. 

Wednef.  20.  We  took  horfe  between  eight 
and  nine,  and  a little  before  two  came  to  Ber- 
wick. I fent  to  the  commander  of  the  garrifon  to 
defire  the  ufe  of  a green  place  near  his  houfe, 
Avhich  he  readily  granted.  I preached  at  feven 
to  (it  was  judged)  two  thoufand  people.  I found 
the  generality  of  them  juft  fuch  as  lexpefled; 
ferious  and  decent,  but  not  eafy  to  be  convinced 
of  any  thing.  For  who  can  tell  them  what  they 
did  not  know  before  ? 

Thurf.  21.  After  preaching  we  walked  round 
the  walls,  which  they  were  repairing  and  re- 
building. I could  not  but  obferve  to-day,  how 
different  the  face  of  things  was,  from  what  it  ap- 
peared yefterday,  efpecially  after  I had  preached 
at  noon  : yefterday  we  were  hallowed  all  along 
the  ftreeis.  To-day  none  opened  his  mouth  as 
we  went  along;  the  very  children  were  all  filent. 
The  grown  people  pulled  off  their  hats  on  every 
fide  ; fo  that  we  might  even  have  fancied  our- 

felves 


[ ] 

felves  at  Newcaftle.  O well  is  It,  that  honour 
is  ballanced  with  diihonour,  and  good  report  with 
evil  report ! 

* At  feven  1 preached  to  a far  larger  congre- 
gation than  before.  And  now  the  word  of  God 
was  as  a fire  and  an  hammer.  I began  again  and 
again,  after  I thought  I had  done  : and  the  latter 
words  were  flill  ftronger  than  the  former  : fo 
that  I was  not  furprized  at  the  number  which 
attended  in  the  morning,  when  we  had  another 
joyful  folemn  hour.  Here  was  the  loud  call  to 
the  people  of  Ben\'ick,  if  haply  they  would 
know  the  day  of  their  vifitation. 

Frid.  22.  I preached  about  noon  at  Tuggle,  a 
village  about  three  miles  from  Barnborough : 
and  then  went  on  to  Alnwick,  where,  at  feven, 
was  fuch  a congregation,  as  one  would  not  have 
thought  the  whole  town  could  afford.  And  I 
was  enabled  to  deal  faithfully  with  them,  in  ex- 
plaining. Thou  art  not  Jar  from  the  kingdom  of 
God.  1 was  conftrained  to  fpeak  twice  as  long 
as  ufual  ; but  none  offered  to  go  away.  And  I 
believe  the  moll  general  call  of  God  to  the  peo- 
ple of  Alnwick  was  at  this  hour. 

Sat,  23.  I preached  at  noon  at  Long-Horfe- 
ley.  Theminilier  here  was  of  a truly  moderate 
fpirit.  He  faid,  “ I have  done  all  1 can  for  this 
people.  And  I can  do  them  no  good.  Now 
let  others  try.  If  they  can  do  any,  I will  thank 
them  with  all  my  heart.” 

Sund.  24.  I preached  at  five ; at  half  hour  paft 

eight 


[ 119  3 

eight  rti  theCaftle-garth,  and  at  four  in  the  after- 
noon. I was  weary  and  faint  when  I began  to 
fpeak.  But  my  flrength  was  quickly  renewed. 
Thence  we  went  to  the  fociety.  I haddefigned 
to  read  the  rules.  But  I could  not  get  forward. 
As  we  began  fo  we  went  on  till  eight  o’clock, 
finging  and  rejoicing,  and  praifing  God. 

Wed.  27,  I rode  to  Blanchland,  intending  to 
preach  there.  But  at  the  defire  of  Mr.  W.  the 
fleward  of  the  lead-mines,  I went  about  a mile 
further,  to  a houfe  where  he  was  paying  the 
miners,  it  being  one  of  their  general  pay-days.  I 
preached  to  a large  congregation  of  feriou»  peo- 
ple, and  rode  on  to  Alandale. 

Thurf.  28.  We  rode  over  the  moors  to  Nint’s- 
head,  a village  fouth  weft  from  Allandale,  where 
I preached  at  eight.  We  then  went  on  to  Alef- 
den,  a fmall  market  town  in  Cumberland  At 
noon  I preached  at  the  Crofs,  to  a quiet.  Haring 
people,  who  feemed  to  be  little  concerned,  one 
way  or  liie  other.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Hindly-hill  again,  and  we  praifed  God  with  joy- 
ful lips. 

Frid.  2g.  At  noon  I went  to  the  crofs  in  Al- 
landale town,  where  Air.  Topping,  with  a com- 
pany of  the  better  fort,  waited  for  us.  I foon 
found,  it  was  but  a vain  attempt,  to  dlfpute  or 
reafon  with  him.  He  Ikipped  fo  from  one  point 
to  another,  that  it  was  nof  poffible  to  keep  up 
with  him.  So  afier  a few  minutes  I removed 
about  an  hundred  yards,  and  preached  in  peace 

to 


[ 120  ] 

to  a very  large  congregation  : it  being  the  ge- 
neral pay-day,  which  is  but  once  in  fix  months. 

Sat.  30.  At  noon  I preached  at  Newlands  : 
about  three  near  Tanfield  crofs,  and  at  Newcaf- 
tle  in  the  evening. 

Sund.  31.  At  eight  I preached  in  the  fireel  at 
Sunderland,  and  at  one  in  the  afternoon.  I 
rode  thence  ftrait  to  the  Callle-garth.  and  found 
abundance  of  people  gathered  together.  Many 
w'ere  in  tears  all  round  while  thofe  comfortable 
words  were  opened  and  applied,  He  healeth 
them  that  are  broken  m heart,  and  givetk  medicine 
to  heal  their  Jieknefs. 

Mond.  Augnft  1.  One  of  my  old  companions 
returned,  my  head-ach,  wdtich  I never  had  while 
I abfiained  from  animal  food.  But  I regarded 
it  not,  fuppofing  it  would  go  off  in  a day  or  two 
of  itfelf. 

Tuef.  2.  I preached  about  noon  at  Biddick  and 
at  Felton  in  the  evening.  I intended  to  have 
given  an  exhortation  to  the  fociety.  But  as  foon 
as  we  met,  thefpirit  of  fupplication  fell  upon  us, 
fothat  I could  hardly  do  any  thing  but  pray  and 
give  thanks,  till  it  was  time  for  us  to  part. 

Vv'^ed,  3.  I found  it  abfolutely  neceffary  to 
publiflr  the  following  advertifement. 

“ Whereas  one  Thomas  Moor,  alias  Smith, 
has  lately  appeared  in  Cumberland  and  other 
parts  of  England,  preaching  (as  he  calls  it)  in  a 
clergyman’s  habit,  and  then  collecting  money 
‘of  bis  hearers  : this  is  to  certify  whom  it  may 

concern, 


C »2I  ] 

concern,  that  the  faid  Moor  is  no  clergyman, 
but  a cheat  and  impoftor ; and  that  no  preacher 
in  connexion  with  me,  either  direftly  or  indi- 
reftly  alks  money  of  any  one. 

John  WJley, 

Thurf.  4.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Spen  : 
Frid.  5.  About  noon  at  Horfeley.  As  I rode 
home  I found  my  head-ach  increafe  much.  But 
as  many  people  were  come  from  all  parts  (it  be- 
ing the  monthly  watch-night)  I could  not  be  con- 
tent to  fend  them  empty  away.  I almoft  forgot 
my  pain  w’hile  I was  fpeaking;  but  was  obliged 
to  go  to  bed  as  foon  as  I had  done. 

Sat.  6.  The  pain  was  much  worfe  than  before, 
I then  applied  cloths  dipt  in  cold  water.  Im- 
mediately my  head  was  eafy,  but  I was  exceed- 
ing fick.  When  I laid  down,  the  pain  returned 
and  tlie  ficknefs  ceafed  ; when  I fat  up,  the 
pain  ceafed,  and  the  ficknefs  returned.  In  the 
evening  I took  ten  grains  of  Ipecacuanha.  It 
wrought  for  about  ten  minutes.  The  moment 
it  had  done,  I was  in  perfect  health,  and  felt  no 
more  either  of  pain  or  ficknefs. 

Sund.  7.  I preached  as  uftial  at  five,  and  at 
half  hour  after  eight.  In  the  afternoon  all  the 
ftreet  was  full  of  people,  come  from  all  parts,  to 
fee  the  judges.  But  a good  part  of  them  followed 
me  into  the  Caftle-garth,  and  found  fometbmg 
elfe  to  do.  This  put  a zealous  man  that  came 
by,  quite  out  of  patience,  fo  that  I had  hardly 
named  my  text,  when  he  began  to  fcold  and 

VoL.  XXIX.  F fcream. 


[ 122  ] 

fcream,  and  curfe  and  fwear,  to  the  utmoft  ex- 
tent of  his  throat.  But  there  was  not  one  of 
the  whole  multitude,  rich  or  poor,  that  regard- 
ed him  at  all. 

Mond.  8.  I fet  out  once  more  for  the  North. 
At  noon  I preached  at  the  crofs  in  Morpeth  ; in 
the  evening  at  Alnwick,  where  many  now  be- 
gan to  fear  God  and  tremble  at  his  word. 

Tuef.  9.  I preached  about  noon  at  Tuggle  ; 
and  between  fix  and  feven  in  the  evening  at 
Berwick.  More  of  the  gentry  were  there  than 
ever  before  ; and  I think  but  three  went  away. 
Wed.  10.  The  congregation  was  nearly  doub- 
led, and  the  word  feemed  to  fink  into  their 
hearts.  It  was  with  great  difficulty  that  I after- 
wards met  the  fociety  ; fo  many  crowded  after 
me  (though  without  the  lead  incivility)  and 
knew  not  how  to  go  away. 

Thurf.  11.  Abundance  of  them  were  with  us 
in  the  morning.  We  took  horfe  as  foon  as  we 
could  after  preaching,  and  before  twelve  reach- 
ed Alemouth,  where  all  the  publicans  and  fin- 
ners  drew  near  to  hear.  Nay,  and  all  the  gen- 
try ; the  chief  of  whom  invited  us  to  dinner, 
where  we  fpent  two  hours  in  agreeable  and  ufe- 
ful  converfation. 

In  the  evening  I preached  to  the  earned  con- 
^gregation  at  Widdrington.  There  is  always  a 
/ bleffing  among  this  people. 

Frid.  12.  In  riding  to  Newcadle,  I finilhed 
the  tenth  Iliad  of  Horner.  What  an  amazing 

genius 


C 123  ] 


genius  had  this  man  ? To  write  with  fuch  ftrength 
of  thought  and  beauty  of  expieffion,  when  he 
had  none  to  go  before  him ! And  what  a vein  of 
piety  runs  through  his  whole  work,  in  fpite  of 
his  Pagan  prejudices  ? Yet  one  cannot  but  ob- 
ferve  fucli  improprieties  intermixt,  as  are  (hock- 
ing to  the  laft  degree. 

What  excufe  can  any  man  of  common  fenfe 
make  for 

“ His  fcolding  heroes  and  his  wounded  gods  ? 

.Nay,  does  he  not  introduce  even  his  “ Father 
of  gods  and  men,”  one  while  (baking  heaven 
with  his  noS,  and  foon  after  ufing  his  filler  and 
wife,  the  emprefs  of  heaven,  with  fuch  language 
a5  a caiTnan  might  be  afitamed  of  ? And  what 
can  he  faid  for  a king,  full  of  days  and  wifdom, 
telling  Achilles,  “ How  ofien  he  had  given  him 
wine,  when  he  was  a child  and  fat  in  his  lap, 
till  he  had  vomited  it  up  on  his  clothes  ?”  Are 
thefe  fome  of  thofe  “ Divine  boldnelTes  which 
naturally  provoke  (hort-fightednefs  and  ignorance 
to  fliew  themfelves.” 

* Tuef.  16,  We  left  Newcaflle.  In  riding  to 
Leeds,  I read  Dr.  Hodge’s  account  of  the  plague 
in  London.  I was  furprized,  J.  That  he  did 
not  learn  even  from  the  fymptoms  related  by 
himfelf,  that  the  part  firll  feized  by  the  infec- 
tion was  the  ftomach  ; and  e.  That  he  fo  obfii- 
mtely  perfevered  in  the  hot  regimen  ; though 
F 2 he 


[ 124  ] 

he  eontinually  faw  the  ill  fuccefs  of  it,  a majori- 
ty of  the  p^ients  dying  under  his  hands. 

Soon  after  twelve  I preached  near  the  market- 
place in  Stockton,  to  a very  large  and  very  rude 
congregation.  But  they  grew  calmer  and  calmer, 
fo  that  long  before  I had  done,  they  w'ere  quiet 
and  feriou*.  Some  gentlemen  of  Yarm  earneft- 
ly  defired,  that  I would  preach  there  in  the  af- 
noon.  1 refufed  for  fome  time,  being  weak  and 
tired,  fo  that  I thought  preaching  thiice  in  the 
day,  and  riding  upward  of  fifty  miles  would  be 
work  enough.  But  they  would  lake  no  denial. 
So  I went  with  them  about  two  o’clock,  and 
preached  at  three  in  the  market-place  there,  to 
a great  multitude  of  people  gatherecf  together  at 
a few  minutes  warning.  About  feven  I preach- 
ed in  the  ftreet  at  Ofmotherly.  It  rained  almofl: 
all  the  time.  But  none  went  away.  We  took 
horfe  about  five.  Wed.  17,  and  in  the  afternoon 
eame  to  Leeds. 

On  Thurfday  and  Friday  I preached  at  the 
neighbouring  towns.  Sat.  20.  At  the  earneft 
defire  of  the  little  fociety,  I went  to  Wakefield. 

I knew  the  madnefs  of  the  people  there.  But  I 
knew  alfo,  they  weie  in  God’s  hand.  At  eight  I 
v/ould  have  preached  in  Francis  Scot’s  yard  ; but 
the  landlord  would  not  fuffer  it,  faying,  “ The 
mob  would  do  more  hurt  to  his  houfes,  than 
ever  we  fltoHld  do  him  good.”^  So  I went  per- 
force into  the  main  flreet,  and  proclaimed  par- 
don for  finirers.  None  interrupted,  or  made  the 

leaft 


[ 125  ] 

leaft  diflurbance,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 

About  one  1 preached  at  Holton,  where  like- 
wife  all  is  now  calm,  after  a violent  ftorm  oi  fe- 
veral  weeks,  wherein  many  were  beaten  and 
wounded  and  outraged  various  ways  ; but  none 
moved  from  their  Itedfadnefs.  In  the  evening 
I preached  at  Armley,  to  many  who  want  a 
florin,  being  quite  unnerved  by  conflant  fun- 
fhine. 

Sund.  21.  I preached  as  ufual,  at  Leeds  and 
Birftal.  Mond.  22.  After  preaching  at  Heaton, 

I rode  to  Skircoat-green.  Our  brethren  here 
were  much  divided  in  their  judgment.  Many 
thought  I ought  to  preach  at  Halifax-crofs. 
Others  judged  it  to  be  impraflicable  : the  very 
mention  of  it  as  a poffible  thing,  .having  fet  all 
the  town  in  an  uproar.  However,  to  the  Crofs 
I went.  There  was  an  immenfe  number  of  peo- 
ple, roaring  like  the  waves  of  the  fea.  But  the 
far  greater  part  of  them  wer.e  ftill,  as  foon  as  I 
began  to  fpeak.  They  feemed  more  and  more 
attentive  and  compofed ; till  a gentleman  got 
fome  of  the  rabble  together,  and  began  to  throw 
money  among  them,  which  occafioned  much 
hurry  and  confufion.  Binding  my  voice  could 
not  be  heard,  I made  figns  to  the  people,  that 
I would  remove  to  another  place.  I believe 
nine  in  ten  followed  me  to  a meadow,  about 
half  a mile  from  the  town  : where  we  fpent  fo 
folemn  an  hour  as  I have  feldom  known,  re- 
joicing and  praifing  God. 

F 3 


Tuef. 


[ 126  ] 


Tuef.  23.  The  congregation  was  larger  at  five 
in  the  morning,  than  it  was  in  the  evening 
when  I preached  here  before.  About  one  I 
preached  at  Baleden,  and  in  the  evening  at  Brad- 
ford, where  none  behaved  indecently,  but  the 
curate  of  the  parifh. 

Wed.  24.  At  eight  I preached  at  Ecclefal,  and 
abcn.it  one  at  Kighly.  At  five  Mr.  Grimfhaw 
read  prayers  and  I preached  at  Haworth,  to  more 
than  the  church  could  contain.  We  began  the 
fervice  in  the  morning  at  five.  And  even  then 
the  church  was  nearly  filled. 

Thur.  23. 1 rode  with  Mr.  Grimfhaw  to  Rough- 
lee,  whei  eT.  Colbeck  of  Kighley  was  to  meet  us. 
We  were  ftopt  again  and  again,  and  Legged 
“ Not  to  go  on  ; for  a large  mob  from  Coin  was 
gone  before  us.”  Coming  a little  farther,  we 
iinderftood  they  had  not  yet  reached  Roughlee. 
So  we  hafiened  on,  that  we  might  be  there  before 
them.  All  was  quiet  when  we  came.  I was  a 
little  afraid  for  Mr.  Grimfliaw.  But  it  needed 
not.  He  was  ready  to  go  to  prifon  or  death  for 
Chrifl’s  fake. 

At  half  hour  after  twelve  I began  to  preach, 
1 had  about  half  finifhedmy  difcourfe,  when  the 
mob  came  pouring  down  the  hill  like  a torrent. 
After  exchanging  a few  words  with  their  captain 
to  prevent  any  conteft,  I went  with  him  as  he 
required.  When  we  came  to  Barrowford,  two 
miles  off,  the  whole  army  drew  up  in  battle  array 
before  the  houfe  into  which  1 was  carried,  with 


twa 


[ 127  ] 


two  or  three  of  my  friends.  After  I had  been  de- 
tained above  an  hour,  their  captain  went  out 
and  I followed  him,  and  defired  him  to  condu£l 
me  whence  I came.  He  faid,  he  would  : but 
the  mob  foon  followed  after  ; at  which  he  was 
fo-  enraged,  that  he  mufl;  needs  turn  back  to 
fight  them,  and  fo  left  me  alone. 

A farther  account  is  contained  in  the  follow- 
ing letter,  which  1 wrote  the  next  morning. 


Efterday  between  twelve  and  one  o’clock, 


while  I was  fpeaking  to  fome  quiet  people, 
without  any  noife  or  tumult,  a drunken  rabble 
came,  with  clubs  and  flaves,  in  a tumultuous 
and  riotous  manner,  the  captain  of  whom,  Ri- 
chard B.  by  name,  faid  he  was-  a deputy-confta- 
ble,  and  that  he  was  come  to  bring  me  to 
you.  I went  with  him.  But  I had  fcarce  gone 
ten  yards,  when  a man  of  his  company  firuck 
me  with  his  fifl  in  the  face  with  all  his  might. 
Quickly  after,  another  threw  his  ftick  at  my^ 
head.  I then  made  a little  ftand.  But  another 
of  your  champions,  curbing  and  fwearing  in  the 
mod  Ihocking  manner,  and  flourilhing  his  club 
over  his  head,  cried  out,  “ Bring  him  away.” 
With  fuch  a convoy  I walked  to  Barrowford, 
where  they  informed  me  you  was,  their  drum- 
mer going  before,  to  draw  all  the  rabble  toge- 
ther from  all  quarters. 


VFiddop,  Aug.  26,  1748. 


S I R, 


When 


[ 125  ] 


When  your  deputy  had  brought  me  into  the 
honfe,  he  permitted  Mr.  Grimfliaw,  the  minif- 
(er  of  Haworth,  Mr.  Colbeck  of  Kighley,  and 
one  more  to  be  with  me,  promifing,  that  none 
ihould  hurt  them.  Soon  after  you  and  your 
friends  came  in,  and  required  me  to  promife, 
“ I would  come  to  Roughlee  no  more.’’  I told 
you,  I would  fooner  cut  off  my  hand,  than  make 
any  fuch  promife.  Neither  would  I promife, 
that  none  of  my  friends  fhould  come.  After 
abundance  of  rumbling  difeourfe  (for  I could 
Iceep  none  of  you  long  to  any  one  point)  from 
about  one  o’clock  till  between  three  and  four 
(in  vvhich  one  of  you  frankly  faid,  “ No,  xjce  will 
not  be  like  Gamaliel ; we  will  proceed  like  the 
Jews.)”  You  feemed  a little  fatisfied  with  my 
faying,  “ I will  not  preach  at  Roughlee  at  this 

time.”- You  then  undertook  to  quiet  the  mob, 

to  whom  you  went  and  fpoke  a few  words,  and 
their  noife  immediately  ceafed.  I then  walked 
out  with  you  at  the  back-door. 

I flrould  have  mentioned,  that  1 had  feveral 
times  before  defired  you  to  let  me  go,  but  in 
vain  ; and  that  when  I attempted  to  go  with 
Richard  B.  the  mob  immediately  followed,  with 
oaths,  curfes  and  ftones ; that  one  of  them  beat 
me  down  to  the  ground  ; and  when  I rofe  again, 
the  whole  body  came  about  me  like  lions,  and 
forced  me  back  into  the  houfe. 

While  you  and  I went  out  at  one  door,  Mr. 
Grimfhaw  and  Mr.  Colbeck  went  out  at  the 

other. 


[ 129  ] 

other.  The  mob  immediately  clofed  them  in, 
toft  them  to  and  fro  with  the  utmoft  violence, 
threw  Mr.  Grimfbaw  down,  and  loaded  them 
both  with  dirt  and  mire  of  every  kind  : not  one 
of  your  friends  offering  to  call  off  your  blood- 
hounds from  the  purfuit. 

The  other  quiet,  harmlefs  people,  who  fol- 
lowed me  at  a diftance,  to  fee  what  the  end 
would  be,  they  treated  ftill  worfe,  not  only  by 
the  connivance,  but  by  the  exprefs  order  of  you? 
deputy.  They  made  them  run  for  their  lives, 
amidft  fhowers  of  dirt  and  ftones,  without  any 
regard  to  age  or  fex.  Some  of  them  they  trampled 
in  the  mire,  and  dragged  by  the  hair,  parti- 
cularly Mr.  Mackford,  who  came  with  me  from 
Newcaftle.  Many  they  beat  with  their  clubs 
without  mercy.  One  they  forced  to  leap  down 
(or  they  would  have  thrown  him  headlong) 
from  a rock,  ten  or  twelve  feet  high,  into  the 
river.  And  when  he  crawled  out,  wet  and 
bruifed,  they  fwore,  they  would  throw  him  in 
again,  which  they  Were  hardly  perfuaded  not  to 
do.  All  this  time  you  fat  well-pleafed  clofe  to 
the  place,  not  attempting  in  the  leaft  to  hinder 
them. 

And  all  this  time  you  was  talking  of  juftice 
and  law  ! Alas,  fir,  fuppofe  we  were  diffent  ers 
(which  I deny)  fuppofe  >ve  were  Jews  orTurks, 
are  we  not  to  have  the  benefit  of  thellws  of  our 
country  ? Proceed  agalnft  us  by  the  law,  if  you 
can  or  dare  but  not  by  lawJefs  violence  ; not 
5 5 . by 


[ ^3°  ] 

by  making  a drunken,  curfing,  fwearing,  riotous 
mob,  both  judge,  jury  and  excutioner  : This  is 
flat  rebellion  againft  God  and  the  king,  as  you 
may  poflibly  find  to  your  coft.” 

Between  four  and  five  we  fet  out  from  Rough- 
lee.  But  obferving  feveral  parties  of  men  upon 
the  hills,  and  fufpefting  their  defign,  we  put  on 
and  paft  the  lane  they  were  making  for,  before 
they  came.  One  of  our  brothers,  not  riding  fo 
Taft,  was  intercepted  by  them.  They  immediate- 
ly knocked  him  down,  and  how  it  was  tliat  he 
got  from  amongft  them,  he  knew  not. 

Before  feven  we  reached  Widdop.  The 
new's  of  what  had  paft  at  Barrowford,  made  us 
all  friends.  The  perfon  in  whofe  houfe  Mr.  B. 
preached,  fent  and  begged  I would  preach  there  r 
which  I did  at  eight,  to  fuch  a congregation  as 
none  could  have  expefted,  on  fofhorta  warn- 
ing. He  invited  us  alfo  to  lodge  at  his  houfe,  and 
all  jealoLifies  vaniflied  away. 

Frid.  26. 1 preached  at  five,  to  much  the  fame 
congregation.  At  twelve  we  came  to  Hepten- 
ftall  Bank.  The  houfe  ftands  on  the  fide  of  a 
fteep  mountain,  and  commands  all  the  vale 
below.  The  place  in  which  I preached  was  an- 
oval  fpot  of  ground,  furrounded  with  fpreading 
trees,  fconped  out,  as  it  were,  in  the  fide  of  the 
hill,  which  rofe  round  like  a theatre.  The  con- 
gregation  was  equal  to  that  at  Leeds.  But  fuch 
ferious  and  earneft  attentiorr-.  It  lifted  up  ray 

hands. 


[ ] 

liands,  fo  that  I preached  as  I fcarce  never  did 
in  my  life. 

About  four,  I preached  again  to  nearly  the 
fame  congiegation,  and  God  again  caufed  the 
power  of  his  love  to  be  known.  Thence  we 
rode  to  Midgeley.  Many  flocked  from  all  parts, 
to  whom  I preached  till  near  an  hour  after  fun- 
fet.  The  calmnefs  of  the  evening  agreed  well 
with  the  ferioufnefs  of  the  people ; every  one 
of  whom  feemed  to  drink  in  the  word  of  God, 
as  a thirfly  land  the  refrefhing  fhowers. 

Sat.  2y.  I preached  once  more  at  feven  to  the 
earneft  people  at  the  Bank,  and  then  rode  to 
Todmorden-edge.  Here  feveral  prifoners  were 
fet  at  liberty,  as  was  Mr.  Mackford  the  day  be* 
fore.  At  five  I preached  at  Mellarburn  in  Rofen- 
dala.  There  were  a few  rude  people  ; but  they 
kept  at  a diftance,  and  it  was  well  they  did,  or 
the  unawakened  hearers  would  have  been  apt  to 
handle  them  roughly.  I obferved  here  what  I 
had  not  then  feen,  but  atone  Angle  place  in  Eng- 
land. When  I had  finifhed  ray  difcourfe,  and* 
even  pronounced  the  blefling,  not  on«  perfon 
offered  to  go  away:  but  every  man,,  woman  and 
child  flayed  jufl  where  they  were,  till  I nayfelf 
went  away  firft. 

Sund.  28.  I was  invited  by  Mr.  U.  the  minis- 
ter of  Good-fliaw,  to  preach  in  his  church.  T 
began  reading  prayers  at  feven  ; but  perceiving , 
tire  church  would  fcarce  contain  half  of  the  con- 
gregation, after  prayers  I went  out,  and  fland-- 
E 6 ing 


C »32  ] 

ing  on  the  church-yard  wall,  in  a place  fhaded 
from  the  fun,  explained  and  inforced  thofe 
words  in  the  fecond  lelTon,  Almojl  thou  per- 
Juadejl  me  to  be  a Chrijlian. 

* 1 wonder  at  thofe,  who  ftill  talk  fo  loud  of 
the  indecency  of  field-preaching.  The  higheft 
indecency  is  in  St.  Paul’s  church,  when  a confi- 
derable  part  of  the  congregation  are  afleep,  or 
talking,  cn-  looking  about,  not  minding  a word 
the  preacher  fays.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is 
the  higbefi  decency  in  a church-yard  or  fields 
when  the  whole  congregation  behave  and  look, 
as  if  they  faw  the  Judge  of  all,  and  heard  him 
fpeaking  from  heaven. 

* At  one,  I went  to  the  crofs  in  Bolton. 
There  was  a vafi  number  of  people,  but  many 
of  them  utterly  wild.  As  foon  as  I began  fpeak- 
ing, they  began  thrufiing  to  and  fro  ; endeavour- 
ing to  throw  me  down  from  the  fleps  on  which 
I flood.  They  did  foonce  or  twice ; but  I went 
up  again,  and  continued  my  difcourfe.  They 
ttien  began  to  throw  flones ; at  the  fame  time 
tome  got  upon  the  crofs  behind  me  to  puflr  me 
down  ; on  which  I could  not  but  obferve,  how 
God  over-rules  even  the  minuteft  circumflances. 
One  man  was  bawling  juft  at  my  ear,  w'hen  a 
ftone  ftruck  him  on  the  cheek,  and  he  was  ftill. 
A fecond  was  forcing  his  way  down  to  me,  till 
another  ftone  hit  him  on  the  forehead ; it 
bounded  back,  the  blood  ran  down,  and  he  came 
Eo  farther.  The  third,  being  got  clofe  to  me, 

. ftretched 


[ 133  ] 

flrctched  out  his  hand,  and  in  the  indant  a 
iharp  hone  came  upon  the  joints  of  his  fin- 
gers. He  fhook.  his  hand,  and  was  very 
quiet,  till  I concluded  iny  difcouiTe  and  went 
away. 

We  came  to  Shacherley,  fix  miles  further, 
before  five  in  the  evening.  Abundance  of  peo- 
ple were  gathered  before  fix,  many  of  whom 
were  difciples  of  Dr.  Taylor,  laughing  at  Origi- 
nal Sin,  and  coirfequently,  at  the  whole  frame  of 
fcriptural  Chi  iftianity.  O what  a providence  is 
it,  which  has  brought  us  here  alfo,  among  thefe 
filver-tongued  anti-chrifts  ? Surely  a few,  at 
leaft,  will  recover  out  of  the  fnare,  and  know 
Jefus  Chrift  as  their  wifdom  and  righteouf- 
nefs  ! 

Mond.  29.  I preached  at  Davy-home.  I had 
heard  a furprizing  account,  concerning  a young 
woman  of  Mancheiler,  which  I now  received 
from  her  own  mouth.  She  faid,  “ On  Friday 
the  4th  of  lafl;  March,  I was  fitting  in  the  houfe 
while  one  read  the  pallion-hymn.  I had  always 
before  thought  myfelf  good-enouglr,  having  con- 
flantly  gone  to  church  and  faid  my  prayers,  nor 
had  I ever  heard  any  of  the  Methodijl  preachers. 
On  a fudden  I faw  our  Saviour  on  the  crofs,  as 
plain  as  if  it  had  been  with  my  bodily  eyes  ; and 
1 felt  it  was  my  fins  for  which  he  died.  I cried 
out,  and  had  no  ftrength  left  in  me.  Whether 
my  eyes  were  open  or  {hut,  he  was  ftill  before 

me 


[ 134  ] 

me  hanging  on  the  crofs,  and  I could  do  nothing 
but  weep  and  mourn  day  and  night.  This  lafled 
till  Monday  in  the  afternoon.  Then  I faw  as  it 
were  heaven  open,  and  God  fitting  upon  his 
throne,  in  the  midft  of  ten  thoufand  of  his 
faints  ; and  I faw  a large  book  in  which-  all  my 
fins  were  written  ; and  he  blotted  them  all  out, 
and  my  heart  was  filled  with  peace,  and  joy, 
and  love,  which.  I have  never  loft  to  this 
hour.” 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Booth-bank. 
Tuef.  30.  I preached  about  one  at  Oldfield-brow. 
We  rode  in  the  afternoon  to  Wcodly  ; we  faw 
by  the  way  many  maiks  of  the  late  flood:  of 
which  John  Bennet,  wTo  was  then  upon  the 
place,  gave  us  the  following  account, 

“ On  Saturday  the  ^3d  of  July  laft,  there  fell 
for  about  three  hours,  in  and  about  Heyfield  in, 
Derbyfnire,  a ver)  heavy  rain  which  caufed 
fuch  a flood  as  had  not  been  feen  by  any  now 
living  in  thofe  parts. 

“ The  rocks  were  loofened  from  the  moun- 
tains : one  field  was  covered  with  huge  flones 
from  fide  to  fide. 

“ Several  water-mills  were  clean  fwept  away, 
without  leaving  any  remains. 

“ The  trees  were  tom  up  by  the  roots,  and 
whirled  away  like  ftufeble. 

“ Twm  women  of  a loofe  charafler  were 
fwept  away  from  their  own  door  and  drowmed : 

one 


[ 135  I 

one  of  them  was  found  near  the  place;  the 
otherwas  carried  feven  or  eight  miles. 

“ Heyfield  church-yard  was  all  torn  up,  and' 
the  dead  bodies  fwept  out  of  their  graves. 
When  the  flood  abated,  they  were  found  in  fe- 
veral  places.  Some  were  hanging  on  trees; 
others  left  in  meadows  or  grounds ; fome  partly 
eaten  by  dogs,  or  wanting  one  or  more  of  their 
members.” 

Wednef.  31.  John  Bennet  fhervod  me  a gen- 
tleman’s houfe,  who  was  a few  years  fince  ut- 
terly without  God  in  the  world.  But  two  or 
three  years  ago,  God  laid  his  hand,  both  upon 
his  body  and  foul.  His  fins  dropt  off.  He  lived 
holy  and  unblameable  in  all  things.  And  not 
being  able  to  go  about  doing  good,  he  refoli^edto 
do  what  good  he  could  at  home.  To  this  end  he 
invited  his  neighbours  to  his  houfe,  every  Sun- 
day morning  and  evening,  (not  being  near  any 
ehurch)  to  whom  he  read  the  prayers  of  the 
church  and  a fermon.  Sometimes  he  had  an 
hundred  and  fifty,  or  two  hundred  of  them  at 
once.  At  Bongs  I received  an  invitation  from 
him  ; fo  John  Bennet  and  I rode  down  toge- 
ther ; and  found  him  rejoicing  under  the  hand 
of  God,  and  praifing  him  for  all  his  pain  and 
weaknefs. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Chinley. 
Thurf.  Sept.  1,  near  Finny-green  at  noon,  and 
in  the  evening  near  Aftbury.  Frid.  2. 1 preached 

at 


I 


t 'SS  ] 

at  Wednefbury  in  the  afternoon,  and  thence  t 
rode  to  Maridan.  Riding  long  ftages  the  next  j 
dav,  we  reached  St.  Albans,  and  the  Foundery  \ 
on  Sunday  morning.  I 

In  the  following  week  I examined  the  clafTes, 
and  fettled  all  the  bufinefs  which  had  called  me 
to  London.  Mond.  12.  I preached  at  Reading, 
and  rode  on  to  Hungerford.  Tuef.  13.  I 
preached  in  the  new-built  room  at  Briftol. 
Thurf.  15.  I rode  to  Beercrocombe,  where  be-  j 
tween  fix  and  feven  I preached  to  a ferious 
congregation.  At  three  Frid.  16.  we  took 
borfe  and  came  in  the  evening  to  Lifton  near 
Lancefton.  i 

One  who  removed  from  Camelford  hither,  re-  • 
eeived  us  gladly.  I had  not  been  well  all  the 
day,  fo  that  I was  not  forr^',  they  had  had  no  no-  1 
tice  of  my  coming.  Being  much  better  in  the 
morning,  I preached  at  feven  in  the  ftreet  to  a 
liJlning  multitude,  on.  Repent  ye  and  believe  the 
gofpd. 

After  preaching  I rode  on  to  Mr.  Bennet’s. 

In  the  evening  I read  prayers  and  preached  in 
in  Trefmere  church.  Sund.  18.  I rode  to  St. 
Ginny’s.  Mr.  Bennet  read  prayers  and  I preach- 
ed, on  Thou  art  net far  from  the  kingdom  of  God^ 

I quellion  if  there  were  more  than  two  perfons- 
in  the  congregation,  wha  did  not  take  it  to  them- 
felves.  Old  Mrs.  T.  did,  who  was  in  tears  dur- 
ing a great  part  of  the  fermon.  And  fo  did  Mr^. 

B. 


[ ^37  ] 

B.  wiro  afteru’ards  fpoke  of  himfdf  in  fuch  a 
manner  as  I rejoiced  to  hear. 

Between  three  and  four  we  reachedTrefmere, 
where  a large  congregation  waited  for  us. 
There  was  no  need  of  fpeaking  terrible  things 
to  thefe,  a people  ready  prepared  for  the 
Lord  So  I began  immediately  (after  prayers) 
All  things  are  oj God,  who  hath  reconciled  us  unto 
himfdf 

A little  before  fix  I preached  again  near  St. 
Stephen's-dowir.  The  whole  multitude  were  fi- 
lent  while  I was  fpeaking.  Not  a whifper  was 
heard.  But  the  moment  I had  done  the  chain 
fell  off  their  tongues.  I was  really  furprized. 
Surely  never  was  fuch  a cackling  made,  on 
: the  banks  of  Cayfter,  or  the  common  of  Sedg- 
. moor. 

Mond.  19.  I rode  to  Camelford,  and  preached 
I about  noon,  none  now  offering  to  interrupt, 

' Thence  I went  to  Port-Ifaac,  and  preached  in 
! the  ftreet  at  five  to  near  the  whole  town : none 
j fpeaking  an  unkind  word.  It  rained  mofi  of 
i the  time;  but  I believe  not  five  perfons  went 
I away. 

^ Tuef.  20.  The  room  was  full  at  four.  I 
breakfafled  about  feven,  at  Warbridge,  with 
’ Dr.  W.  who  was  for  many  years,  a fteady,  rati- 
I onal  infidel.  But  it  pleafed  God  to  touch  his 
; heart  in  reading  the  Appeal : and  he  is  now  la-» 
bouring  to  be  altogether  a Chriftian. 


After 


1 


[ ^38  ] i 

After  preaching  at  one  at  St.  Agnes,  I went 
on  to  St.  Ives.  The  lives  of  this  fociety  have 


convinced  moft  of  the  town,  that  what  we  I 
preach  is  the  very  truth  of  the  gofpel.  1 

Frid.  23.  I preached  at  St.  Ives,  Ligeon  and  I 
Gulval  : Satur.  24.  at  St.  Juft.  * I rejoiced  I 
over  the  fociety  here  ; their  hearts  are  fo  fimple  I 
and  right  toward  God.  And  out  of  one  hundred  I 
and  fifty  perfons,  more  than  an  hundred  walk.  I 
in  the  light  of  his  countenance. 

Sund.  25.  Believing  my  ftrength  would  not 
allow  of  preaching  five  times  in  the  dav,  I de-  | 
fired  John  Whitford  to  preach  at  five.  At  eight 
I preached  in  Morva,  near  the  village  of  Trem- 
bath.  Hence  I rode  to  Zenoon : Mr.  Simmonds- 
came  foon  after,  and  preached  a clofe,  awaken- 
ing fermon  ; which  I endeavoured  to  enlorce- 
by  earneftly  applying  thofe  words.  Thou  art  not. 
far  from  the  kingdom  of  God. 

I reached  Newdin  a little  after  four.  Here  was 
a congregation  of  quite  a diftcrent  fort.  A rude, 
gaping,  flaring  rabble-rout,  fome  or  other  of 
whom  were  throwing  dirt  or  ftones  continually. 
But  before  I had  done,  all  were  quiet  ami  ftill 
and  fome  looked  as  if  they  had  felt  w'hat  w'as 
fpoken.  We  came  to  St.  Ives  about  fcven  : the 
room  would  nothing  near  contain  the  congrega- 
tion ; but  they  flood  in  the  orchard  all  rxaund, 
and  could  hear  perfeftly  well.  I found  to-night, 
that  God  can  wound  by  the  gofpel  as  well  as  by 
the  law  (although  the  inftances  of  tlus  are  ex- 


ceeding 


[ 139  } 


ceeding  rare,  nor  have  we  any  fcrlpture- ground 
to  expeft  them.)  While  I was  enforcing,  JFe 
pray  you  in  Chrijl’s  Jle.ad,  he  ye  reconciled  to  God, 
a young  woman,  till  then  quite  unawakened 
was  cut  to  the  heart  and  funk  to  the  ground: 
though  fhe  could  not  give  a clear,  rational  ac- 
count of  the  manner  how  the  convi£Hon  feized 
upon  her. 

Mond.  26.  I took  my  leave  of  St,  Ives;  about 
noon  preached  at  Sithney,  and  at  fix  in  the 
evening  at  Crowan.  Tuef.  27,  At  one  I preach- 
ed in  Penryn,  in  a convenient  place,  encompafl: 
with  houfes.  Many  of  the  hearers  were  at  firft 
like  thofe  of  Newlin.  But  they  fbon  foftened 
into  attention. 

Wednef.  28.  I took  horfe  between  three  and 
four,  and  came  to  St.  Mewan’s  at  eight.  It 
rained  all  the  time  I was  walking  to  the  Green, 
which  was  the  ufual  place  of  preaching.  But 
the  moment  I began  to  fpeak,  the  rain  ceafed, 
and  did  not  begin  again  till  I had  done  fpeaking. 
It  rained  with  little  intermilhon  all  the  day  af- 
ter, which  made  the  roads  fo  bad,  that  it  was 
pretty  dark  when  we  came  within  two  miles  of 
Crimble-paffage.  We  were  in  doubt,  whether 
the  tide  would  allow  us  to  ride  along  the  fands, 
as  we  do  at  low-water.  However,  it  being  much 
the  fhorteft  way,  we  tried.  The  water  was  ftill 
rifing;  and  at  one  Hep  our  foremoftman  plunged 
in,  above  the  top  of  his  boots.  Upon  inquiry 

we 


r ijLo  j 

U'e  found  his  horfe  had  ftumbled  on  a little  roc 
which  lay  under  water.  So  wc  rode  on,  reached 
the  paffage  about  fevcn,  and  the  Dock  a little  be- 
fore eight. 

We  found  great  part  of  the  congregation  ftilf 
waiting  for  us.  They  attended  again  at  four  in 
the  tnorning.  At  five  we  took  horfe,  and  by 
eafy  riding,  foon  after  eight  came  to  Taviftock. 
After  1 had  preached,  we  haded  on,  relied  an 
hour  at  •Oakbampton,  and  foon  after  fun-fet 
came  to  Crediton, 

We  could  willingly  have  flayed  here,  but 
John  Slocomb  had  appointed  to  meet  us  atCol- 
lunrpton.  Soon  after  we  fet  out,  it  was  e.xceed- 
ing  dark,  there  being  neither  moon  nor  flars„ 
The  rain  alfo  made  it  darker  Hill,  particularly  in 
the  deep,  narrow  lanes.  In  one  of  thefe  we 
heard  the  found  of  horfes  coming  toward  us, 
and  prefently  a hoarfe  voice  cried,  “ What  have 
you  got  ?”  Richard  Mofs  underflood  him  better 
than  me,  and  replied,  “ We  have  no  panniers." 
Upon  which  lie  anfw'ered,  “ Sir,  lafkyour  par- 
don,” and  went  by  very  quietly. 

There  were  abundance  of  turnings  in  the 
road,  fo  that  w’e  could  not  eafily  have  found 
our  w'ay  at  noonday.  But  we  always  turned 
right,  nor  do  I know  that  we  w'ere  out  of  the 
way  once.  Before  eight  the  moon  rofe : we 
then  rode  chearfully  on,  and  before  ten  reached 
Collumpton. 

Frid.  30.  I preached  at  eleven  in  Taunton,  at 

there 


r 141  ] 

tTifee  in  Bridgwater,  at  feven  in  MiddlePef. 
Satur.  061.  1.  I preached  at  Waywick  about 
one,  and  then  rode  quietly  on  to  Briftol. 

I examined  the  foeiety  the  following  week, 
leaving  out  every  carelefs  peiTon,  and  every  one 
I who  wilfully  and  obftinately  refufed  to  meet  his 
^ brethren  weekly.  By  this  means  their  number 
! was  reduced  from  nine  hundred  to  about  feven 
I hundred  and  thirty, 

Sund.  9.  1 began  examining  the  claffes  in 
Kingfwmod  ; and  was  never  before  fo  fully  con- 
j vinced  of  the  device  of  Satan,  which  has  often 
i made  our  hands  hang  down,  and  our  minds  evil 
i affe6fed  to  our  brethren.  Now,  as  ten  times  be- 
I fore,  a cry  was  gone  forth,  “ What  a fcandal  do 
j iJieft  people  bring  upon  the  gofpel  ? What  a fo~ 
! ciety  is  this?  With  all  tlufe  drunkards  and  tale- 
I bearers  and  evil-fpeakers  in  it  ? I expe6fed 
‘ therefore,  that  1 diould  find  an  heavy  talk  upon 
‘I  my  hands,  and  that  none  of  thefe  fcandaloiis  peo~ 
I pk  might  be  concealed,  I firftmetall  the  leaders, 
ii|  arid  enquired  particularly  of  each  perfon  in 
:j  every  clafs.  I repeated  this  inquiry  when  the 
; dalles  themfelves  met.  And  what  was  .the 
,)  ground  of  all  this  outcry  ? Why,  two  perfons 
. had  relapfed  into  drunkennefs  within  three 
ri  months  time  ; and  one  woman  was  proved  to 
; have  made,  or  at  leafl:  related,  an  idle  ftory  con- 
tj  cerning  another.  I fliould  rather  have  expe6led 
I two 


,1 


[ t42  ] 

tv)o  and  twenty  inftances  of  the  former,  an'd  one 
hundred  of  the  latter  kind. 

Thurf.  13. 1 preached  in  Bath  at  noon  to  many 
more  than  the  room  would  contain.  In  the 
evening  I preached  in  the  ftieet  at  Weftbury, 
under  Salilbury  plain.  The  whole  congrega- 
tion behaved  well,  though  it  was  a town  noted 
for  rough  and  turbulent  people.  Frid.  14.  I 
preached  at  Reading,  and  on  Satur.  15.  rode  to 
London. 

Satur.  29.  I fpent  an  hour  in  obferving  the 
various  works  of  God  in  the  pliyfic  garden  at 
Chelfea.  It  would  be  a noble  improvement  of 
the  defign,  if  fome  able  and  indullrious  perfon 
were  to  make  a full  and  accurate  enquiry  into 
the  ufe  and  virtues  of  all  thefe  plants  : without 
this,  what  end  does  the  heaping  them  thus  to- 
gether anfwer,  but  the  gratifying  an  idle  curio- 
fity  ? 

Tuef.  Nov.  1.  Being  All-Saints  day,  we  had  a 
folemn  alTembly  at  the  chappel : as  I cannot  but 
obferve,  we  have  had  on  this  veiy  day,  for  leve- 
ral  years.  Surely,  right  dear  in  the  Jght  of  the 
Lord  is  the  death  of  his  faints  ! 

Sund.  13.  Sarah  Peters,  a lover  of  fouls,  a 
mother  in  Ifrael  went  to  reft.  During  a clofe  • 
obfervation  of  feveral  years,  I never  faw  her, 
upon  the  moft  trying  occafions,  in  any  degree 
ruffled  or  difcompofed,  but  (he  was  always  lov- 
ing, always  happy.  It  was  her  peculiar  gift  and 
her  continoal  care,  to  feek  and  fave  that  which 

was 


I was  loft ; to  fupport  the  weak,  to  comfort  the 
( feeble-minded,  to  bring  back  what  had  been 
turned  out  of  the  way.  And  in  doing  this,  God 
* indued  her  above  her  fellows,  with  the  love  that 
btlitvdh,  hopeth,  endureth  all  things. 
t , # Pq]-  thefe  four  years  laft  paft  (fays  one 

I who  was  intimately  acquainted  with  her)  we 
'•  ufed  once  or  twice  a week  to  unbofom  our- 
f felves  to  each  other.  I never  knew  her  to  have 
i one  doubt  concerning  her  own  falvation.  Her 
foul  was  always  filled  with  the  holy  flame  of 
I love,  and  ran  after  Chrift  as  the  chariots  of  Ami- 
nadab.  She  ufed  to  fay,  “ I think  I am  all  fpi- 
rit;  I mull:  be  always  moving,  I cannot  reft, 
day  or  night,  any  longer  than  I am  gathering  in 
fouls  to  God.”  Yet  fhe  would  often  complain 
I -of  her  weaknefs  and  iraperfeftions,  and  cry  out, 
, “ I am  an  unprofitable  fervant.”  I was  fome- 
times  jealous,  that  fire  carried  her  charity  too 
"far,  not  allowing  herfelf  what  was  needful.  But 
; fhe  would  anfwer,  “ I can  live  upon  one  meal 
a day,  fo  that  I may  have  to  give  to  them  that 
I have  none.” 

I On  Sund.  0£l.  p,  fhe  went  with  one  more  to 
fee  tlie  condemned  malefaClors  in  Newgate. 
' They  inquired  for  John  Lancafter  in  particu- 
lar, who  had  fent  to  defire  their  coming.  He 
I aflved  them  to  go  into  his  cell,  which  they 
willingly  did,  although  fome  dilTnaded  them 
: from  it,  becaufe  the  goal  diftemper  (a  kind  of 
1 peftilential  fever)  raged  much  among  the  pri- 

I 


[ M4  ] 

foners.  Tliey  defired  he  ^voald  call  together  as 
many  of  theprifoners  as  were  willing  to  come. 
Six  or  fevenofthofe  who  were  under  fentence 
of  death  came.  They  fung  a hymn,  read  a por- 
tion of  fcripture  and  prayed.  Their  little  audi- 
ence were  all  in  tears.  Mofl  of  them  appeared 
deeply  convinced  of  their  lod  eflate.  From  this 
time  her  labours  were  unwearied  among  them, 
praying  with  th«m  and  for  them,  night  and  day. 

* John  Lancalter  faid,  “ When  I ufed  to  come 
to  the  Founder)'  every  morning,  which  I con- 
tinued to  do  for  fome  time,  I little  thought  of 
ever  coming  to  this  place.  I then  often  felt  the 
love  of  God,  and  thought  I fhould  never  com- 
mit fin  more.  But  after  a while,  I left  off  com- 
ing to  the  p''eaching;  then  my  good  defires  died 
away.  I fell  again  into  the  diverfions  I had  laid 
afide,  and  the  company  1 had  left  off.  As  I was 
one  day  playing  at  fkettles  with  fome  of  thefe,  a 
young  man,  with  whom  I was  now  much  ac- 
quainted, gave  me  a part  of  the  money  which 
hehad  julf  been  receiving  for  fome  ffolen  goods. 
This,  with  his  frequent  perfuafions,  fo  wrought 
upon  me,  that  at  lafl  I agreed  to  go  partners  with 
him.  Yet  I had  often  flrong  conviflions,  but  I 
fiifled  them  as  well  as  I could.” 

“ We  continued  in  this  courfe  till  Auguft  lafl. 
As  we  were  then  going  home  from  Bartholomew 
fair,  one  morning  about  two  o’clock,  it  came 
hrto  my  mind  to  go  and  Real  the  branches  out 
of  the  Founder)'.  I climbed  over  the  wall,  and 
' brought 


[ M5  ] 

I 

i brought  two  of  them  away,  though  I trembled, 
i and  fhook,  and  made  fo  great  a noife,  that  I 
thought  all  the  family  muft  be  dead,  or  elfe 
they  could  not  but  hear  me.  Within  a few  days 
i after  I Hole  the  velvet,  for  which  I was  taken 
I up,  tried  and  condemned.” 
j Some  being  of  opinion  it  would  not  be  dlf- 
i flcult  to  procure  a pardon  for  him,  S.  Peters, 
i though  Ihe  never  mentioned  this  to  him,  refolv- 
I ed  to  leave  no  means  unattempted.  She  procur- 
I;  ed  feveral  petitions  to  be  drawn,  and  w’ent  her- 
I feif  to  W ehminfter,  to  Kenfington,  and  to  every 
part  of  the  town  where  any  one  lived,  who 
j might  poffibly  affift  therein.  In  the  mean 
I time,  Ihe  went  conflantly  to  Newgate,  fome- 
[ times  alone,  fometimes  with  one  or  two  others, 

, vifjted  all  that  were  condemned  in  their  cells,  ex- 
horted them,  prayed  with  them,  and  had  the 
! comfort  of  finding  them  every  time  more  athirft 
i for  God  than  before,  and  of  being  followed, 
i whenever  fhe  w'ent  away,  w'ith  abundance  of 
prayers  and  bleffings. 

j After  a time,  flie  and  her  companions  believ- 
' ed  it  would  be  of  ufe  to  examine  each  clofely  as 
to  the  ftate  of  his  foul.  * They  fpoke  to  John 
Laiicafter  firft.  He  lifted  up  his  eyes  and  hands, 
and  after  paufing  a while,  faid,  “ I thank  God, 

; I do  feel,  that  he  has  forgiven  me  my  fins.  I do 
know  it.”  They  afked,  “ How%  and  when  he 
knew  it  firft  ?”  He  replied,  I was  in  great  fear  and 
VoL.  XXIX,  G heavinefs, 


[ 146  ] 

heavinefs,  till  the  very  morning  you  came 
hither  firfl-.  That  morning  I was  in  earneft 
prayer  ; and  juft  as  St.  Paul's  clock  ftruck 
five,  the  Lord  poured  into  my  foul  fuch  peace 
as  I had  never  felt,  fo  that  I was  fcarce  able 
to  bear  it.  From  that  hour  I have  never  been 
afraid  to  die.  For  I know,  and  am  fure,  as 
foon  as  my  foul  departs  from  the  body,  the 
Lord  Jefias  will  ftand  ready  to  carry  it  into 
glory.” 

The  next  who  was  fpoken  to  was  Thomas  At- 
kins, nineteen  years  of  age.  When  he  was  afk- 
ed  (after  many  other  queftions,  in  anfwering 
which  he  expreft  the  cleareft  and  deepeft  con- 
viftion  of  all  his  fins,  as  well -as  that  for  which 
he  was  condemned)  “ If  he  was  not  afraid  to 
die  ?”  He  fixed  his  eyes  upward  and  faid,  in 
the  moft  earneft  and  folemn  manner,  “ I 
blefs  God,  I am  not  afraid  to  die ; for  I 
have  laid  my  foul  at  the  feet  of  Jefus.”  And 
to  the  laft  moment  of  his  life,  he  gave  all 
reafon  to  believe,  that  thefe  w^ere  not  vain 
words. 

Thomas  Thompfon,  the  next,  was  quite  an 
ignorant  man,  fcarce  able  to  exprefs  himfelf  on 
common  occafions:  yet  fome  of  his  expreftiorre 
were  intelligible  enough,  “ I don’t  knosv,  faid 
he,  how  it  is  : I nfed  to  have  nothing  but  bad 
and  wdeked  thoughts  in  me,  and  now  they  are 
all  gone,  and  I know  God  loves  me,  and  he 

has 


[ *47  ] 

has  forgiven  my  fins.”  He  perfified  in  this  tef- 
timony  till  death,  and  in  a behaviour  fuitable 
thereto. 

When  John  Roberts  came  firll  into 
John  L’s.  cell,  he  was  utterly  carelefs  and 
fullen.  But  it  was  not  long  before  his 
countenance  changed;  the  tears  ran  down 
his  cheeks,  and  he  continued  from  that  hour 
earneflly  and  fteddily  feeking  repentance  and 
remilTion  of  fins.  There  did  not  pafs  many 
days  before  he  likewife  declared,  that  the 
burthen  of  fin  was  gone  ; that  the  fear  of 
death  was  utterly  taken  away,  and  it  returned 
no  more. 

William  Gardiner,  from  the  time  that  he  was 
condemned,  was  very  ill  of  the  goal-difiemper. 
She  vifited  him  in  his  own  cell,  till  he  was  able 
to  come  abroad.  He  was  a man  of  exceeding 
few  words,  but  of  a broken  and  contrite  fplrit. 
Some  time  after,  he  exprefi  great  readinefs  to 
die,  yet  with  the  utmoft  diffidence  of  himfelf. 
One  of  his  expreffions,  to  a perfon  accompany- 
ing him  to  the  place  of  execution  was,  “ O fir, 
I have  nothing  to  trull  to  but  the  blood  of 
Chrift.  If  that  wont  do,  I am  undone  for 
ever.” 

As  foon  as  Sarah  Cunningham  was  told, 
that  the  w'arrant  was  come  down  for  her  execu- 
tion, Ihe  fell  raving  mad.  She  had  but  few  in- 
tervals of  reafon,  till  the  morning -of  her  execu- 
G 2 tidn. 


[ >48  ] 


tion.  She  was  then  fenfible,  but  fpoke  little  ; 
till  being  told,  “ Chrift  will  have  pity  upon 
you,  if  you  afkbim:”  (be  broke  out,  “ Pity 
upon  me!  Will  Chrift  have  pity  upon  me? 
Then  I will  alk  him.  Indeed  I will  ; which  fhe 
didin  the  heft  manner  (he  could,  till  her  foul 
was  required  of  her. 

Samuel  Chapman  appeared  to  be  quite  har- 
dened. He  feemed  to  fear  neither  God  nor  de- 
vil. But  when  after  fome  time  Sarah  Peters 
talked  with  him,  God  flruck  him  down  at  one 
ftroke.  He  felt  hiinfelf  a firmer,  and  cried  aloud 
formercy.  The  goal-diftemper  then  feized  upon 
him,  and  confined  him  to  his  bed,  till  he  was 
carried  out  to  die.  She  vifited  him  frequently 
in  his  cell.  He  wept  much  and  prayed  much  ; 
but  never  appeared  to  have  any  clear  affurance 
of  his  acceptance  with  God. 

* It  was  the  earneft  defire  of  them  all,  that 
thev  whom  God  had  made  fo  helpful  to  them, 
might  fpend  the  laft  night  with  them.  Accord- 
ingly fhe  came  to  Newgate  at  ten  o’clock,  bilt 
could  not  be  admitted  on  any  terms.  However, 
fix  of  them  were  fuffered  to  be  in  one  cell.  They 
fpent  the  night,  wrellling  with  God  in  prayer. 
She  was  admitted «bnut  fix  in  the  morning.  As 
foon  as  the  cell  was  opened,  they  fprang  out,  fe- 
vcral  ol  them  crying,  with  a tranfport  not  to  be 
expreft,  “ O what  a happy  night  have  we  had? 
What  a bleffed  morning  is  this?  O when  will 

the 


the  hour  come  that  we  long  for,  that  our  fouls 
fhall  be  fet  at  liberty?  The  turnkey  faid,  “ I 
never  faw  fuch  people  before.  When  the  bell- 
man came  at  twelve  o’clock,  to  tell  them  (as 
ufual)  remember  you  are  to  die  to-day,  they  cri- 
ed out,  Welcome  news,  Welcome  news.” 

* John  Lancafter  was  the  firft  who  was  called 
out,  to  have  his  irons  knocked  off.  When  he 
came  to  the  block  (at  which  this  is  done)  he 
faid,  “ Bleffed  be  the  day  I came  into  this  place  ! 
O what  a glorious  work  hath  the  Lord  carried 
on  in  my  foul  fince  I came  hither  ? Then  he 
faid  to  thofe  near  him,  “ O my  dear  friends, 
join  in  praife  with  me  a finner.  O for  a tongue 
to  praife  him  as  I ought.  My  heart  is  like  fire 
In  a clofe  veffel.  I am  ready  to  burft  for  want 
of  vent.  O that  I could  tell  the  thoufandth  part 
of  the  joys  I feel  ?”  One  faying,  “ I am  forry 
to  fee  you  in  that  condition.”  He  anfwered, 
■“  I would  not  change  it  for  ten  thhoufand 
worlds.”  From  the  prefs-yard,  he  was  remov- 
ed into  a large  room,  where  he  exhorted  all  the 
officers  to  repentance,  till  Thomas  Atkins  was 
brought  in : whom  he  Immmediately  afked. 
How  is  it  between  God  and  your  foul  ?”  He 
anfwered,  “ Bleffed  be  God,  I am  ready.”  An 
officer  alking  about  this  time,  “ What  is  it 
o’clock,  was  anfwered.  Near  nine.  On  which 
Lancafler  faid,  “ By  one  I fhall  be  in  paradife, 
fafely  refling  in  Abraham’s  bofom.”  To  another 
prifoner  coming  in,  he  faid,  “ Cannot  you  fee 
G 3 Jefus? 


[ 150  ] 


Jefus?  I fee  him  by  faith,  {landing  at  the  right* 
hand  of  God,  with  open  arms  to  receive  our 
fouls.”  One  afldng  which  is  Lancafter  ? He  an* 
fwered,  “ Here  I am.  Come,  fee  a Chriflian 
triumphing  over  death.”  A by- Hander  faid, 
“ Be  ftedfaft  to  the  end.”  He  replied,  “ I am 
by  the  grace  of  God,  as  ftedfaft  as  the  rock  I am 
built  upon,  and  that  rock  is  Chrift.”  Then  he 
faid  to  the  people,  “ Cry  to  the  Lord  for  mercy, 
and  you  will  furely  find  it.  I have  found  it. 
Therefore  none  fhould  defpair.  When  I came 
firft  to  this  place,  my  heart  was  as  hard  as  my 
cell-walls,  and  as  black  as  hell.  But  now  I am 
wafhed,  now  I am  made  clean  by  the  blood  of 
Chrift.” 

When  William  Gardiner  came  in,  he  faid^ 
“Well,  my  dear  man,  how  are  you?”  He  an- 
fwered,  “ I am  happy,  and  think  the  moments 
long;  for  I want  to  die,  that  I may  be  with 
him  whom  my  foul  loves.”  Lancafter  afked, 
“ Had  we  not  a fweet  night  ?”  He  faid,  “ I 
was  as  it  were  in  heaven.  O,  if  a foretafte  be 
fo  fweet,  what  muft  the  full  enjoyment  be  ?” 
Then  came  in  Thomas  Thompfon,  who  with 
great  power  witneft  the  fame  confefTion.  The 
people  round  the  mean  time  were  in  teats,  and 
the  officers  flood  like  men  affiighted. 

Then  Lancafter  exhorted  one  in  doubt,  never 
to  reft  till  he  had  found  reft  in  Chrift.  After 
this  he  brake  out  into  ftrong  prayer,  (mingled 
with  praife  and  thankfgiving)  that  the  true  gof- 

pel 


[ 1 

pel  of  Chrift  might  fpread  to  every  corner  of 
the.habitable  earth;  that  the  congregation  at 
the  Foundery  might-  abound  more  and  more  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God  ^.that  he  would 
in  a particular  manner  blefs  all  thofe,  who  had 
taken- care  ol  his  dying  foul;  and  that  God 
would-  blefs  and  keep  Mr.  W’s.  that  neither 
men  nor  devils  might  ever  hurt  them,  but  that 
they  might  as  a ripe  lliock  of  corn,  be  gathered 
into  the  garner  of  God. 

* When  the  laft  prifoner  came  into  the  room, 
he  faid,  “ Here  is  another  of  our  little  flack. 
An  officer  faid  tenderly,  “ He  thought  it  was 
too  large.”  He  faid,  “ Not  too  large  for  heaven  : 
thither  we  are  going.” 

He  faid  to  Mr.  M.  “ O fir,  be  not  faint  In 
your  mind.  Be  not  weary  of  well-doing.  You 
ferve  a glorious  mailer;  and  if  you  go  on,  you 
will  have  a glorious  reward. 

When  the  officers  told  them,  “ It  was  time 
to  go,”  they  rofe  with  inexprcffible  joy,  and 
embraced  each  other,  commending  each  others 

foul  to  the  care  of  him  who  had  fo  cared  for 

« 

them.  Lancaller  then  earnellly  prayed,  that  all 
there  prefent,  might,  like  him,  be  found  of 
God,  though  they  fought  him  not. 

* Coming  into  the  prefs-yard,  he  faw  Sarah 
Peters.  He  Hepped  to  her,  kilTed  her,  and 
earnellly  faid,  “ I am  going  to  paradife  to-day. 
And  you  will  follow  me  foon.” 

The  croud  being  great  they  could  not  readily 
G 4 get 


C »52  ] 

get  through.  So  he  had  another  opportunity  of 
declaring  the  goodnefs  of  God.  And  to  one  in 
heavinefs  he  faid,  “ Cry  unto  the  Lord  and  he 
will  be  found.  My  foul  for  thine,  he  will  have 
mercy  upon  thee.”  Then  he  faid  to  all,  “ Re- 
member Mary  Magdalene,  out  of  whom  the 
Lord  call  feven  devils.  So  rely  ye  on  him  for 
mercy;  and  you  will  furely  find  it.’’ 

* As  they  were  preparing  to  go  into  the  cart 
he  faid,  “ Come  my  dear  friends,  let  us  go  on 
joyfully,  for  the  Lord  is  making  ready  to  re- 
ceive us  into  everlading  habitations.”  Then 
turning  to  the  fpe£iators  he  faid,  “ My  friends, 
God  be  your  guide.  God  direft  you  in  the  right 
way  to  eternal  glory.  It  is  but  a fhort  time  and 
we  fhall  be,  where  all  forrow  and  fighing  fhall 
ilee  away.  Turn  from  the  evil  of  your  ways, 
and  you  alfo  with  us  fhall  ftand  with  the  innu- 
merable company  on  mount  Sion.” 

As  they  went  along,  he  frequently  fpoke  to 
the  people  exhorting  them  to  repentance.  To 
fome  he  faid,  “ Ye  poor  creatures,  you  do  not 
know  where  I am  going.  See  that  you  love 
Chrift,  fee  that  you  follow  Chrifl,  and  then  you 
will  come  there  too.”  He  likewife  £rave  out  and 

O 

fung  feveral  hymns  ; particularly  that,  with 
which  he  was  always  deeply  affefted, 

“ Lamb  of  God,  whofe  bleeding  love 
We  ftill  recall  to  mind. 

Send  the  anfwer  from  above, 

And  let  us  mercy  find. 


Think 


t ] 

Think  on  us,  who  think  on  thee, 

And  every  ftruggling  foul  releafe  ! 

O remember  calvary  : 

And  let  us  go  in  peace.” 

All  the  people  who  faw  them  feemed  to  be 
amazed  ; but  much  more  when  they  came  to  the 
place  of  execution.  A folemn  awe  over-whelm- 
ed the  whole  multitude.  As  foon  as  the  execu- 
tioner had  done  his  part  with  Lancafter  and  the 
two  that  were  with  him,  he  called  for  a hymn- 
book  and  gave  out  a hymn  with  a clear,  llrong 
voice.  And  after  the  ordinary  had  prayed,  he 
gave  out  and  fung  the  fifty-firfl  pfalm.  He 
then  took  leave  of  his  fellow-fufferers  with  all 
poflible  marks  of  the  mod  tender  afFe£Hon.  He 
bleft  the  perfons  who  had  attended  him,  and 
commended  his  own  foul  to  God. 

Even  a little  circumflance  that  follow'ed  feemi 
worth  obferving.  His  body  was  carried  awav  by 
a company  hired  of  the  furgeons  : but  a crew  of 
failors  purfued  them,  took  it  from  them  by 
force,  and  delivered  it  to  his  mother,  by  which 
means  it  was  decently  interred,  in  the  prefence 
of  many  who  praifed  God  oh  his  behalf. 

One  thing  which  occafioned  fome  amazement 
was,  that  even  after  death  there  w’ere  no  marks 
of  violence  upon  him.  His  face  was  not  at  all 
bloated  or  disfigured ; no,  nor  even  changed 
from  its  natural  colour ; but  he  lay  with  a calm, 
fmiling  countenance  as  one  in  a fweet  fleep. 

G 5 He 


[ 254  ] 

He  died  on  Frid.  Oft.  28.  and  was  buried  on 
Sunday  the  30th.  S.  Peters,  having  now  finifhed 
her  work,  felt  the  body  fir, k apace.  OnWed.Nov. 
3.  She  took  to  her  bed,  having  the  fyraptoms 
ofa  malignant  fever.  She  praifed  God  in  the  fires 
for  ten  days,  continually  witneffing  thegood  con- 
feffion,  ‘‘  I have  fought  the  good  fight,  I have 
kept  the  faith : I am  going  to  receive  the  crown.” 
And  a little  after  midnight  on  Sund.  13.  her 
fpirit  alfo  returned  to  God, 

Mond.  14.1  rode  to  Windfor,  and  after  preach* 
ing,  examined  the  members  of  the  fociety.  The 
fame  I did  at  Reading  in  the  evening  ; at  Wy* 
combe  on  Tuefday,  and  on  Wednedfay  at  Brent- 
ford, in  the  afternoon  I preached  to  a little  com- 
pany  at  Wandfworth,  who  had  jufi  began  to  feek 
God.  But  they  had  a rough  fetting-out ; the 
rabble  gathering  from  every  fide,  whenever  they 
met  together,  throwing  dirt  and  ftones,  and  abuf- 
ing  both  men  and  women  in  thegrofTeft  manner. 
They  complained  of  this  to  a neighbouring 
magifirate,  and.  he  promifed  to  do  them  juftice. 
But  Mr.  C.  walked  over  to  hjs  houfe,  and  fpoke 
fo  much  in  favour  of  the  rioters,,  that  they  were 
all  difcharged.  It  is  flrange,  that  a mild,  humane, 
man  could  be  perfuaded  by  fpeaking  quite  con- 
trary to  the  truth  (means  as  bad  as  the  end)  to  in-, 
courage  a mercilefs  rabble,  in  outraging  the  in- 
nocent ! A few  days  after  Mr.  C.  w^alking  over 
the  fame  field,  dropt  down  and  fpoke  no  more  f 
Surely  the  mercy  of  God  would  not  fuffer  a 

well-. 


I ^65  ] 

well-meaning  man  to  be  any  longer  a tool  to 
perfecutors. 

Mond.  21.1  fet  out  for  Leigh  in  ElTex.  It  flad 
rained  hard  in  the  former  part  of  the  night, 
which  was  fucceeded  by  a fharp  froft ; fo  that 
moft  of  the  road  was  like  glafs ; and  the  nonh- 
ead wind  fat  jud  in  our  face.  However,  we 
reached  Leigh  by  four  in  the  afternoon.  Here 
was  once  a deep,  open  harbour ; but  the  fands 
have  long  fince  blocked  it  up,  and  reduced  a 
once  flourifhing  town,  to  a fmall,  ruinous  vil- 
lage. I preached  to  mod  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  place  in  the  evening  ; to  many  in  the  morn- 
ing, and  then  rode  back  to  London. 

Mond.  Dec.  5.  I retired  to  Newington  to 
write.  I preached  every  evening  to  a little 
company ; one  who  dumbled  in  among  them  on 
Wednefday,  was  a man  eminent  for  all  manner 
of  wickednefs  : he  appeared  much  affefted,  and 
went  away  full  of  good  defires  and  refolutions. 

Thurf.  8.  A poor  mourner  found  peace. 
When  fhe  related  it  to  me  in,  the  morning,  I 
told  her,  “ If  you  watch  and  pray,  God  will  give 
you  more  of  his  love.”  She  replied,  “ More  ! 
Why,  is  it  pofTible  I fhould  feel  more  love  to 
God  than  I do  now  ?”  The  natural  thought  of 
new-born  babes,  who  feel  as  much  as  their 
hearts  will  then  contain. 

In  the  evening  I faw  one  in  a far  different 
date.  He  was  crying  out  (in  a high  fever)  “ O 
Sir,  lam  dying,  without  God,  without  Chr  id, 
G 6 without 


[ 156  ] 

without  hope.”  I fpoke  flrongly  of  the  mercies 
of  God  in  Chrift,  and  left  him  a little  revived. 
Th'e  next  night  he  told  me,  “ For  fome  time  af- 
ter you  was  here,  I was  I know  not  how  ; fo 
light  and  eafy  ! I had  no  doubt  but  God  would 
have  mercy  upon  me ; but  now  I am  dark  again, 
I fear,  lell  I fltould  perilh  at  the  laft.”  He 
then  broke  out  into  prayer.  I left  him  a little 
eafier,  beginning  again  to  caft  his  care  upon 
God. 

Sund.  1 1.  Several  of  our  brethren  called  upon 
him,  and  found  his  hope  gradually  i-ncreafing. 
Mond.  12.  He  exprelTed  a Rrong  confidence  in 
the  mercy  of  God,  and  faid,  He  feared  nothing 
but  left  he  fliould  live  and  turn  back  into  the 
world.  Before  noon  he  was  a little  delirious ; but 
as  foon  as  any  one  fpoke  of  God,  he  recovered 
himfelf  and  prayed  fo  vehemently,  as  to  fet  all 
that  heard  him  in  tears.  I called  once  more 
about  fix  in  the  evening,  and  commended  his 
foul  to  God.  He  was  Ipeechlefs,  but  not  with- 
out fenfe,  as  the  motion  of  his  lips  plainly  fhew- 
ed ; though  his  eyes  were  generally  fixt  upwards, 
with  a look  which  faid,  “ I fee  God.”  About 
half  an  hour  after  I went  away,  his  foul  was  fet 
at  liberty. 

Thus,  in  the  ftrength  of  his  years,  died 
Francis  Butts,  one,  in  whofe  lips  was  found 
no  guile.  He  was  an  honeft  man,  fearing  God, 
and  earneftly  endeavouring  to  work  righteouf- 
itefs. 


Satun 


[ 157  ] 

Satur.  24.  I buried  the  body  of  William  Tur- 
neir,  who,  towards  the  clofe  of  a long  iHnefs,  had 
been  removed  into  Guy’s  hofpital,  though  with 
fmall  hope  of  recovery.  The  night  before  his 
death  he  was  delirious,  and  talked  loud  and  in- 
coherently, which  occafioned  many  in  the  ward 
to  gather  round  his  bed,  in  order  to  divert 
themfelves.  But  in  that  hour  it  pleafed  God  to 
reftore  him  at  once  to  the  full  ufe  of  his  under- 
flanding ; and  he  began  praifing  God  and  ex- 
horting them  to  repent,  fo  as  to  pierce  many  to 
the  heart.  He  remained  for  foine  time  in  this 
hft  labour  of  love,  and  then  gave  up  his  foul  to 
God. 

Tuef.  27.  Mr.  Glanvile  died.  He  was  at  the 
burial  of  Francis  Butts,  and  was  then  faying, 
“ What  a mercy  it  is  that  I am  alive  ? Tliat  I 
v'as  not  cut  off  a year  ago  ?”  The  fame  night  he 
was  taken  ill,  and  was  for  the  moft  part  delirious. 
In  his  lucid  intervals  he  feemed  intent  on  the 
things  of  God.  1 faw  him  not  till  the  night  be- 
fore his  death ; he  anfwered  me  fenfibly  once 
or  twice,  faying,  “ He  hoped  to  meet  me  in 
a better  place.”  Then  he  raved  again ; fo  I 
ufed  a fliort  prayer,  and  commended  his  Ipirif 
to  God. 

Mond.  Jan.  2,  1749.  I had  defigned  to  fet 
out  with  a friend  for  Rotterdam.  But  being 
much  preft  to  anfwer  Dr.  Middleton’s  book 
againft  the  fathers,  I poftponed  my  voyage,  and 

fpent' 


[ 158  ] 

fpent  almoft  twenty  days  in  that  unpleafing  em- 
ployment. 

* Satur.  28.  I looked  over  the  celebrated  tra6l 
of  Mr.  Daille  on  the  right  ufe  of  the  fathers.  I 
foot!  faw  what  occafion  that  good  man  had  given 
to  the  enemies  of  God  to  blafpheme  ; and  that 
Dr.  Middleton  in  particular  had  largely  ufed  that 
work,  in  order  to  overthrow  the  whole  Chriftian 
fyftem. 

Sund.  Feb.  5.  Mr.  Manning  being  danger- 
oufly  ill,  I was  defired  to  ride  over  to  Hayes.  I 
knew  not  how  the  warm  people  would  behave, 
confidering  the  floiies  which  paft  current  among 
them,  Mrs.  B.  having  averred  to  Mr.  M.  hira- 
felf,  “ That  Mr.  Wefley  was  unqueftionably  a 
Jefuit.”  Juft  fuch  ajefuitin  principle,  (and  de- 
fjrous  to  be  fuch  in  practice)  as  Sir  Nathanael 
Barnardifton  W'as. 

But  God  made  all  things  eafy.  Far  from 
any  tumult  or  rudenefs,  I obferved  deep  atten- 
tion in  almoft  the  whole  congregation.  Sund. 
12.  Mr.  M.  having  had  a relapfe,  I rode  over 
again ; and  again  I obferved  the  fame  de- 
cency of  behaviour  in  a much  larger  congre- 
gation. 

Tuef.  14.  I rode  with  my  brother  to  Oxford, 
and  preached  to  a fmall  company  in  the  even- 
ing. Thurf.  16.  We  rode  to  Rofs,  and  on  Frid. 
to  Garth. 

Sund.  19.  My  brother  preached  at  Maefmen- 
nys  in  the  morning.  I preached  at  Builth  in  the. 

after- 


[ 159  ] 

afternoon,  and  at  Garth  in  the  evening.  Tuef. 
21.  I rode  to  Ragland,  and  the  next  day  to 
Kingfwood. 

Thurf.  23.  My  defign  was,  to  have  as  many 
of  our  preachers  here,  during  the  Lent,  as  could 
poflibly  be  fpared;  and  to  read  Leftures  to 
them  every  day,  as  I did  to  my  pupils  in  Oxford. 
I had  feventeen  of  them  in  all ; thefe  I di- 
vided into  two  clafTes,  andread  to  one  Bilhop 
Pearfon  on  the  Creed  ; to  the  other  Aldrich’s 
Logic ; and  to  both  “ ^l-ules  for  Aftion  and  Ut- 
terance.” 

Frid.  March  3.  I correfled  the  extraft  of 
John  Arndt,  defigned-  for  part  of  the  Chrlftian 
Library.  But  who  can  tell,  whether  that  and 
an  hundred  other  defigns  will  be  executed  or 
no  ? IVken  the  breath  of  man.  goelh  forth,  he  turn- 
eth  again  to  his  duf,  and  then  all  his  thoughts 
perfh ! 

Satur.  11.  I rode  to  Frefhford,  three  or  four 
miles  from  Bath.  The  houfe  not  containing  tha 
people,  I was  obliged  to  preach  out  of  doors. 
It  was  dark  when  I began,  and  rained  all  the 
time  I preached.  But,  I believe,  none  went 
away. 

Sund.  12.  After  preaching  at  five,  I rode  to 
Bearfield  and  preached  there  between  eight  and 
nine,  and  about-  one  at  Seend..  Mrs.  Andrewsj 
the  wife  of  a neighbouring  clergyman  afterwards 
invited  me,  in  her  hufband’s  name,  tohishoufej 
there  I found, 

“ An 


[ ] 


“ An  hoary,  reverend  and  religious  man." 

The  very  fight  of  whom  ftruck  me  with  awe. 
He  told  me,  “ His  only  fon,  about  nine  years 
ago,  came  to  hear  me  preach  at  Bearfield.  He 
was  then  in  the  flower  of  his  age,  but  remarka- 
ble above  his  years,  both  for  piety,  fenfe  and 
learning.  He  was  dearly  and  deeply  convinced 
of  the  truth,  but  returned  home  ill  of  the  fmall- 
pox.  Neverthelefs  he  praifed  God  for  having 
been  there,  rejoiced  in  a full  fenfe  of  his  love, 
and  triumphed  more  and  more  over  ficknefs, 
pain  and  death,  till  his  foul  returned  to  God. 
He  faid,  “ He  had  loved  me  ever  fince,  and 
greatly  defired  to  fee  me ; and  that  he  blefled 
God  he  had  feen  me  once,  before  he  followed 
his  dear  fon  into  eternity.” 

At  five  I preached  at  Bearfield  again.  This 
day  I was  wet  from  morning  to  night,  with  the 
continued  rain  ; but  I found  no  manner  of  in- 
convenience. 

Tuef.  14.  Having  fet  apart  an  hour  weekly 
for  thatpurpofe,  I met  the  childi;en  of  our  four 
fchools  together;  namely,  the  boys  boarded  in 
t}je  new  houfe,  the  girls  boarded  in  the  old  : the 
day  fcholars  (boys)  taught  by  James  Harding, 
and  the  girls  taught  by  Sarah  Dimmock.  W e 
foon  found  the  effeft  of  it  in  the  children, 
fame  of  whom  were  deeply  and  laftingjy 
afiefled. 


r 


* frid. 


[ *5.  ] 

*Fri(j,  31,  1 began  abridging  Dr.  Cave’s  Prl- 
niitive  ChrifHanitv.  O what  pity  that  fo  great 
piety  and  learning  fhould  be  accompanied  with 
fo  little  judgment  1 

Klond.  April  3.  I fet  out  for  Ireland.  We 
waited  more  than  four  hours  at  the  pafiage  : by 
which  delay  I was  forced  to  difappoint  a large 
congregation  at  Newport.  About  three  I came 
to  Pedwas,  near  Carphylly.  The  congregation 
had  waited  fome  hours.  I began  immediate- 
ly, wet  and  weary  as  I was ; and  we  rejoiced 
over  all  our  labours. 

In  the  evening  and  the  next  morning  (Tuef. 
4*)  I preached  at  Cardiff.  O what  a fair  prof- 
■peftwas  here  fome  years  ago!  Surely  this  whole 
town  would  have  known  God,  from  the  leaft 
'even  to  the  greateft,  had  it  not  been  for  men 
leaning  to  their  own  underftanding,  inftead  of 
the  law  and  the  teftimony. 

At  twelve  I preached  at  Lanmais  to  a loving 
earned  people  ; who  do  not  defire  to  be  any 
wifer  than  God.  In  the  evening  I preached  at 
Fonmon,  the  next  morning  at  Cov/bridge.  How 
is  the  fcene  changed  fince  I was  here  lad,  amidft 
the  raadnefs  of  the  people,  and  the  Hones  flying 
on  every  fide  ? Now  all  is  calm  ; the  whole 
town  is  in  good-humour,  and  flock  to  hear  the 
glad  tidings  of  falvation. 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Lantriffent. 
Thurf.  6.  we  rode  to  a hard- named  place  on  the 
top  of  a mountain;  I fcarce  faw  any  houle  near; 

however 


[ i62  J 

however  a large  number  of  honeil,  fimple  peo- 
ple foon  came  together.  But  fevv  could  under- 
hand me  : fo  Henry  Lloyd,  when  I had  done, 
repeated  the  fubftance  of  mv  fermon  in  Wellh. 
The  behaviour  of  the  people  recorapenfed  us 
for  our  labour,  in  climibing  up  to  them.. 

About  noon  we  came  to  Aberdare,  juft  as  the 
bell  was  ringing  for  a burial.  This  had  brought 
a grea.t  number  together,  to  whom,  after  the  bu- 
. tial,  I preached  in  the  church.  We  had  almoft 
continued  rains  from  Aberdare  to  the  great 
rough  mountain  that  hangs  over  the  vale  of 
Brecknock  : but  as  foon  as  w'e  gained  the  top  of 
this,  we  left  the  clouds  behind  us.  We  had. a 
mild,  fair,  funfhiny  evening  the  remainder  of 
our  journey. 

Frid.  7.  We  reached  Garth.  Satur.  8.  I mar- 
ried my  brother  and  Sarah  Gwvnne.  It  was  a 
folemn  day,  fuch  as  became  the  dignity  of  a 
Chriftian  marriage. 

Sund.  9.  1 preached  at  Builih,  Maefmennys 
and  Garths  Mond.  to.  A little  after  ten  we 
reached  Lanidlos.  Many  were  come  thither  be- 
fore us  from  all  parts.  About  eleven  I preached 
in  the  market-place.  The  wind  was  fo  piercing, 
that  whenever  it  came  in  my  face,  it  almoft 
took  away  my  voice.  But  the  poor  people 
(though  all  of  them  ftood  bare-headed)  Teemed 
not  to  know  there  was  any  wind  at  all.  We 
rode  from  hence  in  three  hours  to  a village  fe- 

ven 


[ ^63  ] 

ven  miles  off.  The  perfons,  at  whofe  houfe  we 
called,  knowing  who  we  were,  received  us  with 
open  arms,  and  gladly  gave  us  fuch  fare  as  they 
had.  In  three  hours  more  we  rode  with  much 
ado,  feven  miles  farther,  to  a village  named 
Dynas-mouihy,  here  an  honoft  man,  out  of  pure 
good-will,  without  my  knowing  any  thing  of  the 
matter,  fent  for  the  moil  learned  man  in  the 
town,  who  was  an  excifeman,  to  bear  me  com- 
pany. He  fent  an  excufe,  being  not  very  well, 
but  w'ithal  invited  me  to  his  houfe.  I returned 
him  thanks  and  fent  him  two  or  three  little 
books ; on  which  he  wrote  a few  lines,  begging 
me  to  call  upon  him.  I went,  and  found  one 
that  wanted  a Saviour,  and  was  deeply  fenfible 
of  his  want.  I fpent  fome  time  with  him  in  con- 
verfation  and  prayer,  and  had  reafon  to  hope, 
the  feed  was  fown  in  good  ground. 

Tuef.  11.  We  reached  Dall-y-gelle  in  lefs 
than  three  hours,  Tannabull  before  noon,  and 
Carnarvon  in  the  evening.  What  need  there  is 
of  guides  over  thefe  fands  I cannot  conceive. 
This  is  the  third  time  I have  croffed  them  with- 
out any, 

Wednef.  12.  We  came  to  Holy-head  be- 
tween one  and  two.  But  all  the  Hiips  were  on 
the  Iiiffi  fide.  One  came  in  the  next  day,  but 
could  not  go  out,  the  wind  being  quite  contrary. 

* In  this  journey  I read  over  Statius’s  Thebais : 

I wonder  one  man  (hould  write  fo  well  and  fo  ilj. 

Some- 


L 164  ] 

Sometimes  he  is  fcarce  inferior  to  Virgil ; fome- 
times  as  low  as  the  dulleli:  parts  of  Ovid. 

In  the  evening  I preached  on,  Ee  ye  alfo 
ready,  Tlie  poor  people  now  feemed  to  be 
much  a£fe£led  ; and  equally  fo  the  next  night. 
So  that  I was  not  forry  the  wind  was  con- 
trary. 

Satur.  15.  We  went  on  board  at  fix,  the  wind 
then  handing  due  eaft.  But  no  foonerwere  we 
out  of  the  harbour,  than  it  turned  fouth-weft 
and  blew  a horm.  Yet  we  made  forward,  and 
about  one  o’clock,  came  within  two  or  three 
leagues  of  land.  The  wind  then  wholly  failed  ; 
a calm  fuddenly  following  a ftorm,  produced 
fuch  a motion  as  I never  felt  before.  But  it  was 
•not  long  before  the  wind  fprung  up  weft,  w’hich 
obliged  us  to  hand  away  for  the  Skerries.  When 
W'e  wanted  a league  of  fhore  it  fell  calm  again, 
fo  that  there  we  rolled  about  till  paft  funlet. 
But  in  the  night  we  got  back  into  Dublin-bay, 
and  landed  foon  after  thiee  at  Dunlary,  about 
feven  Englifh  miles  from  the  city.  LeavingWil- 
liam  Tucker  to  follow  me  in  a chaife,  I walked 
ftrait  away  and  came  to  Skinner’s-alley,  a little 
before  the  time  of  preaching.  I preached  on, 
.i^^oved,  ij  God  fo  loved  i/s,  zoe  ozighl  a’Jo  to  love 
one  another.  In  the  afternoon,  and  again  In 
the  evening  (in  our  own  garden)  I preached  on, 
Let  us  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that 
.we  may  find  mercy  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need. 


On 


[ >S5  ] 


On  Thurf.  and  Frid.  I examined  the  clafTes, 
and  was  much  comforted  among  them.  I left 
about  four  hundred  in  the  fociety  ; and  after  all 
the  ftumbling-blocks  laid  in  the  way,  I found 
four  hundred  and  forty-nine. 

Sund.  23.  We  had  feveral  fhowers  in  the  af- 
ternoon, while  I was  preaching  in  our  garden, 
and  toward  the  conclufion  a vehement  fliowcr 
of  hail.  But  all  kept  their  ground  till  1 con- 
cluded. 

Mond.  24.  The  cold  which  I had  had  for  forae 
days  growing  worfe  and  worfe,  and  the  fwelling 
which  began  in  my  cheek  increafing  greatly, 
and  paining  me  much,  I fent  for  Dr.  Ruttv. 
But  in  the  mean  time  I applied  boiled  nettles, 
which  took  away  the  pain  in  a moment.  After- 
wards I ufed  warm  treacle,  which  fo  abated  the 
fwelling,  that  before  the  dodlor  came,  1 was  al* 
moft  well.  However,  he  advifed  me,  “ Not 
to  go  out  that  day.”  But  I had  appointed  to 
read  the  letters  in  the  evening.  I returned 
home  as  early  as  I could,  and  found  no  incon- 
venience. 

Satur.  29. 1 rode  to  TyiTel’s-pafs,  and  preached 
in  the  evening,  and  on  Sunday  morning  and 
evening.  Mond.  May  1.  1 preached  at  five  in 
the  evening  at  Edinberry,  to  an  exceedingly 
well-behaved  congregation.  I preached  at  five 
in  the  morning  (many  quakers  being  prefent)  on, 
Ef  Jliall  beall  taught  of  God. 


In 


[ ^66  ] 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Mount- 
rnelick. 

Wednef.  3.  I preached  at  Tullamore  : Thurf. 
4.  at  Clara  about  noon,  and  in  the  evening  at 
Athlon  e.  I never  faw  fo  large  a congregation 
here  on  a weekday  before;  among  whom  were 
many  of  the  foldiers  (the  remains  of  the  regi- 
ment wherein  John  Nelfon  was)  and  feven  or 
eight  of  the  officers.  They  all  behaved  well, 
and  liRned  with  deep  attention. 

1 his  day  and  the  next  I endeavoured  to  fee 
all  who  were  weary  and  faint  in  their  minds. 
Moll  of  them,  I found,  had  not  been  ufed  with 
fufficient  tendernefs.  Who  is  there  that  fuffici- 
ently  weighs  the  advice  of  Kempis,  “ Nole 
duritzT  agere  cum  tintato  ? Deal  not  harllily  with 
one  that  is  tempted.” 

Sund.  7.  I preached  (as  ufual)  at  five  and  at 
three,  t\’ith  the  fpirit  of  convincing  fpeech. 
1 he  reffor  preached  in  the  afternoon  (though 
it  is  called  the  morning  fervice)  a clofe  ufeful 
fermon  on  the  fear  of  God.  At  five  1 had  great 
numbers  of  the  poor  papifls  (as  well  as  protef- 
tant.s)  maugre  all  the  labour  of  their  priefis.  I 
called  aloud,  Ho ! Extery  one  that  thirjieih, 
come  ye  to  the  waters',  and  he  that  hath  no  money! 
Strange  news  to  them  ! One  of  whom  had  de- 
clared frankly,  but  a few' days  before,  “ I would 
fain  be  with  you,  but  I dare  not:  for  now'  Ihat'e 
all  my  fins  forgiven  for  four  fliillings  a year ; 
and  this  could  not  be  in  yoar  church.” 


We 


I 167  ] 

We  had  a triumphant  hour  when  the  fociety 
met.  Several  captives  were  fet  at  liberty  : one 

of  thefe  was  Mr,  Jofeph  Ch . He  had 

been  an  eminent  man  many  years  for  curfing, 
ih^■earing,  drinking,  and  all  kinds  of  fafliionable 
wickednefs.  On  Monday  laft  he  had  rode  fif- 
teen miles  to  Tyrrel’s-pafs,  and  came  thither 
before  five  in  the  morning.  He  was  immediately 
convinced  and  followed  me  in  from  the  preach- 
ing. I was  then  examining  a clafs.  The  words 
cut  him  to  the  heart.  He  came  after  me  to  Ath- 
lone  (when  he  had  fettled  fome  temporal  bufii. 
nefsj  having  his  e)  es  continually  filled  with 
tears,  and  being  fcarce  able  either  to  eat,  drink 
or  llecp.  But  God  now  wiped  away  the  tears 
from  his  eves;  and  he  returned  to  his  houfe, 
to  declare  what  things  God  had  wrought. 

Mond,  8.  I rode  to  Aghrim,  where  the  face 
of  things  w'as  quite  changed  fince  the  timel  w'as 
there  before.  Here  was  now  a ferious  congrega- 
tion from  all  the  country  round.  I preached 
about  feven,  and  afterwards  explained  the  nature 
and  ufe  of  a fociety.  The  firft  who  defired 
to  join  therein,  was  Mr.  S.  his  wife,  and 
daughter. 

Tuef.  9.  I rode  to  Ahafkra,  fix  miles  fouth, 
at  the  defire  of  Mr.  G.  the  reftor.  As  the  pa- 
pifis  durfi:  not  come  into  the  church,  I preached 
before  Mr.  G.’s  door.  I Ihould  not  have  ima- 
.giiied  this  was  the  firfi  time  of  their  hearing 

this 


[ i68  ] 

this  prea(;hing;  fo  fixtand  earneft  was  their  at- 
tention. In  the  morning.  Wed.  lo.  I think 
the  congregation  was  larger  than  in  the  evening; 
among  whom  was  the  reSor  of  a neighbouring 
parilh,  who  feeraed  then  to  be  much  athirft  after 
lighteoufnefs. 

hlr.  Wade  of  Aghrim  rode  with  me  hence  to 
Eyre-court,  about  14  miles  from  Ahafkra. 
Here  1 preached  in  the  market-houfe,  a large 
handfome  room,  to  a well-behaved  congrega- 
tion. Thence  I rode  on  to  Birr,  and  preached 
at  (even  to  a large,  unconcerned  congregation. 
The  next  day,  both  in  the  morning  and  even- 
ing, I fpoke  very  plain  and  rougli.  And  the 
congregation  had  quite  another  appearance  than 
it  had  the  night  before.  So  clear  it  is,  that  love 
will  not  always  prevail  ; but  there  is  a time  for 
the  terrors  of  the  Lord. 

Frid.  12.  Before  nine  w'e  came  to  Nenagh. 

I had  no  defign  to  preach  ; but  one  of  the  dra- 
goons quartered  there,  would  take  no  denial.  So 
I ordered  a chair  to  be  carried  out,  and  went  to 
the  market-place.  Prefently  fuch  a congrega- 
tion was  gathered  round  me,  as  I had  not 
feen  ft  nee  I left  Athlone.  To  thefe  I fpake, 
as  I was  able,  the  whole  counfel  of  God,  and  then 
rode  chearfully  on  to  Limerick. 

Between  fix  and  feven  I preached  atMardvke, 
(an  open  place  without  the  walls)  to  about 
two  thou fand  people : not  one  of  whom  I obferv- 

ed 


[ 169  ] 

ed  either  to  laugh  or  to  look  about,  or  to  mind 
any  thing  but  the  fermon. 

Some  years  fince  an  old  Abby  here  was  re- 
built, with  a defign  to  have  public  fervice  therein. 
But  that  defign  failing,  only  the  fhell  of  it  was 
finilhed.  Of  this  (1  \ ing  ufelefsj  the  fociety  has 
taken  a leafe.  Here  I preached  in  the  morning, 
Sat.  ig.  to  fix  or  feven  hundred  people. 

We  then  went  to  prayers  at  the  cathedral,  an 
antient  and  venerable  pile.  In  the  afternoon  I 
walked  round  die  walls  of  the  towms,  fcarce- 
fo  large  as  Newcallle  upon  Tyne.  And  the  for- 
tifications are  much  in  the  fame  repair;  very 
fufficicnt  to  keep  out  the  wild  Irifh. 

May  14.  Being  Whitfnndav,  citr  church  was 
more  than  full  in  the  morning,  many  being  ob- 
liged to  hand  without.  I hardly  know  how  the 
time  went,  but  continued  fpeakingtill  near  feven 
clock.  I went  at  eleven  to  the  cathedral.  I had 
been  informed  it  was  a cuftom  here,  for  the  gen- 
try, cfjiecially  to  laugh  and  talk  all  the  time  of 
divine  fervice  : but  I faw  nothing  oi  it.  The 
whole  congregation,  rich  and  poor,  behaved 
fuitably  to  the  occafion. 

In  the  evening  I pi  cached  to  a numerous  con- 
gregation, on  If  any  man  thirjl,  let  him  come  unto 
me  and  drink.  We  afterwards  met  the  fociety. 
Six  or  feven  prlfoners  of  hope  werefet  at  liberty 
this  day. 

Mond.  15.  A company  of  revellers  and  dan- 
cers had  in  the  afternoon  taken poffelTion  of  the 
VoL.  XXIX.  H place 


[ 17®  ] 

place  where  I ufed  to  preach.  Some  advifed  me 
to  go  to  another  place  ; but  1 knew  it  needed 
not.  As  foon  as  ever  I came  in  fight,  the  holy- 
day  mob  vanilhed  away. 

Tuef.  i6.  I went  to  dine  on  the  ifland  (fo 
they  call  a peninfula  without  the  walls.)  W e 
had  hardly  dined,  when  one  and  another  of  the 
neighbours  came  in,  till  we  had  a company  of 
fixteen  or  eighteen.  We  joined  together  in 
prayer  and  praifing  God,  and  many,  I believe, 
\yent  home  rejoicing. 

How  does  the  frequency  and  greatnefs  of  the 
works  of  God  make  uslefs  fin'ftead  of  more)  fen- 
fible  of  them  ? A few  years  ago  if  we  heard  of 
one  notorious  finner  truly  converted  to  God, 
it  was  matter  of  folemn  joy  to  all  that  loved  or 
feared  him.  And  notv  that  multitudes  of  every 
kind  and  degree,  are  daily  turned  from  the 
power  of  darknefs  to  God  we  pafs  it  over  as  a 
common  thing  ! O God  give  us  thankful 
hearts  ! 

Wed.  17.  I met  the  clafs  of  foldiers,  eight  of 
whom  were  Scotch  highlanders.  Moll  ofthefe 
were  brought  up  well  : but  evil  communications 
had  corrupted  good  manners.  They  all  faid,  from 
the  time  they  entered  into  the  army,  they  had 
grown  worle  and  worfe.  But  God  had  now 

O 

given  them  anoiiier  call,  and  they  knew  the  day 
of  their  vifitation. 

Sat.  20  I faw  a melancholy  fight.  A gentlewo- 
man of  an  Linfpotted  characier,  fitting  at  home, 

on 


[ 171  ] 

on  May  4,  1747,  cried  out,  that  “ Something 
feized  her  by  the  fide.”  Then,  (he  faid,  it  was 
in  her  mouth.  Quickly  after  fhe  complained  of 
her  head.  From  that  time  fhe  wept  cominually 
for  four  months,  and  afterwards  grew  outrage- 
ous ; but  always  infilled,  “ That  God  had  for- 
faken  her,  and  that  the  devil  pofiell  her,  body 
and  foul.” 

I found  it  availed  nothing  to  reafon  with  her. 
She  only  blafphemed  the  more  ; curfing  God, 
and  vehemently  defiring,  yet  fearing,  to  die. 
However,  fire  fuffered  me  to  pray,  only  faying, 
“ It  fignified  not,  for  God  had  given  her  up.” 

Her  brother  gave  me  almofi  as  ftrange  account 
of  himfelf.  Some  years  lince,  as  he  was  in  the 
full  career  of  fin,  in  a moment  he  felt  the  wrath 
of  God  upon  him,  and  was  in  the  deepeft  hor- 
ror and  agony  of  foul.  He  had  no  reft,  day  or 
night,  feeling  he  was  under  the  full  power  of  the 
devil.  He  was  utterly  irrcapable  of  any  bufinefs, 
fo  that  he  was  obliged  to  fhut  up  his  ftrop.  Thus 
he  wandred  up  and  down,  in  exquifite  torture, 
for  juft  eighteen  months.  And  then  in  a mo- 
nient  the  prelTure  was  removed  : he  believed 
God  had  not  forfaken  him.  His  underftanding 
was  clear  as  ever.  Fie  refumed  his  employ,  and 
followed  it  in  the  fear  of  God. 

* Mond.  22.  The  more  I converfe  with  this 
people,  the  more  I am  amazed.  That  God  hath 
wrough  a great  work  among  them  is  manifeft. 
And  yet  the  main  of  them,  believers,  and  unbe- 
H 2 lievers. 


[ »72  ] 

lievers,  are  not  able  to  give  a rational  account 
of  the  plaineft  principles  of  religion.  ’Tis  plain, 
God  begins  his  work  at  the  heart  then  the  in- 
fpiration  of  the  highefl  giveth  underftandiilg. 

Wed.  24.  A gentlewoman  called  upon  me, 
with  her  fon,  who  ((he  informed  me)  w’as  given 
over  laft  fummer,  having  long  been  ill  of  a waft- 
ing diftemper,  and  expefted  death  every  day. 
In  this  ftate,  he  was  one  day  in  agony  of  prayer, 
when  God  revealed  to  him  his  pardoning  love. 
He  immediately  declared  this  to  his  mother,  tel- 
ling her  alfo,  “ I fhall  not  die  now.  God  has 
told  me  fo.”  And  he  recovered  from  that  hour. 

About  eight  feveral  of  us  took  boat  for  New- 
town, fix  miles  from  Limerick.  After  dinner 
we  took  boat,  in  order  to  return.  The  wind  was 
extremely  high.  We  endeavoured  to  crofsover 
to  the  leeward  fide  of  the  river:  but  it  was  not 
poffible.  The  boat  being  fmall,  and  over-load- 
ed, was  foon  deep  in  <'/ater ; the  more  fo,  be- 
caufe  it  leaked  much,  and  the  w'aves  waflied 
over  us  frequently.  And  there  was  no  ftaying 
to  empty  it ; all  our  men  being  obliged  to  row 
with  all  their  firength.  After  they  had  toiled 
about  an  hour,  the  boat  ftruck  upon  a rock,  the 
point  of  which  lay  juft  under  the  water.  It  had 
four  or  five  ftiocks,  the  wind  driving  us  on,  be- 
fore we  could  get  clear.  But  our  men  wrought 
for  life  ; and  about  fix  o’clock  God  brought  us 
idle  to  Limerick. 

Sund.  28.  I preached  at  Mardyke  in  the  even- 
ing. 


C m ] 

mg,  on  God  was  in  ChriJ}.,  reconciling  the 
world  unto  himfelf.  I never  faw,  even  at  Brif- 
tol,  a congregation  which  was  at  once  fo  numer- 
ous and  fo  ferious. 

Mond.  eg.  I fet  out  for  Cork.  We  break- 
fafted  at  Brough,  nine  miles  from  Limerick. 
When  I went  into  the  kitchen,  firfl;  one  or  two 
then  more  and  more  of  the  neighbours  gathered 
about  me,  liflning  to  every  word.  I fhould 
foon  have  had  a congregation,  but  1 had  no 
time  to  ftay.  . 

A mile  or  two  beyond  Killmallock  (once  a 
large  and  ftrong  city,  now'  a heap  of  ruins)  we 
faw  the  body  of  a man  lying  dead  in  the  high- 
way, and  many  people  Handing  and  looking 
upon  it.  I ftopt  and  fpoke  a few  words,  all 
liftened  attentively,  and  one  who  was  on  horfe- 
back  rode  on  with  us.  W e quickly  fell  into  dif- 
courfe ; I foot!  perceived  he  was  a priefl,  and 
found  he  w'as  a fenfible  man.  I gave  him  a book 
or  two  at  parting,  and  he-difmift  me  with  “ God 
blefs  you,”  earnellly  repeated  twice  or  thrice. 

We  Hopped  a while  at  Killdorrery  in  the  af- 
ternoon, and  took  the  opportunity  of  fpeaking 
clofely  to  every  one  that  underHood  EngliHi, 
and  of  giving  them  a few  books.  What  a nation 
is  this  ! every  man,  woman  and  child  (except  a 
few  of  the  great  vulgar)  not  only  patiently,  but 
gladly  fuHer  the  word  of  exhortation. 

Between  fix  and  feven  w'e  reached  Rathcur- 
mock.  Mr.  Loyd  read  prayers  and  I preached. 

H 3 Ever 


[ 1/4  3 

Even  the  paplfts  ventured  to  come  to  church 
for  once,  and  were  a very  ferious  part  of  the 
congregation. 

Tuef  30.1  preached  at  eleven,  and  the  hearts 
of  the  people  feemed  to  be  as  melting  wax. 
Thefe  are  now  willing  in  this  day  of  his  power. 
But  will  not  many  of  them  harden  their  hearts 
again  ? 

In  the  afternoon  I waited  on  Col.  Barry,  and 
found  him  a ferious  and  undcrlfanding  man. 
And  his  long  and  painful  illnefs  feems  to  have 
been  attended  with  good  and  happy  fruit. 

Our  congregation  in  the  evening  was  larger 
than  ever.  And  never  fince  I came  into  this 
kingdom,  was  my  foul  fo  refreflred,  as  it  was  both 
in  praying  for  them,  and  in  calling  them  to  ac- 
cept the  redemption  that  is  in  Jefus. 

Juft  as  we  came  out  of  church  Mr.  Skelton 
came  from  Cork,  and  told  me,  “ I had  no  place 
there  yet : it  being  impoftible  for  me  to  preach 
now,  while  the  rioters  filled  the  ftreets  ” 

Wed.  31.  I preached  at  nine,  and  about  ele- 
ven took  horfe  : our  way  lay  through  Cork.  We 
had  fcarce  got  into  it  (though  I had  never  been 
there  till  then)  before  the  ftreets,  and  doors,  and 
windows  were  full  of  people.  But  the  mob  had 
not  time  to  gather  together,  till  we  were  quite 
gone  through  the  town.  I rode  on  to  Bandon, 
a town  which  is  intirely  inhabited  by  proteftants. 
I preached  at  feven  in  the  middle  of  the  main 
ftreet  on.  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found. 

Here 


[ ^75  ] 

Here  were  by  far  the  largeft  congregations, 
both  morning  and  evening,  of  any  I had  feen 
in  Ireland. 

Frid.  June  2.  I was  fent  for  by  a clergyman 
who  had  come  twelve  miles  on  purpofe  to  talk 
with  me.  We  had  no  difpute,  but  fimply  en- 
deavoured to  ftrengthen  each  other’s  hands  In 
God. 

* In  the  evening  a gentlewoman  informed 
me  that  Dr.  B.  had  averred  to  her  and  many 
others,  1.  “ That  both  Jolin  and  Charles  Wef- 
ley  had  been  expelled  the  unlverfity  of  Oxford 
long  ago.  2.  That  there  was  not  a Methodift  lelt 
in  Dublin,  or  any  where  in  Ireland  but  Cork 
and  Bandon ; all  the  rell  having  been  rooted 
out,  by  order  of  the  government.  3.  That  nei- 
ther were  there  any  Methodifts  left  in  England ; 
and  4.  That  it  was  all  Jefuitifm  at  the  bottom.’’ 
Alas,  for  poor  Dr.  B.  God  be  merciful  unto 
thee  a finner ! 

Sat.  3.  At  the  requeft  of  many  in  the  town,  in 
the  clofe  of  my  evening  fermon,  I anfwered  for 
myfelf.  And  have  reafon  to  believe,  it  was  much 
bleft  to  many  of  the  congregation. 

Sund.  4.  Being  extremely  hoarfe,  I could 
not  fpeak  without  difficulty.  However  I made 
fhift  to  preach  at  nine,  at  two  and  at  five,  the 
congregation  continually  increafing.  I think 
the  mod  general  call  of  God  to  the  inhabitants 
of  Bandon.  was  at  or  about  this  time. 

Mond.  5. 1 rode  to  Blarney,  three  miles  wide 
H 4 of 


[ 176  ] 

of  Cork,  where  many  ofthe  fociety  met  me.  I 
fpent  fome  time  with  them  in  exhortation  and 
prayer,  and  then  went  on  to  Rathcorrnuck. 

I was  a httle  furprized  at  the  acutenefs  of  a 
gentleman  here,  who  in  converfation  with  Col. 
Barry,  about  late  occurrences,  faid,  he  had 
heard,  there  was  a people  rifen  up  that  placed 
all  religion  in  wearing  long  whifkers  ; and  feri- 
oufly  afked,  “ Whether  thefe  were  not  the  fame 
who  were  called  Methodifts?” 

Wed.  7.  I fet  out  early  with  Mr.  Loyd,  and 
breakfaftcd  at  Mr.  T’s.  at  CafUe-hyde.  They 
boih  rode  with  me  to  T^illdoircry  : about  one 
I preached  to  fome  ftocks  and  ftones  at  Brough  : 
in  the  evening,  to  another  fort  of  a congregation 
at  Limerick,  on  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  ye  righte- 
ous. 

Four  comfortable  days  I fpent  with  this  lively 
people,  the  like  to  whom  I had  not  found  in  all 
the  kingdom.  Mond.  12.  I had  appointed  to 
take  horfe  at  four,  that  I might  have  time  to 
preach  at  Nenagh,  but  no  horfes  came  till  feven. 
At  four  I walked  forward  after  refting  awhile- 
at  Tullah,  I walked  on,  till  an  honeft  man  over- 
taking me  defired  me  to  ride  behind  him. 
With  this  help  I came  to  Nenagh  before  elevent 
preached  there  at  twelve,  and  at  Birr  in  the 
evening. 

Tuef.  13.  We  rode  over  to  Glofler,  a beauti* 
ful  feat,,  built  by  an  Englifli  gentleman,  who  had 
fcarce  finiflted  his  houfe  and  laid  out  bis  gardens 

when 


[ 177  ] 

when  he  was  called  to  his  everlafting  home. 
Sir and  his  lady  dined  with  us,  whether  com- 

ing by  accident  or  defign  I know  not.  About 
five  I preached  in  the  liately  faloon,  to  a little 
company  of  plain,  ferious  people  : the  fine 
ones  looking  on,  and  fome  of  them  feeming  to 
be  a little  affected,  I expounded  at  Birr  about 
feven,  in  the  flrongefl  manner  I could,  the  ftory 
of  Dives  and  Lazarus. 

Wed.  14.  We  defigned  to  dine  at  Ferbane, 
about  twelve  miles  from  BiiT.  We  ftopt  at  the 
firft  inn  in  the  town.  But  they  did  not  care  to 
entertain  hereticks : neither  did  the  people  at 
the  fecond  inn.  I alighted  at  the  third,  and  went 
in,  without  alking  any  queftions.  Here 'I  met 
with  a woman  very  fick  and  very  ferious.  Some 
of  her  neighbours  quickl)'  gathered  about  us  and 
we  endeavoured  to  improve  the  opportunity. 
After  fome  time  fpent.in  clofe  converfation  and 
prayer,  we  parted  in  much  love. 

About  feven  I preached  at  Athlone.  It  being 
the  time  of  the  general- review,  abundance  of 
foldiers  and  many  officers  were  prefent.  They 
all  behaved  with  the  utmoft  decency.  But  a 
gentleman  of  the  town  did  not  ; which  had 
like  to  have  coft  him  dear.  Many  fwords  tvere 
drawn;  but  the  officers  interpofed,  and  it  went 
no  farther. 

Sat.  17.  The  wind  being  very  tempeftuous  in 
the  evening,  I preached  in  our  new-built  houfe. 
Toward  the  clofe  of  the  fermon,  I afked,  “ whidi 
H 5 of 


C *78  ] 

of  you  will  give  yourfelf,  foul  and  body,  to 
God  ?”  One  cried  out,  with  a cry  that  almoft 
fhook  the  houfe,  “ O,  I will,  I will.”  And  as 
foon  as  fhe  could  ftand,  fhe  came  forth  in  the 
midft,  to  witnefs  it  before  all  the  congregation. 
It  was  Mrs.  Glafs.  Her  words  pierced  like  light- 
ning. Prefently  another  witneft  the  fame  refolu- 
tiou.  And  not  long  after,  one  who  had  been 
forrowing  as  without  hope.  Mrs.  Meechara,  lift- 
ed up  her  head  with  joy,  and  continued  finging 
and  praifing  God  to  the  dawn  of  the  next  day. 

Perceiving  this  was  an  acceptable  time,  I laid 
afide  my  defign  of  meeting  the  fociety  and  con- 
tinued in  prayer  with  the  whole  congregation,  all 
our  hearts  being  as  the  heart  of  one  man. 

* When  I had  at  length  pronounced  the  blef- 
fing,  no  man  ftirred  but  each  flayed  in  his  place 
till  I walked  throtigh  them.  I was  foon  called  back 
by  one  crying  out,  “ My  God,  my  God  thou 
hafl  forgotten  me.”  Having  fpoken  this,  flie 
funk  to  the  earth.  We  called  upon  God  in  her 
behalf.  The  cries  both  of  her  and  of  feveral 
others,  mourning  after  God  redoubled.  But  we 
continued  wreflling  with  God  in  payer,  till  he 
gave  us  an  anfwer  of  peace. 

Sund.  18.  I preached  at  five,  and  about  two  on 
the  Connaught  fide  of  the  river : thence  I 

haftened  to  Aghrim,  and  endeavoured  to  awaken 
3 ferious  but  fleepy  congregation. 

Mond.  19. 1 rode  over  to  Abafkra,  and  thence 
K>  Mr.  Mahon’s  at  Caflie-garth.  I had  much 

con- 


[ »79  ] 

converfation  with  Mrs.  M — , and  was  much 
in  doubt,  from  the  account  fire  gave  of  her  own 
experience,  whether  fhe  had  not  beenjufiified 
many  years,  tho’  Ihe  knew  it  not  by  that 
name. 

I preached  at  Abaikra  at  fix,  both  in  the  even- 
ing and  in  the  morning  ; on  Tuefday  evening  at 
Athlone.  I then  met  the  fociety,  where  one,  and 
another,  and  another  cried  aloud  for  mercy  : 
We  called  upon  God,  till  feveral  of  them  found 
mercy,  and  praifed  him  with  a good  courage. 
I think  more  found  peace  with  God  in  thefe 
four  days,  than  in  fixteen  months  before. 

Wed.  21.  I rode  to  Tyrrels  pafs,  but  did  not 
find  that  ferv'or  of  fpirit  in  the  congregation, 
which  was  among  them  the  laft  year.  Yet  a few 
there  were,  who  were  Hill  preffing  onto  the 
mark. 

Turf.  2 2.  I preached  at  noon  at  a village, 
three  miles  from  Tyrrels-pafs  : in  the  evening 
at  Tullamore,  and  on  Friday  morning  and  even- 
ing. Sat.  24.  I rode  to  Mount-melick  and  dined 
with  Jofeph  Fry,  late  a quaker.  Abundance  of 
people  were  at  the  preaching  in  the  evening,  and 
all  feemed  to  give  earneft  attention. 

Sund,  25.  1 preached  at  eight  to  a Hill  increaf- 
ing  congregation  ; and  God’s  word  was  as  u two 
edged  fword.  I rode  thence  to  Portarlington,  a 
town  inhabited  chiefly  by  French.  A clergyman 
there  received  me  gladly.  Some  time  before  a 
gentleman  of  Mount  melick,  had  defired  him  to 
H 6 preaxh 


[ i8o  ] 

preach  againft  the  Methoclifts.  He  faid,  “ He 
could  not,. till  he  knew  what  they  were  in  or- 
der to  which,  he  came  foon  after  and  heard  Mr. 
Larwood.  And  from  that  time,  inlfead  of  preach- 
ing againft  them,  he  fpoke  for  them,  wherever 
he  came. 

As  foon  as  we  came  out  of  church,  I went 
ftrait  to  the  Market-houfe,  and  the  whole  congre- 
gation followed  me.  I had  not  feen  in  all  Ireland 
fo  glittering  a company  before,  unlefs  at  St. 
Mary’s  church  in  Dublin  ; and  yet  all  of  them, 
high  and  low,  behaved  in  fuch  a manner,  as  be- 
came his  prefence  before  whom  they  flood. 

Thence  I rode  two  miles  farther,  to  Mr.  L’s. 
houfe,  at  Clofeland,  near  Ballibrittis.  It  rained 
the  whole  time  that  I was  preaching.  But  the 
congregation  regarded  it  no  more  than  I did  : 
though  I was  throughly  wet  before  I had  done, 
the  Glower  driving  full  in  my  face. 

Mond.  26.  We  had  a bleffed  opportunity  at 
Mo  untmelick  in  the  evening,  while  I was  ex- 
plaining the  covenant  God  hath  made  with  us. 
The  fame  fpirit  continued  with  us,  at  the  meet- 
ing of  the  foclety.  So  that  niy  voice  could  not  be 
heard  for  the  voice  of  thofe  ivho  cried  for  mercy 
or  praifcd  the  God  of  their  falvation. 

Tuef.  27.  I talked  two  hours  with  J — S , 

a quaker.  He  fpoke  in  the  very  fpirit  and  lan- 
guage wherein  pooc  Mr.  Hall  ufed  to  fpeak,  be- 
fore he  made  ftiipwreck  of  the  grace  of  Gcd.  I 

found 


[ ] 

found  it  good  forme  to  be  with  him.  It  enliven- 
ed and  ftrengtltend  my  foul. 

I rode  in  the  afternoon  to  Clofcland,  and  preach- 
ed in  the  evening  and  morning,  to  a people  ear- 
nefily  defiroLis  of  pleafing  God. 

Thurf.  29. 1 rode  to  Portarlington  again,  and 
preached  to  a larger  congregation  than  before. 
They  all  feemed  to  hear,  not  only  with  flrong 
defire,  but  with  uftderlfanding  alfo. 

I afterwards  explained  to  them  the  nature  of 
a fociety,  and  defired  any  who  wei'e  willing  fo  to 
unite  together,  tofpeak  to  me  feverally.  Above 
threefcore  did  fo,  the  fame  day. 

Sat.  July  1.  I preached  at  Mount-melick. 
Sund.  2.  I preached  at  eight  in  Portarlington, 
and  again  at  two.  I fcarce  knew  how  to  leave 
off;  all  the  people  feemed  to  be  fo  deeply  af- 
fefted.  The  fociety  now  contained  above  one 
hundred  members  full  of  zeal  and  good  defires. 
And  in  one  week,  the  face  of  the  whole  town 
is  changed.  Open  wickednefs  is  not  feen.  The 
fear  of  God  is  on  every  fide  : and  rich  and  poor 
afk,  “ W^’^hat  mull  I do  to  be  faved  ? And  how 
long  (I  thought  with  myfelf)  will  this  continue  ? 
In  moll,  only  till  the  fowls  of  the  air  come,  and 
devour  the  feed.  Many  of  the  reft,  when  per- 
fecution  or  reproach  begins,  will  immediately 
be  offended.  And  in  the  frnall  remainder,  fome 
will  fall  off,  either  through  other  defires,  or  the 
cares  of  the  world,  or  the  deceitfulnefs  of  riches. 

Mond.  3.  I preached  at  Edinderry,  and  on 

Tuefday 


[ 182  ] 

Tuefday  morning  and  evening.  Almoft  every 
perfonwho  was  prefent  at  the  meeting  of  the 
fociety,  appeared  to  he  broken  in  pieces.  A 
cry  went  up  on  every  fide  ; till  Jofeph  Fry,  once 
as  eminent  a finner  as  even  Jofeph  Fry  of  Mount- 
melick,  and  fmce  as  eminent  an  inflance  of 
the  grace  of  God,  broke  out  into  prayer.  It 
was  not  long  before  praife  and  prayer  were  mixt 
together.  And  fhortly  after,  prayer  was  fwallow- 
ed  up  in  the  voice  of  praife  and  ihankfgiving. 

Wed.  5.  I returned  to  Dublin.  Sund.  9.  I 
preached  on  the  green  both  morning  and  after- 
noon. And  the  congregation  was  confiderably 
larger  than  any  1 had  feen  in  Dublin  before. 

Wed.  12.  Being  one  of  the  grand  Irilh  felll- 
vals,  by  reaion  of  “ 1 he  breach,  ?.  e.  battle  of 
Aghriin,”  we  had  a very  large  congregation  to 
whom  I fliewed  u'hat  reti'ard  they  \i2iA given  un- 
io  the  Lord Jor  all  his  hentjits.  I expefted  much 
of  their  ufual  courtefy  from  the  mob  when  we 
came  out.  But  I walked  through  them  all  in 
perfedl  peace,  none  molefting  us,  cither  by 
word  or  deed. 

Tuef.  18.  Mr.  Miller  (the  Lutlieran  miniOcr) 
informed  me,  that  in  a collection  of  trafis,  pub- 
liftied  at  Buding,  Count  Z’s.  brethren  had  print- 
ed  feveral  palfages  of  thy  journal,  and  whatever 
elfe  they  could  glean  up  which  tended  to  pre- 
judice the  Lutherans  againft  the  Methodijls..  Was 
this  merely  to  fhew  their  good-will?  Or  to  obvi- 
ate my  teftimony  ? 


» Wed. 


[ ] 

* Wed.  19.  I finifhed  the  tranflation  ofMar- 
tin  Luther’s  life.  Doubtlefs  he  was  a man  highly 
favoured  of  God,  and  a blelTed  infti  ument  in 
his  hand.  But  O ! What  pity  that  he  had  no 
faithful  friend  ! None,  that  would  at  all  hazards 
rebuke  him  plainly  and  lharply,  for  his  rough, 
untraftable  fpirit,  and  bitter  zeal  for  opinions, 
fo  great!)’  obllruftive  of  the  work,  of  God. 

Thurf.  20.  I faw  Dr.  Stephen’s  hofpital,  far 
cleaner  and  fweeterthan  any  I had  feen  in  Lon- 
don, and  the  Royal  hofpital  for  old  foldiers, 
ftanding  on  the  top  of  an  hill,  overlooking 
Phcenix  park.  All  the  buildings  are  kept  not 
only  in  good  repair,  but  likewife  exactly  clean; 
The  hall  is  exceeding  grand  : the  chappe!  far 
better  finiflied  than  any  thing  of  the  kind  in 
^ Dublin.  O what  is  wanting,  to  make  thefe  men 
happy  ? Only  the  knowledge  and  the  love  of 
God. 


[ ^84  ] 


A N 

EXTRACT 

OF  THE 

Rev.  Mr.  John  Wesley’s 

JOURNAL, 

From  July  20,  1751,  to  Oclcber  £.8, 

1754- 


Number  VIII. 


Saturday,  November  2,  1751. 

Mr.  ARVIN,  according  to  my  defire  in- 
formed Mr.  M — that  I was  willing 

to  give  him  twenty  pounds  a year,  for  affilling 

me 


[ iSj  ] 


me  once  a week.  He  refufed  it  with  the  utmofi 
indignation,  and  from  that  time  fpoke  all  manner 
of  evil. 

Mond.  11.  I rode  to  Rocheiter,  and  the  next 
day  to  Canterbury,  where  I preached  morning 
i and  evening,  in  v/hat  tvas  lately  the  French 
, church.  We  had  not  any  difturbance  from  firft 
' to  laft  ; the  court  of  King’s-bench  having  broke 
the  fpirits  of  the  rioters. 

Satiir.  i6.  I fet  out  early  In  a clear  calm 
morning,  and  in  the  afternoon  came  to 
London. 

1 Tuef.  ig.  I began  writing  a letter  to  the  Com- 
parer of  tlie  Papijls  and  Mcthodijls.  Heavy 
: work  ; fuch  as  I flrould  never  chufe  ; but  fome- 
liraes  it  mull  be  done.  Weil  might  tlie  atitient 
fay,  “God  made  praftical  divinity  neceffary; 
j “ the  devil,  controverfial.”  But  it  was  necef- 
! fay.  We  mufl:  relijl  the  devil,  or  he  will  not  flee 
from  us.  - 

Satur.  Dec.  22.  Being  informed  that  Mr. 
\ K — — for  feme  years  zealoufly  attached  to  the 
brethren,  had  notv  bnrft  his  chain,  I had  a defire 
to  hear  from  his  own  mouth,  how  he  was  deli- 
vered. So  a day  or  two  after,  I talked  with  him 
at  large,  and  wrote  down  tlie  fubdance  of  his 
account,  that  I might  make  no  miftake.  After  a 
i,  few  days  I called  upon  him  ; I read  over  to  him 
I vvhat  I had  written,  and  defired  him  to  tell  me, 
j if  I had  mifunderflocd  hin>  in  any  thing.  And 
Ij  this  account  alone  may  be  abundaiuh’  luflicient 

I ' to 


[ ^86  ] 

to  pull  off  the  malk  from  thofe  cruel  and  deceit- 
ful men. 

“ 1. 1 was,  faid  he,  one  of  the  firft  members  of 
the  fociety  at  the  Foundery,  and  continued 
there  till  William  Oxlee,  about  the  latter  end  of 
the  year  1740,  perfuaded  me  to  join  the  brethren. 

It  was  not  long  before  I was  admitted  to  moft  of 
their  conferences:  and  mv  love  for  them  in* 
creafed  more  and  more,  till  in  the  year  1741,  I 
went  over  to  Herndyke. 

2.  Here  I faw  feveral  things  I did  not  approve; 
particularly  the  arbitrary  power  with  which  the 
heads  of  the  church  governed  ; and  the  vafl  re-  j 
fpeff  they  fhewed  to  the  rich,  while  the  poor  , 
were  little  regarded.  But  I forgot  all  this  when  I I 
returned  to  England,  and  gave  myfelf  up  to  their  | 
difpofal.  ' 

3. 1 was  foon  after  employed  to  colleft  money  I 
for  repairing  the  chappel  in  Fetter-lane.  1 he 
manner  of  the  brethren  was,  to  write  to  each  of  ' 
thofe  who  were  accudomed  to  hear  the  preach- 
ing, and  defire  them,  “If  they  found  their  hearts 
“ free,  to  fend  five  or  ten  guineas.”  As  many 
ofthefe  were  not  at  all  awakened,.  I thought  this 

was  quite  wrong.  So  I told  Mr,  M ; 

but  he  anfwcred  me  fliort,  That  does  not  con- 
cern )0U. 

4.  I faw  feveral  other  things  which  I could 
not  approve,  and  I fpoke  of  them  ; but  without 

effefl.  Some  months  after,  Mr.  Sp told 

me,  * “ My  brother,  we  are  going  to  fettle  an 


oeconomv 


[ 18/  ] 

" oecononiy  of  children  at  Larab’s-inn.  And  It 
“ is  the  Saviour’s  will,  that  you  Ihould  go  there, 
“ 3nd  be  the  phyfician  of  the  houfe.”  I 
thought  it  llrange ; for  I did  not  underftand 
phyfic.  However,  I did  not  dare  to  reafon.  So  I 
went. 

^ g.  The  management  here  gave  me  a great 
Ihock.  Without  any  regard  to  the  rules  laid 

down,  R U and  his  wife,  the  di- 

redlors  of  the  oeconomy,  behaved  in  the  moft 
haughty  and  tyrannical  manner.  Thofe  who 
were  fet  over  the  children  had  no  gifts  for  the 
work,  and  fome  of  them  little  care  for  their  own 
^ fouls.  Several  of  the  children  were  wipt,  with- 
[,  out  caufe,  and  fometimes  out  of  meafure  ; by 
! ; which  ill  management,  one  of  mine  was  utterly 
; ruined,  and  has  had  no  fear  of  God  ever  fince. 
i As  for  me,  I might  give  advice  if  I would,  but 
none  regarded  it.  And  when  I rofe  one  night 
and  covered  the  children,  who  had  thrown  the 

deaths  off  in  their  ffeep,  Mr.  U- fharply 

reproved  me  before  the  whole  familv,  telling  me, 
I had  done  what  I had  no  bufinefs  to  do  ; add- 
ing, that  1 was  the  moft  ufelefs  perfon  in  the 
whole  houfe.  Idefired,  that  if  fo,  I might  return 
to  London.  With  much  difficulty  they  con- 
fented  ; and  I made  all  hafte  back  to  my  own 
houfe. 

6.  But  I grew  more  and  m.ore  uneafy  at  their 
management,  which  the  brethren  perceiving,  fent 
I me  to  Ycrkfbire.  ^ When  I had  been  there  a 
■ few 

? I; 

I: 


[ i88  ] 

few  days,  one  of  them  told  me,  I was  to  go  to 
Gieat  Horton  in  the  morning  : it  being  ma^e 
out  to  the  brethren,  that  I was  to  preach  there. 

I was  amazed,  having  never  had  one  thought 
of  preaching.  Yet  I did  not  dare  to  refufe;  and 
from  that  time  they  employed  me  to  preach, 
and  to  vifit  all  the  fouls  through  that  circuit. 

* 7.  /it  Holbeck  we  had  an  oeconomy  of 
young  men.  When  I vifited  them,  and  exa- 
mined them  flriftly,  they  declared  to  me  fo  much 
ot  their  onanijms,  wh— ms,  and  other  abomina- 
tions, that  I was  utterly  aflonifbed.  I was  con- 
flrained  to  rebuke  them  Oiarply  ; for  which  in  a 
few  days  I received  a fevere  letter  from  Mr.  Sp. 
telling  me,  I was  deliro)  ing  God’s  dear  children, 
inifead  of  building  them,  up  ; and  that  therefore  I 
was  neither  to  preach,  nor  labour  any  more  in 
Yorkfhire. 

8.  In  a little  while,  I teas  Tent  for  to  London, 
to  accompany  h'Irs,  St.  into  Germany’.  But  the 
letter  being  delayed,  although  I rode  pod,  flie 
was  gone  before  1 came.  Some  time  after  I was 
appointed  a member  of  the  committee  of  fix,  to 
whom  an  account  was  to  be  tranfinitted  by  all 
the  labourers,  of  all  the  fteps  which  they  took, 
either  at  home  or  abroad. 

One  of  our  fundamental  rules  was,  not  to  run 
in  debt  above  thirty  pounds.  Therefore,  when 
Mr.  Sp.  brought  in  a bill  of  more  than  three  hun- 
dred, I was  exceedingly  ftartled,  and  moved,  that 
the  particulars  of  it  might  he  given  in,  and  tliat 

all 


[ 1%  J 


all  our  accounts  might  be  clearly  and  fairly 
-flated.  Wencel  Neufer  being  prefent,  (though 
not  one  of  our  members)  took  m.e  up  for  this 
very  feverely  ; telling  me,  “ They  were  fervants 
“ of  the  Saviour,  and  would  give  no  account  to 
“ men.” 

9.  I was  m.ore  and  more  uneafy  at  their  way 
of  proceeding,  till  one  day  Mr.  SI.  came  to  me, 
and  aflted  me,  if  I was  willing  to  go  to  Bedford, 
for  fix  or  eight  days  ? 1 told  him  I was,  and  in 
•a  day  or  two  fet  out.  But  Mr.  Br.  told  me, 

Brother  !<.■- ) OU  muft  not  expetl  to  do 

much  good  here  ; for  there  is  the  hidden  cur/e 
amona:  the  fouls,  rv’hich  I believe  arifes  chiefly 

from  the  praftice  of  procuring  ab , which 

is  fo  common  among  the  women,  Neverthelefs 
I did  find  a great  biefling,  during  the  two  or 

D O'  O 

three  morifhs  that  I laboured  there.  But  I could 
not  flay,  having  a ferong  imprelfion  on  my  mind, 
that  I was  to  labour  in  Jamaica. 

10.  Upon  my  mentioning  this  to  the  brethren, 
they  faid,  I fliould  go  thither  as  foon  as  poflTible : 
but  it  would  be  proper  for  me  to  go  to  Penfyl- 
vania  firft,  and  fpend  a little  time  at  Bethlehem. 
I believed  they  knew  befl.  So  in  the  year  1744, 
I quitted  mv  fhop,  left  all  my  affairs  unfettled, 
and  failed  to  Penfylvania. 

* 11.  I had  full  employ  at  Bethlehem,  being 
appointed  general  preacher,  and  expected  to 
bear  a part  in  all  Uie  conferences.  But  it  was 

not 


[ ] 

not  long  before  I was  troubled  more  than  ever, 
feeing  fo  much  craft  and  fubtlety,  and  withal 
fo  much  pride,  hatelinefs,  and  tyranny,  in  thofe 
that  governed  the  church.  One  inftance  out  of 
very  many,  was  this.  W.  Harding,  who  came 
over  fome  time  before  me,  and  was  a flated 
preacher,  had  Ipoken  to  them  freely  and  warmly, 
of  feveral  things  which  he  thought  reproveable. 
Upon  this,  he  was  put  out  of  all  his  offices,  and 
all  the  brethren  Were  forbid  to  fpeak  to  him. 
Being  forfaken  of  all,  he  was.  more  uneafy  flill ; 
on  which  //^e  brethren  faid,  he  was  mad.  As  fuch 
he  was  confined,  and  tood  was  brought  to  him 
once  or  twice  a day,  by  two  or  tliree  young  men, 
who  likev.  ife  many  times  beat  him  very  feverely. 
At  length  be  w’aiched  his  opportunity,  and  made 
his  efcape  ; but  they  followed  after,  and  took 
him,  and  a wooden-houfe  was  built  for  him,  not 
a quarter  of  a mile  from  the  towm,  about  ten  foot 
fquarc,  and  very  dark.  I was  walking  alone 
near  the  place,  when  they  was  bringing  him  thi- 
ther. His  cries  and  intreaties  might  have  pierced 
an  heart  of  done.  He  begged  that  he  might  clean 
fhoes,  fetch  them  water,  cleave  w'ood,  or  what- 
ever they  pleafed  in  the  open  air.  But  it  availed 
not : he  was  fhut  up.  About  fix  weeks  after,  as 
they  opened  the  door  one  day,  in  order  to  give 
him  fome  meat,  he  rufhed  out,  got  by  them,  and 
made  toward  Philadelphia,  with  all  the  fpeed  he 
could.  Being  clofe  purfued  he  ran  to  the  river, 

(being 


C ^9^  ] 

(being  an  excellent  fwimmer)  leaped  in,  funk, 
and  rofe  no  more, 

12.  I was  then  at  New-York,  whence  I re- 
turned to  Bethlehem  in  January  1746.  But  I 
had  no  reft  in  my  fpirit,  till  after  three  weeks,  I 
removed  to  Philadelphia.  Here  two  of  the  bre- 
thren and  a widow-woman  lived  in  the  brethren's 
ho«fe,  I hired  a room  in  it,  and  defired  the  wi- 
dow, as  I had  not  convenience  myfelf,  to  boil 
me  a little  water  in  a morning  for  my  tea.  Mean 
time  all  the  brethren  in  Philadelphia  were  charg- 
ed, not  to  converfe  with  me.  And  not  long  after 
the  two  brethren  wrote  Mr.  Sp.  word,  that  I 
lived  in  adultery  with  the  widow.  When  I was 
informed  of  this,  Iwent  ftrait  to  Bethlehem,  and 
told  Mr.  Sp.  the  whole  affair  : who  immediately 
wrote  back  to  them  in  Philadelphia,  that  I had 
confeft  the  charge. 

* 14.  Being  now  thoroughly  weary  of  man- 
kind, I procured  a little  houfe  in  a wood,  atfome 
miles  diftant  from  any  town,  and  refolved  to 
fpend  the  remainder  of  my  days  by  myfelf. 
Here  I ftayed  about  four  years ; till  one  after- 
noon, Mr.  Sp.  and  the  Count’s  fon-in-law  called 
upon  me.  We  talked  together  till  two  in  the 
morning.  They  acknowledged  many  things 
that  had  been  wrong,  promifed  they  Ihould  be 
amended  without  delay,  andperfuaded  me  to  join 
with  them  once  more.  But  nothing  was  amend- 
ed, fo  that  after  a few  months,  I was  conftrained 
to  leave  them  again.  I follow^ed  my  bufinefs 

in 


[ ] 

jn  Philadelphia,  till  I had  earned  money  for 
my  palfage,  and  a year  ago  returned  to  London.” 

Was  there  ever  fo  melancholy  an  account ! O 
what  is  human  nature  ? How  low  are  they  fallen, 
who  weie  once  burning  and  fliining  lights, 
fpreading  blelTings  wherever  they  came  ! But 
what  infatuatuiii  is  it,  which  makes  this  very  man 
attend  their  preaching  Hill,  and  his  wife  (though 
fne  believes  mod  of  what  her  hufhand  fays)  to 
remain  in  clofe  connecHon  with  them? 

Sund.  March  ij,  1752.  While  I was  preach- 
ing at  Wed-fireet  in  the  afternoon,  there  was 
, one  of  the  moft  violent  ftorms  1 ever  remember. 
In  the  midR  of  the  fermon  great  part  of  an  houfe 
oppofite  to  the  chappel  was  blown  down.  We 
heard  an  huge  noife,  but  knew  not  the  caufe : fo 
much  the  more  did  God  fpeak  to  our  hearts. 
And  great  was  the  rejoicing  of  many,  in  confi- 
dence of  his  proteftion.  Between  four  and  five 
I took  horfe,  with  my  wife  and  daughter.  The 
tiles  were  rattling  from  the  houfes  on  both  Tides. 
But  they  hurt  not  vis.  We  reached  Hayes 
about  feven  in  the  evening,  and  Oxford  the  next 
day. 

Tuef.  17.  The  rain  continued  without  inter- 
miiTion,  till  we  came  toEnftone.  Soon  after  we 
fet  out  from  thence,  it  was  fncceeded  by  fo  ve- 
hement a wind,  as  on  Broadway-hill  often  drove 
us  clear  out  of  the  path,  and  was  ready  to  carry 
away  both  horfe  and  rider.  But  our  ftrength 

was 


[ 193  ] 

was  as  our  day ; and  before  fix  in  the  evening 
we  came  unhurt  to  Evediam. 

* I preached  in  the  evening  at  the  Town-hall, 
where  feveral  of  the  clergy  and  gentry  were  pre- 

fcnt.  Wednef.  iB.  I rode  over  with  Mr. 

to  his  houfe,  which  I had  not  feen  for  upwards 
of  twenty  years.  The  place  I found  ; but  not 
the  Inhabitants ; moft  of  them  were  gone  to  their 
long  home.  I faw  not  one  whom  I knew  but 

Mr. ’s  aunt ; who  could  not  long  forbear 

telling  me,  “ How  forry  (he  was,  that  I Ihould 
leave  all  my  friends,  to  lead  this  vagabond  life.” 
Why,  indeed  it  is  not  pleafing  to  flefh  and 
blood  : and  I would  not  do  it,  if  I did  not  be- 
lieve there  was  another  world.  Our  difpute  did 
not  continue  long,  and  ended  in  much  love. 
Mr. rode  back  with  me  to  Evelham  ; at- 

tended the  preaching  both  at  feven  and  at  five  in 
the  morning,  and  walked  with  me  from  the  room 
after  fermon  ; but  it  was  fome  time  before  he 
could  fpeak.  He  then  broke  out,  “ I am  to  take 
care  of  tw’o  thoufand  fouls.  And  I never  yet 
knew  how  to  take  care  of  my  own.”  I left  him 
full  of  conviftion  and  good  refolutions.  How 
many  days  wdll  they  continue  ? 

Thurf.  19.  1 rode  to  Birmingham,  and  from 
the  behaviour  of  the  people,  both  this  and  the 
following  evening,  found  reafon  to  hope,  that 
fome  of  the  feed  which  has  been  fown  here,  will 
bear  lafiing  fruit.  Sauir.  21.  I rode  to  Wednef- 

burv,  where  Mr.  vicar  of  had  ap- 

; VoL.  XXLX.  I pointed 


f 


c 194  ] : 

pointed  to  meet  me.  I rejoiced  to  find  fo  great 
a change.  Since  he  has  known  the  pardoning 
love  of  God,  he  has  been  fwiftly  going  on  from 
faith  to  faith,  and  growing  not  in  knowledge  onl}% 
but  in  love.  * 

Sund.  22.  After  preaching  at  five,  I returned 
to  Birmingham.  Many  were  much  afraid  of  my 
preaching  in  the  ftreet,  expefting  I know  not 
what  mifchlef  to  be  done.  Vain  fear ! I faw  , 
not  one  perfon  behave  amifs,  while  I declared, 
There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  [inner  that  re-  • 
penteth,  \ 

At  one  I preached  at  Tipton-green  to  a large 
congregation,  though  the  wind  was  ready  to  cut  j 
us  in  two:  and  about  five  to  a much  larger  at 
Wednefbury:  where  in  fpite  of  all  the  wiles  ' 
of  Satan,  and  the  cunning  craftinefs  of  men,  , 
the  plain  genuine  gofpel  runs  and  is  glori- 
fled. 

Wednef.  23.  J fpent  an  agreeable  hour  with 

Mr. curate  of  W.  an  honefi,  upright  man, 

1 veiilv  believe,  and  willing  to  know  the  whole 
counfel  of  God,  In  the  evening  I preached  to  a 
final!,  ferious  congregation  at  Billbrook.  The 
Aorm  of  wind,  fnow  and  hail,  was  ready  for  us  in 
the  morning  almoA  as  foon  as  we  fet  out,  and 
continued  moA  part  of  the  day.  When  we  had 
heaths  or  commons  to  crofs,  it  was  not  eafy  to 
fit  an  horfe,  efpeciallv  as  the  wind  was  full  in  our 
teeth.  However  we  reached  Poole  (two  miles 
from  Nantwich)  in  the  evening,  and  found  a con- 
2 gregation 


[ m ] 

gregation  gathered  from  many  miles  round : fe* 
veral  of  whom  fat  up  all  night,  for  fear  of  lofing 
the  morning  fermon. 

Wednef.  25.  After  preaching  at  five  and  at 
nine,  I rode  on  to  Alprahara,  where  a large  con- 
gregation of  ferious,  fenfible  people  attended, 
both  at  one,  and  at  feven  in  the  evening. 
Thurf.  26.  We  rode  on,  through  wind  andfnow, 
and  reached  Manchefter.  At  night  I was 
grieved  to  hear  in  all  places,  from  my  coming 
into  Chefiiire  till  now,  that  John  Bennet  was 
flill  fpeaking  all  manner  of  evil  : averring 
wherever  he  came,  “ I’hat  Mr.  W.  preached 
nothing  but  popery,  denying  jullification  by 
faith,  and  making  nothing  of  Chrift.”  Lord,  lay 
not  this  fm  to  his  charge  ! 

March  27.  Being  Good-friday,  I went  to  the 
old  church,  where  Mr.  Clayton  read  prayers,  I 
think  the  mofl.  diftinffly,  folemnly  and  gracefully 
of  any  man  1 have  ever  heard.  And  the  beha- 
viour of  the  whole  congregation  was  ferious  and 
folemn  in  every  part  of  the  fervice.  But  I was 
furprized  to  fee  fuch  a change  in  the  greater  part 
of  them,  as  foon  as  ever  the  facrament  was  over. 
They  were  then  bowing,  curtfying  and  talking 
to  each  other,  juft  as  if  they  were  going  from  a 
play. 

On  Sunday,  Monday  and  Tuefday,  I fpoke 
feverally  to  each  member  of  the  fociety,  and 
found  reafon,  after  the  ftrifteft  fearch,  to 
I 2 believe. 


[ 196  j 

believe,  that  there  was  not  one  diforderly  walker 
therein. 

Tuef.  March  31.  T,  M , gave  me  a full 

account  of  J.  B ’s  renouncing  all  connec- 

tion with  me ; adding,  “ On  the  30th  of  Dec. 
laft,  after  he  had  faid  many  bitter  things  of  you, 
to  the  congregation  at  Bolton,  he  fpread  out  his 
arms  and  cried,  Popery,  Popery,  Popery  ! I have 
not  been  in  connexion  with  him  thefe  three 
years,  neither  will  I be  any  more.  And 
the  fame  thing  he  faid  to  all  the  Rewards, 
at  the  quarterly  meeting  on  New-year’s-day.” 

Frid.  April  3.  I rode  to  Bank  houfe,  near  Roch- 
dale, where  T.  Mitchell  gave  me  the  following 
account, 

“ On  Sunday,  Aug.  7.  laR,  1 preached  at 
Rangdale,  at  five  in  the  morning,  as  ufual. 
About  fix,  two  conftables  came,  and  carried  me 
to  a public-houfe,  where  I was  kept  till  near  four 
in  the  afternoon.  Then  one  ol  them  faid.  He 
would  go  and  alk  the  minifter,  whether  they 
might  not  let  me  go  ? Upon  his  return  they 
brought  me  out  to  a large  mob,  who  carried  me, 
and  threw  me  into  a Handing  water,  and  as  often 
as  I tried  to  come  out,  they  pitched  me  in  again. 
At  laft  fome  of  them  faid,  I fiiould  come  out, 
and  kept  the  others  off,  till  I got  up  the  bank.  I 
found  myfelfvery  happy  all  the  time  ; fori  knew 

I was  in  the  Lord’s  hand. 1 got  back  to  the 

houfe  where  I lodged  and  went  to  bed.  But  in 
lefs  than  an  hour  the  mob  came  again,  broke 

open 


[ 197  ] 


open  the  doors  of  the  houfe  and  the  chamber, 
and  dragged  me  away  w’ith  them.  They  carried 
me  to  a great  pond,  which  was  railed  round,  be- 
ing ten  or  twelve  foot  deep.  Then  four  men 
took  me  up  by  my  legs  and  arms.  I felt  the 
fleih  fhririk  a little  at  fiift.  But  it  was  foon  over, 
and  I did  not  care  whether  I lived  or  died  ; juft 
as  pleafed  the  Lord.  They  fwung  me  backward 
and  forward  two  or  three  times,  and  then  threw 
me  as  far  as  they  could  into  the  water.  The 
fall  took  away  my  fenfes,  fo  that  I felt  nothing 
more.  But  forne  that  did  not  care  to  have  me 
drowned,  when  I came  above  w'ater,  catching 
hold  oft  my  cloaths  with  a long  pole,  pulled  me 
out. — I lay  fenfelefs  for  fome  time.  When  I 
came  to  myfelf,  I faw  many  people  about  me; 
one  of  them  helped  me  up,  and  bad  me  go  with 
him.  He  brought  me  to  a little  houfe,  and  put 
me  to  bed  ; hut  I had  not  laid  long,  before  the 
mob  came  again,  pulled  me  out  of  bed,  and 
drove  me  before  them,  almoft  naked,  to  the  end 
of  the  parlfh,  where  they  left  me,  I made  fhift  to 
get  on  to  a place  three  miles  off,  where  I got  to 
bed  again  and  flept  in  peace.” 

Sund.  5.  About  one  I preached  at  BIrftal, 
Obferving  that  feveral  fat  on  the  fide  of  the  op- 
pofite  hill,  I afterward  defired  one  to  meafure 
the  ground ; and  we  found  it  was  fevenfeore 
yards  from  the  place  where  I flood.  Yet 
the  people  there  heard  perfeHly  well.  I did 
1 3 not 


[ <98  ] 

not  think  any  human  voice  could  have  reached 
fo  far. 

Between  four  and  five  I preached  in  our  new 
houfe  at  Leeds.  But  it  was  lo  full,  confequently 
fo  hot,  and  my  voice  was  fo  damped  by  the 
breath  of  the  people,  that  I fuppofe  many  could 
not  hear. 

Wednef.  8.  We  rode  to  Heptonfial,  a little 
town  on  the  round  top  of  a veiy  high  mountain, 
with  a lleep  defcent  on  every  fide.  I preached 
in  a vacant  place,  on  the  brow  of  the  hill.  A 
captain  who  came  from  the  minifier’s  houfe,  la- 
boured much  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  peo- 
ple. But  none  regarded  him  at  all.  When  we 
we,nt  away,  he  followed  us  down  the  hill.  One 
took  him  by  the  hand  and  fpoke  a few  words; 
on  which  he  fliook  like  a leaf,  and  faid,  “ He 
hoped  this  would  be  an  happy  day  for  him,  and 
that  he  fhould  think  more  than  he  had  done  in 
time  pall.” 

Frid.  10.  I preached  at  Dewfbury,  where  the 
cafe  of  the  vicar  and  his  curate  will  not  foon  be 
forgotten.  After  a converfation  I had  with  the 
vicar,  above  three  j ears  ago,  he  was  deeply  fe- 
rious,  till  he  converfed  again  with  rich  and  ho- 
nourable men,  who  foon  cured  him  of  that  dif- 
traftion.  Yet  in  a while  he  relapfed,  and  was 
more  ferious  than  ever,  til!  he  was  taken  ill. 
Thephyfician  made  light  of  his  illnefs,  and  faid, 
“ He  would  do  well  enough,  if  they  did  but  keep 
thofe  Methodifts  from  him.”  They  did  fo  ; how- 

ever, 


[ m ] 

ev^r,  In  a few  days  he  died,  and  according  to 
liis  own  exprefs  order,  was  carried  to  the  grave 
at  {even  in  the  morning  by  eight  poor  men, 
(whom  he  had  named)  and  buried  on  the  north 
fide  of  the  church.  The  curate,  who  buried 
him,  fickning  the  fame  week,  infifted  that  the 
Methodijls  fhould  not  be  kept  from  him.  About 
ten  days  after  he  died,  and  according  to  his  de- 
fire, was  about  the  fame  hour  carried  alfo  by 
eight  poor  men,  and  laid  in  a grave  clofe  to  that 
of  Mr.  R 

Satur.  1 1.  I preached  at  R , once  a 

place  of  furious  riot  and  perfecution,  but  quiet 
and  calm,  fince  the  bitter  reftor  is  gone,  to  give 
an  account  of  himfelf-to  God. 

Sund.  12.  I came  to  Wakefield,  as  the  bells 
were  ringing  in,  and  went  dire6tly  to  Mr. 

W in  the  veftry.  The  behaviour  of  the 

congregation  furprized  me.  I faw  none  light, 
none  carelefs  or  unaffefted,  while  1 inforced. 
What  is  a man  profited,  ifi he  /hall  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  loje  his  own  foul?  Hath  not  God  the 
hearts  of  all  men  in  his  hand?  Who  would  have 
expected  to  fee  me  preaching  in  Wakefield 
church,  to  fo  attentive  a congregation,  a few 
years  ago,  when  all  the  people  were  as  roaring 
lions,  and  the  honeft  man  did  not  dare  to  let  me 
preach  in  his  yard,  left  the  mob  fhould  pull  down 
his  houfes  ? 

Mond.  13.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Shef- 
field, in  the  fhell  of  the  new  houfe.  All  is  peace 
I 4 here 


[ 200  ] 

here  now,  Once  the  trial  at  York.  Surely  the  magif- 
trate  has  been  the  minifler  of  God  to  us  for  good  ! 

Tuef,  14.  I went  to  B — , whence  the 

vicar,  Mr.  had  fent  a meffenger  on 

purpofe,  to  deOre  he  m’ght  fee  me.  I found 
him  in  deep  diftrefs  for  the  lofs  of  his  wife,  mixt 
^vilh  Ifiong  deOres  after  God.  Hearing  I was 
going  to  preach  at  Rotherham,  he  offered  to  go 
with  me.  Ke  feemed  to  flagger  at  nothing; 
though  as  yet  his  underilanding  is  not  opened. 
O that  he  may  not  reft  till  it  is  ! 

Wednef.  15. 1 rode  on  toward  Epworth.  But  I 
w'as  nigh  fhipwrecked  in  fight  of  the  port.  At- 
tempting to  ride  over  the  common  the  neareft 
way,  my  mare  w'as  quickly  imbogged.  But  be- 
ing lively  and  flrong  fhe  made  a fhift  to  get  out, 
and  I was  glad  to  go  round  by  Tome  bank. 

Thurf.  16.  I walked  over  to  Burnham.  I had 
no  thought  of  preaching  there,  doubting  if  my 
flrength  would  allow  ol  preaching  alw'ays  thrice 
a day,  as  I had  done  moff  days  fince  I came  from 
Evefhatn.  But  finding  an  houfe  full  of  people,  I 
could  not  refrain.  Still  the  more  I ufe  my  flrength, 
the  more  I have.  I am  often  much  tired,  the 
firfl  time  I preach  in  a day;  a little  the  fecond 
lime  : but  after  the  third  or  fourth,  I rarely  feel 
either  weaknefs  or  w'earinefs. 

* Frid.  17.  I called  on  the  gentleman,  who 
told  me  he  was  “ Sinner  enough,”  when  I 
preached  firfl  at  Epworth  on  my  father’s  tomb  : 
and  was  agreeably  furprized,  to  find  him  flrong 

in 


201  ] 


in  faith,’  though  exceeding  weak  in  body.  For 
fome  years,  he  told  me,  he  had  been  rejoicing  in 
God,  without  either  doubt  or  fear,  and  was  now 
waiting  for  the  welcome  hour,  when  he  fhould 
depart  and  he  with  Chrijl. 

Satur.  i8.  I preached  at  Belton,  and  felt  an 
uncommon  degree  of  the  prefence  of  God, 
among  an  handful  of  poor  defpifed  people.  O 
how  precious  is  the  leaft  of  thefe  in  his  fight, 
who  bought  them  with  his  own  blood ! 

Sund.  19.  At  eight  I preached  at  Clay  worth, 
where  a year  ago,  the  mob  carried  all  before 
them.  But  an  honefl  juftice  quelled  them  at 
once,  fo  that  they  are  now  glad  to  be  quiet,  and 
mind  their  own  bufinefs. 

At  one  I preached  at  Mifterton,  to  a deeply 
attentive  congregation,  affembled  from  all  parts ; 
and  between  four  and  five  at  Epworth-crofs.  The 
congregation  here  was  fomewhat  leflened,  by 

a burial  at  Belton,  that  of  poor  Mr.  R — . 

P , emphatically  poor,  though  while  he 

lived,  he  pojfeji  (not  enjoyed)  at  lead  a thoufand 
pounds  a year. 

Mond.  20.  I rode  by  Hainton,  to  Coningfby. 
The  next  dayl  preached  at  Rangdale,  where  we 
expefted  fome  diilurbance,  but  found  none. 
The  light  punifliment  inflidled  on  the  late  rioters, 
(though  their  expence  was  not  great,  as  they  fub- 
mitted  before  the  trial)  has  fecured  peace  ever 
fince.  Such  a mercy  it  is,  to  execute  the  pe- 
nalty of  the  law,  on  thofe  who  will  not  regard 
I 5 its 


[ 202  J 

its  precepts ! So  many  inconveniences  to  tli^ 
innocent  does  it  prevent,  and  fo  much  fin  in  the 
guilty. 

Wednef.  22.  I rode  to  Grimfby.  The  croud 
was  fo  great  in  the  evening,  that  the  room  was 
like  an  oven.  The  next  night  I preached  at  the 
end  of  the  town,  whether  almofl  all  the  people, 
rich  and  poor,  followed  me : and  I had  a fair 
opportunity  of  clofely  applying  that  weighty 
queftion.  Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  faved  ? 

Frid.  24.  We  rode  by  a fine  feat : the  owner 
of  which  (not  much  above  fourfcore  years  old) 
fays,  “ He  defires  only  to  live  thirty  years  long- 
“ er ; ten  to  hunt,  ten  to  get  money,  (having  at 
“ prefent  but  twenty  ihoufand  pounds  a year) 
“ and  ten  years  to  repent,”  O that  God  may 
not  fay  unto  him.  Thou  fool  I This  night  fiall  thy. 
foul  be  required  of  thee  ! 

When  I landed  at  the  key  in  Hull,  it  was  co- 
vered with  people,  inquiring.  Which  is  he  ? 
Which  is  he  ? But  they  only  ftared  and  laugh- 
ed ; and  we  walked  unmolefted  to  Mr.  A ’s 

houfe. 

I was  quite  furprized  at  the  miferable  condi- 
tion of  the  fortifications,  far  more  ruinous 
and  decaved,  than  thofe  at  Newcaftle,  even  be- 
fore the  rebellion.  It  is  well  there  is  no  enemy 
near. 

* I went  to  prayers  at  three  in  the  old  churchy 
a grand  and  venerable  flruflure.  Between  five 
and  fix  the  coach  called,  and  took  me  to  Migh- 

ton.  Car, 


f 203  ] 

ton-Car,  about  half  a mile  from  the  town.  An 
huge  multitude,  rich  and  poor,  horfe  and  foot, 
with  feveral  coaches,  were  foon  gathered  toge- 
ther; to  whom  I cried  with  a loud  voice  and  a 
compofed  fpirit,  JV/za( Jhall  it  profit  a man,  if  he 
Jhall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lofe  his  own  foul? 
Some  thoufands  of  the  people  ferioufly  attended  : 
but  many  behaved  as  if  poffell  by  Moloch. 
Clods  and  ftones  flew  about  on  every  fide  : but 
they  neither  touched  nor  difturbed  me.  When 
I had  finifhed  my  difcourfe,  I went  to  take 
coach.  But  the  coachman  had  driven  clear 
away.  We  were  at  a lofs,  till  a gentlewoman 
invited  my  wife  and  me,  to  come  into  her  coach. 
She  brought  fome  inconveniences  on  herfelf 
thereby  : not  only  as  there  were  nine  of  us  in 
the  coach,  three  on  each  fide,  and  three  in  the 
middle;  but  alfo  as  the  mob  clofely  attended 
us,  throwing  in  at  the  windows  (which  we  did 
not  think  it  prudent  to  fhut)  whatever  came  next 
to  hand.  But  a large  gentlewoman  who  fat  in 
my  lap,  fcreenedrae,  fo  that  nothing  came  near 
me. 

The  mob,  who  were  increafed  to  feveral  thou- 
fands, when  I ftept  out  of  the  coach  into  Mr. 

A ’s  houfe,  perceiving  I was  efcaped  out  of 

their  hands,  revenged  themfelves  on  the  win- 
dows, with  many  fhowers  of  ftones,  which  they 
poured  in,  even  into  the  rooms  four  ftorieshigh, 
Mr.  A walked  through  them  to  the  may- 

or’s houfe,  who  gave  him  fair  vvmrds,  but  no  af- 
I 6 fiftance ; 


[ 204  ] 

fiftance ; probably  not  knowing,  that  himfelf 
(the  mayor)  might  be  compelled  to  make  good 
all  the  damage  which  fhould  be  done.  He  then 
went  in  quell  of  conftables,  and  brought  two 
with  him  abcmt  nine  o’clock.  With  their  help 
he  fo  thoroughly  difperfed  the  mob,  that  no  two. 
of  them  were  left  together.  But  they  rallied 
about  twelve,  and  gave  one  charge  more,  with 
oaths  and  curfes,  and  bricks  and  Hones.  After 
this,  all  was  calm,  and  I flept  found  till  near  four 
in  the  mornino-. 

O 

About  five,  Satur.  25.  We  took  horfe,  and 
made  to  Pocklingion.  I was  forty,  when  I found 
it  was  the  fair  day,  that  notice  had  been  given 
of  my  preaching;  efpecially  when  I heard  there 
was  no  fociety,  and  fcarce  anv  one  awakened  in 
the  town.  The  unufual  bitternefs  of  feveral  who 
met  us  in  the  llreet,  made  the  profpeft  Hill  more 
unpromiling.  However  I went  to  fee  the  room 
provided  for  preaching,  but  found  it  was  not 
above  five  yards  fquare.  I then  looked  at  a yard 
which  was  propofed  ; but  one  circumllance  of 
this  I did  not  like.  It  was  plentifully  furniflied 
with  Hones;  artillery  ready  at  hand,  for  the  de- 
vil’s drunken  companions.  JuH  then  it  began 
to  rain,  upon  which  a gentleman  offered  a large 
commodious  barn.  Thither  I went  without  de- 
lay, and  began  preaching  to  a few,  who  increafed 
continually.  I have  known  no  fuch  time  fince 
we  left  London.  Their  tears  fell  as  the  rain.  None 

oppofed 


[ 205  ] 

oppofed  or  mocked : fo  that  thefe  made  full 
amends  for  the  behaviour  of  thofe  at  Hull. 

The  man  and  his  wife  at  whofe  houfe  we 
dined,  had  been  bitterly  perfecuted  both  by  his 
and  her  mother.  Thefe  were  fome  of  the  firft 
whofe  hearts  wei'e  touched.  Immediately  after 
preaching  they  came  up  into  the  room  where 
we  were,  and  confeft  with  many  tears,  how  ea- 
gerly they  had  oppofed  the  truth  of  God,  and 
troubled  their  children  for  adhering  to  it.  How 
wife  are  all  the  ways  of  God  ? Had  it  not  been 
fair  day,  thefe  had  not  been  here. 

Yet  fome  of  our  company  had  dreadful  fore- 
bodings of  what  was  to  be  at  York,  A worthy 
jullice  of  the  peace  (doubtlefs  to  quiet  the  mob 
there)  had  juft  caufed  to  be  cried  about  the 
ftreets,  ftuck  up  in  public  places,  and  even 
thrown  into  many  houfes,  part  of  the  “ Compa- 
rifon  between  the  Papijis  and  Methodijls.”  Per- 
haps this  might  be  the  occafion  of  fome  bitter 
curfes  which  were  given  us,  almoft  as  foon  as  we 
entered  the  gates.  But  the  vain  words  of  thofe 
Rabfhakehs,  returned  into  their  own  bofoms.  I be- 
gan preaching  at  fix.  The  chappel  was  filled  with 
hearers,  and  with  the  prefence  of  God.  The  op- 
pofers  opened  not  their  mouths.  The  mourners 
bleft  God  for  the  confolation. 

Sund.  26.  Atfeven,  God  was  with  us  as  be- 
fore, and  his  word  brake  the  rocks  in  pieces. 
We  left  York  about  nine,  as  quietly  as  we  came, 
and  rode  to  Acomb. 


Mond. 


206  ] 

Mond.  27.  We  reached  Ofmotherly.  After 
preaching  in  the  evening,  I was  defired  to  viftt 
a perfon,  who  had  been  an  eminent  fcoffer  at 
all  religion,  but  was  now,  they  faid,  ” in  a 1 
ftrange  way.”  I found  her  in  a flravge  way  in- 
deed : either  raving  mad,  or  pofTeft  by  the  de- 
vil. The  woman  herfelf  affirmed,  “ That  the 
devil  had  appeared  to  her  the  day  before,  and  •; 
after  talking  fome  time,  leaped  upon,  and  grie- 
voufly  tormented  her  ever  fince.”  We  prayed  ; 
with  her.  Her  agonies  cealed.  She  fell  afleep, 
and  awaked  in  the  morning  calm  and  eafy. 

Tuef.  28.  About  noon  we  reached  Stokefley, 
where  I found,  none  had  ever  yet  preached  I 
abroad.  Samuel  Larwood  had  attempted  it ; 
but  in  vain  : and  fo  had  Mr.  Roberts  forae  time 
after.  But  a clergyman  came  at  the  head  of  a , 
large  mob,  and  obliged  him  to  defift.  About 
one,  the  perfon  in  whofe  houfe  we  were,  came  1 

in  trembling,  and  told  us  what  threatnings  were  | 

breathed  out.  I anf-v  ered,  “ Then  there  is  no  i 

time  to  lofe,”  and  went  out  immediately.  I ( 

fuppofe  the  mob  expefted  to  hear  us  fing.  But  I 

they  were  difappointed  : for  I began  preaching  j 

without  delay.  By  this  means,  miffing  their  : 

fignal,  they  came,  not  in  a body,  but  tsvo  or  | 

three  at  a time.  And  as  fall  as  they  came,  their  i 

minds  were  changed  ; fo  that  all  were  quiet,  i 

from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  I 

It  rained  all  the  way  we  rode  to  Stockton  ; but  I 

was  i 


[ 207  ] 


was  fair  all  the  time  I flood  in  the  main  ftreet, 
and  explained  to  a liftening  multitude,  the 
that  is  in  heaven  over  one Jinner  that  repenteth. 

Wed.  2g.  I preached  at  Durham  to  a quiet, 
ftupid  congregation,  and  the  next  day  went  on 
to  Newcaftle. 

On  Friday  and  Saturday  we  enpyed  a little 
refpite  from  labour,  and  were  refrefhed  both  in 
foul  and  body. 

Sund.  May  3.  We  bad  the  lejl  drejl  congre- 
gation, that  ever  I faw  in  this  place.  I fpoke 
very  plain.  Yet  all  were  patient,  and  looked  as 
if  they  underflood  what  was  faid. 

Sat,  gi  I rode  to  Sunderland,  where  I found 
one  of  the  liveliefl.  focieties  in  the  North  of 
England.  This  is  the  effeft  of  their  being  fo 
much  under  the  law^  as  to  fcruple,  one  and  all, 
the  buying  even  milk  on  a Sunday.  The  houfe 
hardly  contained  the  people  at  five  the  next 
morning.  At  eight,  and  at  twelve  I preached  in 
the  ftreet ; none  oppofing  or  interrupting.  About 
four  1 began  at  Newcaftle,  near  the  Keelmen’s 
hofpital.  It  wasjuft  as  I expefted.  Many  who 
had  turned  back  from  the  holy  commandment  once 
delivered  to  them,  flocked  together,  and  feemed 
convinced,  that  God  was  ftill  ready  to  return, 
and  leave  a blelTmg  behind  him. 

Mond.  It.  After  preaching  at  Morpeth  in  my 
way,  diough  with  little  prefent  effe£f.  I rode  on 
to  Alnwick,  and  preached  at  the  Crofs  to  a far 
more  numerous  and  more  ferious  congregation. 

Wed. 


[ 2o8  ] 

Wed.  13.  I rode  to  Berwick,  and  after  preach- 
ing, defiled  all  who  had  been  of  the  fociety  to 
meet  me.  I fpoke  to  feventeen,  w’ho  were 
throughly  willing  to  unite  again.  And  (what  was 
remarkable)  all  ol  them  Ifill  retained  a fenfe  of 
the  pardoning  love  ol  God  ; although  they  were 
convinced,  they  had  fuffered  great  lofs,  by  a 
famine  of  the  word. 

Thurf.  14.  At  five,  the  foldiers  made  a con- 
fiderable  part  of  the  congregation.  At  noon, 
they  came  again  in  troops.  One  of  tliem,  T — 

W , came  laft  year  from  the  Highlands,  and 

went  through  Weftmorcland,  to  beat  up  for 
recruits.  He  had  been  earneflly  warned  before 
he  left  Scotland,  on  no  account  to  go  near  the 
Methodifts.  But  in  Kendal,  he  lighted  on  two 
or  three,  from  which  time  they  were  not  one 
day  afimder.  It  was  not  long,  before  God  clearly 
alTured  him  of  his  pardoning  love.  A fortnight 
after,  he  was  ordered  to  follow  the  regiment  to 
Berwick,  where  he  is  continually  exhorting  his 
comrades,  to  be  good  foldiers  of  jfefus  Ckrift. 
And  many  already  have  lifted  under  his  banner. 

* Frid.  15,  In  the  afternoon  I preached  at 
Alemouth.  How  plain  an  evidence  have  we 
here,  that  even  our  outward  work,  even  the  fo- 
cieties,  are  not  of  man’s  building.  With  all 
our  labour  and  fkill,  we  cannot  in  nine  year’s 
time,  form  a fociety  in  this  place  ; even  though 
there  is  none  that  oppofes,  poor  or  rich  : na\’, 
though  the  two  richeft  men  in  the  town,  and 

tlie 


[ 209  ] 


the  only  gentlemen  there,  have  done  all  which 
was  in  their  power  to  further  it. 

Sat.  i6.  I rode  on  to  the  poor  colliers  at  Pla- 
cey.  When  we  came  hither  fird,  John  Lane, 
then  nine  or  ten  years  old,  was  one  of  the  fird 
who  found  peace  with  God.  From  that  hour  he 
continued  to  vv'alk  day  and  night  in  the  light  of 
his  countenance.  I law  him  lad  year,  longing 
to  be  with  Chrid.  But  he  was  detained  here  a 
little  longer,  that  he  might  witnefs  a good  con- 
lellion  in  death  as  well  as  in  life.  He  prailed 
God  as  long  as  he  had  breath,  and  was  buried  a 
day  or  two  before  I came. 

May  17.  Being  Whitfunday,  I preached  in 
the  morning  at  Gatefliead,  to  an  huge  congre- 
gation, on  our  Lord’s  words,  If  any  man  thirji, 
let  him  come  unto  me  and  diink.  About  five,  I 
began  near  the  Keelmen’s  hofpital,  many  thou- 
fands  danding  round,  or  fitting  on  the  grafs. 
The  wind  was  high  jud  before  : but  fcarce  a 
breath  was  felt,  all  the  time  we  were  adembled 
before  God.  I praife  God  for  this  alfo.  Is  it 
enthufiafm,  to  fee  God  in  every  benefit  which 
we  receive  ? 

Mond.  J 8.  I preached  at  Newlands,  and  en- 
deavoured to  remove  the  offences,  which  had 
crept  in  among  ttie  fimple  people.  In  the  even- 
ing I preached  at  Sheep-hill.  It  rained  all  the 
time  ; but  that  little  didurbed  either  the  congre- 
gation or  me. 

Tuef.  ig.  I preached  at  Wickham,  before 

Mrs. 


L 210  ] 

Mrs.  Armftrong’s  door.  ^ I was  a little  furprir- 
ed  at  the  account  fhe  gave,  of  God’s  late  deal- 
ings with  her.  When  her  atioient  hufband, 
with  whom  fhe  had  lived  Irom  her  youth,  was 
on  account  of  a debt  contracted  bv  his  fon,  hur- 
ried away  and  thrown  into  Durham-goal,  which 
foon  put  an  end  to  his  life  ; when  fhe  was  like- 
ly to  lofe  all  (he  had,  and  to  be  turned  out  of 
doors  at  fourfcore  years  of  age,  hill  the  oracles 
of  God,  which  flte  had  loved  from  a child,  were 
her  delight  and  her  counfellors.  But  one  dav 
when  file  put  on  her  fpeflacles  to  read,  fhe  could 
not  fee  a word.  She  was  flartled  at  firil ; but  foon 
faid,  It  is  the  Lord  : let  him  do  what  Jeemtih  him 
good.  She  laid  her  fpeclacles  down,  and  cad- 
it:g  her  eye  on  the  corner  of  the  bible,  thought 
file  could  difcern  foine  letters.  Taking  up  the 
book,  (lie  read  as  well  as  her  daughter  could. 
And  from  that  hour  fhe  could  not  only  reed 
without  fpeclacles,  but  fow  or  thread  the  fined 
needle,  with  the  fame  eafe,  as  when  Die  was 
thirty  years  of  age. 

Wed.  20,  I preached  at  Biddick  to  a multi- 
tude of  colliers,  though  it  rained  hard  all  the 
time.  They  feeined  all,  even  feme  who  l;ad 
long  drawn  back,  to  be  melted  down  as  wax  be- 
fore the  fire.  So  ftrong  and  general  an  influence 
on  a congregation,  1 do  not  remember  to  have 
been  for  fome  years. 

Sund.  2^.  The  congregation  at  the  Keehnen’s 
hofpital,  vvas  far  too  large  for  my  voice  to  com- 
mand. 


r 211  ] 

mand.  I doubt  not  more  than  two  thirds  could 
hear  ; but  all  were  Hill,  till  I commended  them 
to  the  grace  of  God. 

Mond.  aj.  We  rode  to  Durham,  and  thence 
through  very  rough  roads,  and  as  rougii  weather,, 
to  Barnard-caftle.  I was  exceeding  faint  when 
we  came  in  ; however,  the  time  being  come,  I 
went  into  the  ftreet,  and  would  have  preached. 
But  the  mob  was  fo  numerous  and  fo  lotid,  that 
it  was  not  pofTible  for  many  to  hear.  Never- 
thelefs  I fpoke  on,  and  thofe  who  were  near, 
liflened  with  huge  attention.  To  prevent  this, 
fom.e  of  the  rabble  fetched  the  engine,  and 
threw  a good  deal  of  water  on  the  congregation. 
But  not  a drop  fell  on  me.  After  about  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour,  I returned  into  the  houfe. 

Tuef.  20.  At  five,  the  preaching-houfe  would 
not  contain  one  half  of  the  congregation.  Many 
flood  at  the  door  and  windows,  far  more  than 
could  hear.  When  I come  again,  perhaps  they 
will  hear  while  they  may. 

We  rode  hence  to  Wecadale.  I had  been 
out  of  order  all  night,  and  found  myfcif  now 
much  weaker.  However  I trnfied  in  the  ftron^ 
for  ftrength,  and  began  preaching  to  a numer- 
ous congregation.  And  I did  not  want  fi length, 
til!  I had  finifhed  my  difeourfe  : nor  did  the 
people  want  a blelfing. 

In  the  evening  we  came  to  Allandale,  and 
found  the  poor  fociety  well  nigh  fhattered  in 
pieces.  Slacknefs  and  offence  had  eaten  them 

up. 


[ 212  ] 

up.  When  I came  into  the  room,  I was  juft 
like  one  of  them,  having  neither  life  nor 
ftrength,  and  being  fcarce  able  either  to  fpeak 
or  to  ftand.  But  immediately  we  had  a token 
for  good.  In  a moment  I was  well.  My  voice 
and  ftrength  were  entirely  reftored,  and  I cried 
aloud,  How Jhall  I give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ? The 
mountains  again  flowed  down  at  his  prefence, 
and  the  rocks  were  once  more  broken  in  pieces. 

Wed.  27.  I preached  at  Clifton,  near  Pen- 
rith, to  a civil  people,  who  looked  juft  as  if  I 
had  been  talking  Greek.  The  next  day  we  went 
on  to  Larton,  a little  village,  lying  in  a green 
fruitful  valley,  furrounded  by  high  mountains, 
the  Tides  of  which  are  covered  with  grafs  and 
woods,  and  the  bottom  watered  by  two  fmall  ri- 
vers. Here  I found  m)  felf  much  out  of  order 
again.  However,  at  Cx,  I preached  to  a very 
large  and  ferious  congregation.  The  minifters 
of  Larton,  and  of  the  next  pai  ifti,  were  among 
them,  that  they  miight  hear  andjudge  forthem- 
felves. 

Frid.  29.  I preached  at  noon  to  a very  differ- 
ent congregation  in  the  Caftle-yard  at  Cocker- 
mouth.  Howev'er,  they  behaved  with  decency  ; 
none  interrupting,  or  making  any  noife. 

About  five  we  reached  Whitehaven.  After  a 
little  reft,  I went  to  the  room;  but  it  was  rather  to 
be feen  than  heard.  However  I fpoke  as  I could  for 
about  half  an  hour,  and  then  immediately  went 
to  bed.  But  I could  not  fleep,  having  a violent 

flux 


[ 213  ] 

flux  with  a fever,  and  continual  pain  in  my  fto- 
mach.  But  at  twelve,  I fell  into  a doze,  and  fl-om 
that  time,  began  to  recover. 

On  Sunday  in  the  afternoon  I ventured  to 
church,  and  in  the  evening  preached  as  I was 
able. 

Mond.  June  i.  I examined  the  fociety,  and 
praifed  God  on  their  behalf. 

Tbuf.  2.  I rode  to  Seaton,  a totvn  of  colliers, 
ten  meafured  miles  from  Whitehaven.  The  poor 
people  had  prepared  a kind  of  pulpit  for  me,  co- 
vered at  the  top  and  on  bothfides,  and  had  placed 
a cufhion  to  kneel  upon  of  the  greeneft  turf  in 
the  county.  But  my  voice  was  (till  fo  low,  that 
I fear  not  half  of  thofe  who  were  prefcnt  could 
hear. 

Wed.  3.  I was  able  to  preach  again  in  the 
morning.  One  of  our  friends,  who  was  mafter 
of  a fliip  purpofing  to  fet  fail  on  Thurfday  4,  for 
Dublin,  I knew  not  but  it  would  be  well  to  go 
over  with  him,  fuppofing  the  wind  fhould  turn 
fair.  It  did  turn  fair  that  very  morning  ; but  be- 
ing fuddenly  called  on  board,  be  failed  without 
us.  In  about  fix  hours  the  wind  turned  foul.  So 
I fuppofe  he  came  back  the  next  morning. 

In  the  afternoon  we  rode  to  Mr.  Blencowe’s 
about  fifteen  miles  from  Whitehaven.  We  took 
a walk  in  the  evening  to  a little  town,  called  Drig, 
about  a mile  from  his  houfe,  where  I preach- 
ed to  afmall  company  of  plain  ferious  people. 

But 


C 214  ] 

But  I fear  they  underftood  very  little  of  what  they 
heard. 

Friday  5.  I went  on  with  Mr.  Milner,  to  Uiver- 
ftone.  Here  a very  convenient  place  for  preach- 
ing was  offered.  But  few  people  had  any  de- 
fire  to  hear.  So  I rvent  quietly  back  to  ray 
inn. 

Sat.  6.  We  reached  Chipping,  and  were  im- 
mediately informed,  that  feveral  there  were  con- 
fulting  together,  how  to  hinder  me  from  preach- 
ing. Mr.  Milner,  hearing  they  v.’ere  met  at  the 
nexthoufe,  went  thither,  and  brought  them  all 
with  him,  who  were  the  churciiwardens,  and 
three  or  four  perfons  more.  I fpeat  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  with  them,  in  calm  and  friend- 
ly debate,  and  they  went  away  much  cooler 
than  they  came. 

Sund.  7.  Underftanding  fome  defigned  to  go 
out  of  church,  when  I v;ent  into  the  pulpit.  I 
thought  it  would  be  better  for  them  to  go  out 
fooner,  and  to  read  prayers  as  w’ell  as  preach. 
Such  a congregation  was  prefent,  as  I believe  was 
never  feen  there  before.  And  a folemn  awe 
feeraed  to  reft  on  the  whole  congregation,  from 
the  beginning  of  the  fervLce  to  the  end. 

I preached  in  the  afternoon  on  the  conclufion 
of  the  iecond  leftbn,  God  was  in  ChrijI,  reconcil- 
ing the  world  to  hirnjtlf.  The  people  were  all 
attention.  Surely  there  is  no  counfel  or  ftrength 
againft  the  Lord.' 

Mond.-8.  We  rode  to  Rough-Lee,  and  found 

a large, 


[ 215  ] 

a large,  ferious  and  quiet  congregation,  Tliere 
have  been  no  tumults,  fince  Mr.  W — was  re« 
moved.  He  was  for  fome  years  a popifh  prieft. 
Then  he  called  himfelf  a proteflaiit,  had  the 
living  of  Coin.  It  was  his  manner  firft  to  hire, 
and  then  head  the  mob,  when  they  and  he  were 
tolerably  drunk.  But  he  drank  himfelf,  firft  into 
a goal,  and  then  into  his  grave. 

In  theevening  I preached  at  Heptonftall.  An 
attorney,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  town, 
endeavoured  to  interrupt,  retailing  fome  low, 
threadbare  dories,  with  a verv  audible  voice. 
But  fome  of  the  people  cut  him  fliort  in  ths 
midftby  carrying  him  quietly  awav, 

Tuef.  9.  I preached  at  fix  to  abundance  of 
people  near  Ewood,  and  with  an  uncommon 
bleffing.  Hence  we  rode  to  Dadmarden,  the 
minifter  was  ilowly  recovering  from  a violent  fit 
of  a palfy,  with  which  he  was  Ifriick  immediate- 
ly after  he  had  been  preaching  a virulent  iermon 
againft  the  Methodilfs. 

I preached  on  the  fide  of  a mountain  to  a 
large  and  earneft  congregation,  and  then  went 
on  to  Mellar-burn  : I preached  at  fix  in  the  town 
and  I fuppofe  all  the  inhabitants,  young  and  old 
were  prefent.  Nor  have  I often  feen  fo  large  a 
congregation,  fo  univerfally  and  deeply  af- 
fe£led. 

My  lodging  w'as  not  fuch  as  I fliould  have 
chofen  : but  what  providence  chufes,  is  always 
good.  My  bed  was  confiderably  under  ground 

the 


[ 2,6  ] 

the  room  fervlng  both  for  a bed-chamber  and  a 
cellar.  The  clofenefs  was  more  troublefome  at 
firfl  than  the  coolnefs.  But  I let  in  a little  freflr 
air,  by  breaking  a pane  of  paper  put  by  way  of 
glafs)  in  the  window,  and  then  flept  found  till 
the  morning. 

Frid.  12.  I rode  to  Bolton.  So  hot  a day  as 
this,  I do  not  remember  to  have  felt  in  England. 
The  congregation  feemed  to  forget  the  heat,  tho' 
the  room  was  like  an  oven.  For  it  was  a com- 
fortable hour  : God  refrelhing  many  fouls  with 
the  multitude  of  peace. 

Sat.  13.  The  houfe  was  fuller  this  evening, 
than  the  laft,  while  I inforced  that  gracious  invi- 
tation, Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  are  weary,  and 
htaxy  laden. 

Sund.  14.  After  preaching  in  the  evening,  I 
took  occafion  to  tell  the  whole  congregation, 
That  there  had'been  a miftake,  concerning  the 
houfe,  which  J.  B.  imagined,  I had  contrived  to 
make  my  own  property  : but  Mr.  Grimfhaw 
had  now  cleared  it  up  ; having  affured  Mr.  B. 
1.  That  I knew  nothing  of  the  deed  relating  to 
the  houfe,  till  after  it  was  made.  2.  That  I had 
no  property  in  it  flill  ; only  a claufe  was  inferted 
whereby  Mr.  G.  my  brother,  and  I were  im- 
powered,  To  appoint  the  preachers  therein. 

Mond,  15.  I bad  many  little  trials  in  this  jour- 
ney, of  a kind  I had  not  known  before.  I had 
borrowed  a young,  ftrong  mare,  when  I fetout 
from  Mancheller.  But  fire  fell  lame  before  I 

got 


C 217  ] 


got  to  Grlmfby.  I procured  another,  but  was 
difmounted  again,  between  Newcaftle  and  Ber- 
wick. At  my  return  to  Manchefter,  I took  my 
own.  But  fhe  had  lamed  herfelf  in  the  pafture. 
I thought  neverthelefs  to  ride  her  four  or  five 
miles  to  day.  But  fhe  was  gone  out  of  the 
ground,  and  we  could  hear  nothing  of  her. 
However  I comforted  myfelf,  that  I had  another 
at  Manchefler,  which  I had  lately  bought.  But 
when  I came  thither  I found,  one  had  borrow- 
ed her  too,  and  rode  her  away  to  Chefter. 

About  noon,  I preached  near  Shackerley,  at 
an  old  man’s  houfe,  who  was  groaning  for  re- 
demption. We  walked  together  a little  way, 
after  preaching;  and  almofl  as  foon  as  we  part- 
ed, the  power  of  God  fell  upon  him,  fo  that  he 
hardly  knew  w'hether  he  was  on  earth  or  in  hea- 
ven. From  that  hour  he  has  been  continually 
filled  with  peace  and  joy  in  believing. 

At  my  return  to  Bolton,  I wrote  down  a par- 
ticular account  of  one,  that  lately  adorned  the 
gofpel.  It  was  as  follows,  “ In  April,  174b, 
Katherine  Whitaker  went  to  Halifax,  to  hear 
John  Nelfon.  She  was  before  convinced  of  the 
truth  by  reading,  and  from  that  time  grew  more 

and  more  ferious.  The  next  year  John  H 

called  at  our  houfe.  As  he  was  going,  he  turned 
back,  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  faid,  “ You 
mufi  believe,  whether  you  can,  or  no.”  ‘ As  foon 
as  he  was  gone,  fhe  began  crying  to  God,  and 
ceafed  not,  till  fhe  knew  fire  did  believe  in 
VoL.  XXIX.  K Chrift. 


[ 2i8  ] 


Chrift.  She  never  afterward  loft  the  fenfe  of  his 
love : nor  could  fhe  reft,  if  Ihe  found  the  leaft 
cloud,  till  It  was  wholly  removed,  and  the  clear 
light  fhone  again  upon  her  foul. 

“ In  May  1750.  She  removed  to  Bolton,  and 
foon  after  appeared  to  be  confumptive.  But  file 
did  not  fp are  herfelf  on  that  account,  ftill  rifingat 
five,  four,  or  three  in  the  morning,  and. continu- 
ing to  teach  her  fcholars,  as  ufual,  till  about 
Chriftmas  1751.  From  that  time  her  bodily 
ftrength  failed,  though  fhe  did  not  keep  her  room 
till  March.  She  was  then  afraid,  left  fhe  fliould 
live  to  be  a burden  to  her  relations : but  that  fear 
foon  vanifhed  away,  and  fhe  faid,  “ Now'  I can 
leave  it  all  to  God.  Let  me  die  fooner  or  later, 
it  is  all  one.”  But  fhe  had  ftill  fome  ftruggle  con- 
cerning her  hufband,  before  fhe  was  thoroughly 
willing  to  give  him  up. 

“ The  next  Friday  but  one  before  fhe  died, 
one  of  her  fiflers  fitting  by  her  began  finging, 

O happy,  happy  day, 

That  calls  the  exiles  homes.” 

She  immediately  joined  with  her,  and  fung  on  to 
the  end  of  the  hymn.  The  Thurfday  after  fhe 
looked  round  upon  us,  and  faid,  “ O how  I love 
you  all.  I am  all  love.  I love  every  foul  God 
has  made.”  Her  hufband  afked,  “ Are  you 
■happy  ?”  She  faid,  “ O yes. 


I cannot 


[ 219  ] 


I cannot  fear,  I cannot  doubt, 

I feel  the  fprinkled  blood : 

**  Sing  on,  fing  on, 

“ Let  every  foul  with  me  cry  out, 

“ Thou  art  my  Lord,  my  God,” 

At  breakfaft  fhe  defired  a little  cold  water:  on 
receiving  which  fhe  looked  up  and  faid,  “ In 
a little  while,  I fhall  drink  new  wine  in  the 
kingdom  of  my  Father.”  About  ten  o’clock 
fhe  broke  out. 

My  God  is  reconciled, 

His  pard’ning  voice  I hear. 

He  owns  me  for  his  child, 

I can  no  longer  fear,” 

One  afking  her,  How  flie  did  ?”  She  faid, 
“ I long  to  be  with  him  whom  my  foul  loveth.” 
On  Friday  and  Saturday,  being  extremely  weak, 
fhe  fpake  very  little.  On  Sunday  morning  fhe 
faid,  “ So  the  Lord  hath  brought  us  to  another 
fabbath.  Vouchfafe,  0 Lord,  to  keep  us  this  day 
without  jin''  She  then  partly  fung,  and  partly 
repeated  that  hymn, 

“ O when  fhall  I fweetly  remove, 

O when  fhall  I enter  my  reft  ! 

K 2 


Return 


C 220  ] 

Return  to  the  Sion  above, 

The  mother  of  fpirits  diftreft.” 

* She  then  faid,  “ Who  is  in  the  houfe  ? O,  I 
do  not  love  the  flaying  at  home  on  a Sunday. 
Defire  them  all  to  go  to  church.  When  I was 
mofl diligent  ingoing  to  church,  I always  found 
the  greatell  bleffings.”  At  night  fhe  faid, 
“ Swelled  legs!  For  a little  time  ; there  will  be 
no  fwelled  legs  in  heaven.”  About  five  on 
Monday  morning,  March  23,  her  hufband  afked, 
“ Do  you  know  me  ?”  She  faid,  “ Yes,  I do 
and  putting  her  arm  l ound  his  neck,  quickly  be- 
gan to  (lumber.  Waking  foon  after,  fhe  faid, 
“ I muft  make  hafle,  and  drefs  myfelf  for  the 
bridegroom.”  She  then  dozed  afrefh ; but  wak- 
ing in  a few  minutes,  faid,  “ I am  going  to 
Chrifl,”  and  fell  afleep. 

Satur.  20.  I rode  to  Chefler,  and  preached  at 
fix  in  the  accuflomed  place,  a little  without  the 
gates,  near  St.  John’s  church.  One  fmgle  man, 
a poor  alehoufe-keeper,  feemed  difgufled,  fpoke 
a harmlefs  word,  and  ran  away  with  all  fpeed. 
All  the  refl  behaved  with  the  lumofl  ferioufnefs, 
while  1 declared,  The  grace  of  our  Lord  jfefus 
Chrift. 

Sund.  21.1  preached  at  feven  in  a much  larger 
houfe,  which  was  jull  taken,  near  St.  Martin’s 
church ; as  eminent  a part  of  the  town,  as 
Drury-lane  is  in  London,  or  as  the  Horfe-fair 


w'as 


[ 221  ] 

was  in  Briftol.  At  church  Mr.  L preached 

a ftrong,  plain,  ufeful  fermon,  upon  the  faith 
of  Abraham.  At  one,  I began  preaching  again, 
on.  We  preach  not  ourf elves,  but  Chrijl  Jefus  the 
Lord.  But  the  houfe  not  containing  half  the 
congregation,  I was  obliged  to  Hand  at  the  door, 
on  one  fide  of  a kind  of  fquare,  large  enough  to 
contain  ten  or  twelve  thoufand  people.  I had  a 
few  hours  before  fpoken  to  the  captain  of  a vef- 
fel,  with  whom  I propofed  to  fail  for  Dublin. 
And  the  wind  being  fair,  I knew  not  whether  I 
fhould  fiay  to  preach  another  fermon  in  Chefler. 
I find  it  ufeful  to  be  in  fuch  a flate  of  fufpence  ; 
wherein  I know  not,  what  will  be  the  next  hour, 
but  lean  abfolutely  on  his  difpofal,  who  knoweth 
and  ruleth  all  things  well. 

At  four,  I preached  in  the  fquare,  to  a much 
larger  congregation,  among  whom  were  abun- 
dance of  gentry.  One  man  fcreamed  and  hol- 
lowed as  loud  as  he  could  ; but  none  feconded 
or  regarded  him.  The  reft  of  the  congregation 
were  fleddily  ferious,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end. 

. Mond.  22.  We  walked  round  the  walls  of  the 
city,  which  are  fomething  more  than  a mile  and 
three  quarters  in  circumference.  But  there  are 
many  vacant  fpaces  within  the  walls,  many  gar- 
dens, and  a good  deal  of  pafture  ground.  So  that 
I believe  Newcaftle-upon-Tyne,  within  the  walls, 
contains  at  leaft  a third  more  houfes  than 
Chefter. 

K3 


The 


[ 222  ] 

The  greateft  convenience  here  is  what  they 
eall  The  Rows,  that  is,  covered  galleries,  which 
run  through  the  main  ftre ets  on  each  fide,  from 
eaft  to  weft  ; and  from  north  to  fouth  : by  which 
means  one  may  walk  both  clean  and  dry  in 
any  weather,  from  one  end  of  the  city  to  the 
other. 

1 preached  at  fix  in  the  evening  in  the  fquare, 
to  a vaft  multitude,  rich  and  poo-r.  The  far 
greater  part,  the  gentry  in  particular,  u’ere  feri- 
oufly  and  deeply  attentive  : though  a few  of  the 
rabble,  moft  of  them  drunk,  laboured  much  to 
make  a difturbance.  One  might  already  per- 
ceive a great  increafe  of  earncftnefs  in  the  gene- 
rality of  the  hearers.  So  is  God  able  to  cut  fhort 
his  work,  to  wound  or  heal,  in  whatever  time  it 
pleafeth  him. 

Tuef.  23.  Having  received  letters  which 
made  me  judge  it  neceffary  to  be  at  Briflol  as 
foon  as  poffible ; about  ten  I fet  out,  dined  at 
Birmingham  the  next  day,  and  thence  rode  to 
Red-ditch. 

Thurf.  25.  Finding  the  congregation  waiting, 
I began  preaching  between  three  and  four.  I 
preached  at  Wallbridge,  near  Stroud,  in  the 
evening,  and  the  next  day,  before  noon,  reached 
Kingfwood. 

Wednef.  July  1.  Having  finiflied  my  bufinefs 
at  Briftol,  I took  horfe  again,  and  preached  that 
evening  at  Evefham. 

Thurf.  2.  I reached  Bilbrook,  and  Chefter, 

Frid. 


[ 223'  ] 

Frid.  3.  I was  faying  in  the  morning  to  Mr. 
Parker,  “ Confidering  the  good  which  has  be€n 
done  there  already,  I wonder  the  people  of 
Chefter  are  fo  quiet.”  He  anfwered,  “ You 
mull  not  expeft  they  will  be  fo  always.”  Ac- 
cordingly one  of  the  firll  things  I heard  after  I 
came  into  the  town  was,  that  for  two  nights  be- 
fore,. the  mob  had  been  employed  in  pulling 
down  the  houfe  where  I had  preached.  “ I 
afked,  where  there  no  magillrates  in  the  city?’’ 
Sev.eral  anfwered  me,  “ We  went  to  the  mayor 
after  the  firll  riot,  and  defired  a M'arrant  to  bring 
the  rioters  before  him.  But  he  pofitively  re- 
fufed  to  grant  any,  or  to  take  any  informations 
about  it.”  So  being  undillurbed,  they  alTem- 
bled  again  the  next  night,  and  finilhed  their 
work. 

Satur.  4. 1 preached  in  our  old  room. 

Sund.  5.  I llocd  at  feven  in  the  morning  near 
the  ruins  of  the  houfe,  and  explained  the  princi- 
ples and  practice  of  that  Setl  ivhich  is  every  where 
Jpoken  againji,  I went  afterwards  to  St.  Martm’s 
church,  which  Hands  clofe  to  the  place.  The 
gentleman  who  officiated,  feeined  to  be  ex-' 
tremely  moved  at  fevera!  palfages  of  the  fecond 
lelTon,  Luke  17,  particulai  Iv,  It  is  impojfible 
but  that  offences  will  come ; but  woe  unto  him 
through  whom  they  come.  It  were  better  for  hint 
that  a milljione  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  he- 
cajl  into  the  fea,  than  that  he  Jhould  offend  one  of 
theft  little  ones. 

K4 


*He 


[ 224  ] 


* He  began  his  fermon  nearly  in  thefe  words. 

“ Thelaft  Lord’s  day  I preached  on  doing  as  you 
would  be  done  to,  in  hopes  of  preventing  fuch 
proceedings  as  are  contrary  to  all  juftice,  mercy, 
•and  humanity.  As  I could  not  do  that,  1 have 
chofen  thefe  words  for  your  prefent  confidera- 
tion,  Ye  know  not  what  manner  ofjpiritye  are  of. 
Tor  the  Son  of  Man  is  not  come  to  dejlroy  men’s 
lives,  but  to fave  them:’ 

* He  concluded  nearly  thus : “ I am  forry 
any  fuch  outrage  fliould  be  committed,  particu- 
larly in  this  parifh ; where  I have  been  teaching 
fo  many  years.  And  to  how  little  purpofe  ? I 
will  remove  as  foon  as  poflibly  I can  from  a 
place,  where  I can  do  fo  little  good.  O what  an 
account  have  they  to  make,  who  have  either  oc- 
cafioned  or.  incouraged  thefe  proceedings  ? May 
God  grant,  that  they  may  repent  in  time  ! That 
they  may  know  what  fpirit  they  are  of!  That 
they  may,  before  it  is  too  late,  acknowledge  and 
Jove  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jefus.” 

I preached  again  in  the  fame  place  at  one  and 
at  four,  and  the  whole  congregation  were  quiet 
and  ferious. 

Mond.  6.  Finding  no  fliip  ready  to  fail,  I de- 
termined to  return  to  Whitehaven.  So  I 
took  horfe  with  my  wife  between  nine  and 
ten,  and  in  the  evening  preached  at  Man- 
chefier. 

Tuef.  7.  We  rode  to  Bolton  : on  Wednefday 

to 


[ 225  ] 

to  Chipping  ; and  on  Friday  lo,  reached  White- 
haven. 

Sund.  12.  I took  my  old  ftand  In  the  market- 
place, about  feven  in  the  morning,  and  proclaim- 
ed the  Lord  God, gracious  and  mercijul,  forgiving 
iniquity,  tranfgr^on  and  fin.  In  the  afternoon 
we  had  an  awakening  fermon  at  the  new  church, 
on,  one  thing  is  needful.  At  five  I preached  in  the 
room,  on.  To  fear  the  Lord,  that  is  wifdom,  and 
to  depart  from  evil,  is  underfianding. 

Mond.  13.  I befpoke  the  cabin  in  a fltip 
bound  for  Dublin,  which  only  waited  for  a wind. 
About  ten  at  night,  word  was  brought,  that  Ihe 
was  ready  to  fail.  We  went  down  to  the  key 
immediately,  and  found  Ihe  had  failed  out  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  before,  and  was  then  off  at 
fea.  As  another  fliip  had  juft  weighed  anchor, 
we  went  on  board,  and  failed  without  delay. 
But  having  contrary  winds,  it  was  Frid.  17,  in  the 
evening  before  we  reached  Dublin. 

Thehoufe  here  is  nearly  of  the  fame  fize,  and 
of  the  fame  form  with  that  at  Newcaftle.  But 
having  deep  galleries  on  three  fides,  it  will  con- 
tain a larger  number  of  people. 

Sund.  19.  I preached  at  five  and  eight,  but  not 
to  fo  large  a congregation  as  I expefted.  I was, 
greatly  fhocked  at  the  behaviour  of  the  congrega- 
tion in  St.  Patrick’s  church.  But  all  their  care- 
leffnefs  and  indecency  did  not  prevent  my  find- 
ing an  uncommon  bJefling.  Between  five  and 
fix,  our  houfe  was  nearly  filled  : but  great  part  of 
K 5 the 


[ 226  ] 


the  hearers  feemed  utterly  unawakened.  I mar- 
vel how  it  is,  that  after  all  our  labour  here,  there 
fhould  Hill  be  fo  little  fruit. 

Mond.  20.  1 learned  the  particulars  of  the  late 
riot.  Some  weeks  ago,  a large  mob  afi’embled 
one  evening,  broke  many  of  the  windows,  and 
had  juft  broke  into  the  houfe,  when  a guard  of 
foldiers  came.  The  chief  rioters  were  appre- 
hended and  tried.  But  ten  or  eleven  of  the 
jurymen  being  Papills,  frightened  the  twelfth,  fo 
that  he  did  not  contradidt,  when  they  brought  in 
their  fellows,  not  guilty. 

Tuef.  2 1.  1 inquired  into  the  Hate  of  the  fo- 
ciety.  Hill  confiding  of  about  four  hundred  and 
twenty  members  ; though  many  had  been  much 
fliaken,  chiefly  by  various  opinions,  which 
fome  even  of  our  own  preachers  had  propa- 
gated. 

Thurf.  23.  We  went  to  fee  a friend  a few 
miles  from  Dublin.  Before  dinner,  Mr.  Cownly 
and  1 took  a walk  on  the  fea-fhore.  Being 
fomewhat  tired,  we  thought  to  return  a fhorter 
■way,  by  climbing  over  the  rocks.  We  found 
little  difficulty  at  firft:,  theafcent  not  being  deep 
toward  the  bottom.  But  as  we  went  higher,  it 
grevv  fteeper  and  fleeper,  till  we  wou'd  gladly 
have  gone  back  if  we  could.  But  we  could  nci- 
their  go,  nor  look  back ; fo  that  we  had  only 
this  choice,  to  get  quite  to  the  top,  or  to  make 
one  ftep  to  the  bottom.  The  flones  likewife  on 
which  w’e  Hood,  or  which  we  took  hold  of,  fre- 
quently 


[ 227  ] 

quently  gave  way,  and  tumbled  : fo  that  I know 
not  whether  we  were  ever  in  fo  much  danger 
on  the  fea,  as  we  were  now  on  the  fhore.  But 
in  half  an  hour,  I know  not  how,  we  got  upon 
firm,  even  ground. 

Sund.  26.  I met  one,  whom  I had  formerly 
feen  at  BriRol,  heaping  up  money  with  both 
hands.  And  he  has  now  all  that  the  world  can 
give.  But  he  enjoys  nothing  ; having  fuch  a con- 
tinual lownejs  oj /pirits,  as  they  call  it,  that  his 
very  life  is  a burden.  He  feems  partly  to  under,- 
Hand  his  own  cafe.  May  the  great  Phyfician  heal 
his  ficknefs ! 

Mond.  27.  I preached  in  Edinderry  at  one, 
and  at  Clofeiand  in  the  evening.  Tnef.  28.  I 

O 

preached  at  Portarlington,  though  I was  ex- 
tremely ill,  and  it  was  a pain  to  me  to  fpeak  : 
but  it  was  a comfortable  pain.  I could  from 
my  heart  praife  God  for  his  fatherly  vifi- 
tation. 

Wednef.  2g.  I rode  to  Mountnielick,  but  w'as 
fo  hoarfe  and  weak,  that  I could  only  preach  in 
the  houfe.  Prid,  31.  Being  not  well  able  to  ride, 

I borrowed  Mr.  P.^ ’s  chair  to  Tullamore  ; 

and  on  Saturday  reached  Cony-lough,  and  met 
many  of  my  friends  from  all  parts.  I now  found 
my  flrength  increafing  daily : it  mi^fl  be,  as  my 
day  is. 

Sund.  Aug.  2.  I baptized  Jofeph  Englilh, 
(late  a quakgr)  and  two  of  his  children.  Abun- 
dao«e  of  people  were  at  Tyrrel’s-pafs  in  the 
K 6 evening, 


[ 228  ] 

evening,  many  more  than  the  houfe  could  contain. 
At  five  in  the  morning,  one  who  had  tailed  of 
the  love  of  God,  but  had  afterwards  rclapfed  into 
his  former  fins,  nay,  and  funk  into  deifm,  if  net 
atheifm,  was  once  more  cut  to  the  heart.  At  fix 
in  the  evening,  I preached  at  Drumarca,  where 
many  now  know  in  whom  they  have  believed. 

Mr.  B r the  mini  Her  of  D met  me 

here,  the  laft  man  I fhould  have  expefled!  But 
itiannot  laft.  The  fame  perfon  cannot  long  ad- 
mire both  John  Welley  and  John  Taylor. 

Tuef.  14.  I preached  about  noon  at  Street,  to 
a civil,  unconcerned  congregation  ; and  about  fix 
in  the  evening,  at  Abidarrig,  a mile  Ihort  of  Ke- 
nagh.  Many  Romanids  being  prefent,  I found 
much  concern  for  them,  and  could  not  but  ad- 
drefs  myfelf  to  them  in  particular,  and  exhort 
them  wholly  to  rely  on  the  one  Mediator,  be- 
tween God  and  man. 

Wednef.  5.  We  rode  to  Athlone.  Thurf.  6. 
I preached  in  a large  open  place,  near  the  houfe, 
to  many  of  the  rich,  as  well  as  poor.  Satur.  8.  I 
called  on  a lively  man,  who  is  juft  married,  in 
the  ninety-fecond  year  of  his  age.  He  ferved  as 
an  officer  both  in  King  William’s  and  Queen 
Ann’s  wars,  and  a year  or  two  ago  began  to  ferve 
the  Prince  of  Peace.  He  has  all  his  faculties 
of  body  and  mind  intire,  works  in  his  garden, 
fome  hours  every  day,  and  praifes  God,  who  has 
prolonged  his  life  to  fo  good  a purpofe; 


Siind. 


[ 229  1 

Simd.  9.  At  eight  we  had  the  ufual  congrega. 
tion  in  the  inarket-houfe,  and  the  ufual  bleffing. 

jVIr,  G— preached  an  excellent  fermon  at 

church,  on  the  necelTity  of  the  religion  of  the 
heart.  At  five,  I preached  on  the  Connaught 
fide  of  the  river,  to  abundance  of  romanifts  as 
well  as  proteffants  ; all  of  whom  feemed  con- 
vinced, tliat  they  ought  not  any  longer  to  halt  be- 
tween two  opinions. 

Here  I learned  from  her  hufband,  that  Rofe 
Longworth,  found  peace  with  God  in  June, 
1749,  This  (he  never  loll,  and  often  rejoiced 
with  joy  unfpeakable.  From  that  time,  fhe  was 
always  remarkably  ferious,  and  walked  clofely 
with  God. 

About  Eafter,  1751.  She  found  a great  decay 
of  her  bodily  ftrength.  But  of  this  fhe  never 
complained,  being  only  concerned,  left  her  foul 
fliould  fnfter  lofs.  In  'July  following,  flie  was 
removed  into  the  country,  but  ftill  continued 
walking  in  the  light.  Toward  the  latter  end  of 
the  month,  apprehending  her  time  was  fhort,  fhe 
defired  to  return  to  Athlone.  On  Saturday  the 
21ft,  fhe  returned,  extremely  weak,  but  continu- 
ally praifing  God  ; and  all  the  following  week 
expreifing  a ftrong  defire  to  depart,  and  be  with 
Chrift. 

* Mr. adminiftered  the  facrament  to 

her  on  Sunday.  She  could  fpeak  little,  but  faid, 
fhe  had  no  doubt  of  her  falvation.  He  was 
deeply  affetfed,  and  faid,  he  believed  her;  but 

could 

I 

I 


C 230  ] 


could  fcarce  fpeak  for  tears.  When  fhe  could  not 
be  heard,  flie  had  her  eyes  conflantly  fixt  upward 
and  her  lips  moving.  In  the  afternoon  fhe 
fainted  away.  Coming  to  herfelf  fhe  faid,  “ Ah  ! 

I was  difappointed  ; 1 thought  I had  efcaped.” 
She  then  prayed  for  herhufband,  for  her  parents, 
for  the  fociety,  the  church,  and  the  whole  world. 
Fainting  again,  and  coming  to  herfeli,  fhe  cried 
out,  “See,  my  Redeemer  ! See,  my  Redeemer! 
See  how  his  blood  dreams  ! 1 iee  fhe  Latnb  in 
glory  ! I fee  the  Lamb  in  glory.  Fare  ye  well. 
God  be  with  you.  Fare  ye  well.”  She  then 
ceafed  to  fpeak.  ami.  went  to  GaL 

Mond.  10.  I preached  at  Aghnm,  and  foiuid 
the  people  m'tchaiive  to  God.  Tuef.  11.  1 rode 

over  to  Mr.  M ’s.  How  gracious  has  God 

been  to  this  family  ? Three  years  ago,  his 
yoLingen;  daughter,  after  fhe  had  received  a 
clear  fenfe  of  the  love  ef  God,  was  brought  to 
the  gates  of  death,  and  continues  dill  juft  on  the 
wing  for  eternity.  Flis  other  daughter  was  fud- 
denly  ftruck  laft  year,  and  after  having  witneft 
a good  confeflion,  to  all  that  were  round  about 
her,  went  to  God  in  the  ftill  triumph  o-f  faith. 

Some  months  dnce  Mr.  M ’s  brother  began 

to  decline  : and  two  or  three  weeks  ago,  full  of 
unutterable  peace  and  joy,  went  to  him,  whom 
his  foul  loved. 

Wed.  12.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Birr. 
I fcarce  ever  faw  fo  large,  fo  genteel,  and  fo 

feiious 


[ 231  ] 


ferious  a congregation  there  before.  The  next 
evening,  I reached  Limerick. 

I fpent  Friday  and  Saturday  in  conference  with 
our  preachers,  and  the  next  week  fpake  with 
each  of  the  members  of  the  focicty : many  of 
whom,  I now  found,  were  rooted  and  ground- 
ed in  love,  and  zealous  of  good  works. 

Frid.  2 1.  I rode  through  heavy  rain  to  Shro- 
nill,  and  to  Cork  the  next  day.  Sund.  23.  At 
eight,  the  houfe  would  not  near  contain  the 
congregation.  Yet  J judged  a fmall  congrega- 
tion with  peace,  preferable  to  a large  one  with 
noife  and  tumult. 

On  A'londay  and  Tuefdav,  I carefully  exa- 
mined the  fociety  ; put  away  thofe  who  did  not 
walk  according  to  the  gofpel,  and  found  about 
three  hundred  who  fill  ftrive  to  have  a confci- 
ence  void  of  offence  toward  God,  and_  toward 
man. 

^ Tuef.  25.  I preached  in  the  Market-place, 
at  Kinfale.  The  next  morning  at  eight  I walk- 
ed to  the  fort.  On  the  hill  above  it  we  found  a 
large,  deep  hollow,  capable  of  containing  two 
or  three  thoufand  people.  On  one  fide  of  this, 
the  foldiers  foon  cut  a place  with  their  fwords 
for  me  to  Hand,  where  I was  fcreened  both  from 
the  wind  and  fun,  while  the  congregation  fat  on 
the  grafs  before  me.  Many  eminent  finners 
were  prefent,  particularly  of  the  army.  And  I 
believe  God  gave  them  a loud  call  to  lepent- 
ance. 


la 


[ 232  J 


In  the  evening  I called  finners  to  repentance 
in  the  main  flreet,  at  Bandon.  On  Thurfdav 
and  Friday,  the  rain  drove  us  into  the  Market- 
houfe.  Indeed  I hardly  remember  two  dr)'  days 
together,  fince  1 landed  in  Ireland.  Saturday 
29,  I returned  to  Cork,  and  fpent  a comforta- 
ble day,  having  a ftrong  hope,  that  God  trill 
lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  down.  Monday  31. 
I rode  to  Clenmell.  A wide  door  was  open- 
ed here  a year  ago.  But  one  evening,  juft  after 
fermon  was  ended,  the  room  in  which  the 
preaching  had  been,  fell.  Two  or  three  per- 
fons  were  hurt  thereby ; for  which  reafon, 
(could  one  defire  a better  ?)  the  people  of  the 
town  vowed,  that  no  Methodift  fhould  ever 
more  preach  in  Clenmell. 

Tuefd.  Sept.  1.  I preached  at  Waterford. 
Only  one  poor  man  behaved  amifs.  His  cafe  is 
really  to  be  pitied.  Some  time  fince  he  had 
ftrong  defires  to  ferve  God,  and  had  broke  oft' 

his  outward  fins,  when  Mr.  , one  of  the 

prebendaries,  told  him,  “ He  did  very  wrong 
to  go  after  thofe  fellows,”  and  made  him  pro- 
mife  to  hear  them  no  more.  He  kept  his  word, 
and  turned  back,  as  a dog  to  his  vomit,  wallow- 
ing in  fin,  as  he  did  before.  But  he  does  not 
go  to  the  Methodifts  ; fo  all  is  well.  He  may- 
go  to  the  devil  and  welcome. 

Wed.  2.  At  eleven  Mr.  Walftt  began  preach- 
ing in  Irifh  in  the  Market-houfe.  It  being  m.ar- 
ket-day,  the  people  flocked  from  all  Tides,  many 

oi 


[ 233  ] 

of  them  ferioufly  attended.  A few  of  the  rabble 
curfed  and  fwore ; ’but  did  not  make  any  confi- 
derable  interruption. 

At  five  I went  to  the  Court-houfe,  and  began 
preaching.  But  the  mob  was  fo  numerous  and 
noify  that  few  could  hear.  Perceiving  the  noife 
increafe  more  and  more,  I walked  through  the 
midft  of  the  mob  to  my  lodgings.  They  hollow- 
ed and  fhouted  and  curfed  amain.  Hitherto 
could  they  come,  but  no  further. 

Thurf.  Sept.  14.  (So  we  mufi  call  it  now,  fee- 
ing the  new  ftyle  now  takes  place)  I rode  to  the 
bog  of  Boiree,  where  a great  and  effe£lual  door 
is  opened.  On  Friday  evening  we  rode  on  to 
Goree,  and  the  next  day  to  Dublin. 

Sund.  17.  I made  an  end  of  Mr.  V- 
^ay  on  the  happinefs  of  the  life  to  come.  I am 
glad  it  is  wrote  in  French.  Probably  not  many 
in  Ireland  will  be  at  the  pains  of  reading  it.  He 
is  a lively,  fenfible  writer.  But  I cannot  believe 
his  hypothefis,  while  I believe  the  bible, 

Mond.  18.  We  had  our  firft  watchnight  in 
the  new  houfe ; and  it  was  a night  that  will  not 
foon  be  forgotten.  On  Tuefday  I rode  to  Port- 
arlington,  and  the  next  day  to  Birr,  through 
fo  violent  a ftorm,  that  my  ftrength  was  utterly 
exhaufied,  and  how  I fhould  preach,  I knew 
not.  But  God  foon  renewed  my  llrength  , and 
on  Thurf.  21.  I arofe  lively  and  well ; and  in 
the  afternoon,  through  continued  rain,  came 
very  wet,  but  not  tired  to  Limerick, 


Sat, 


[ 234  ] 

Sat.  23.  We  reached  Cork.  Sund.  24.  In 
the  evening  I propofed  to  the  fociety,  the  build- 
ing a preaching-houfe.  The  next  day  ten  per- 
fons  fubfcribed  an  hundred  pounds ; another 
hundred  was  fubfcribed  in  three  or  four  days, 
and  a piece  of  ground  taken.  1 faw  a double 
providence  now  in  our  not  failing  laft  week.  If 
we  had,  probably  this  houfe  had  never  been 
built  : and  it  is  moll  likely,  we  fliould  have 
been  cad  away  : above  thirty  Ihips,  we  were 
informed,  have  been  loll  on  thefe  coads  in  the 
late  dorm, 

Sund.  Ocl.  1.  We  had  in  the  morning  at  St. 
Paul’s,  a drong,  clofe,  practical  fermon  ; and 
another,  at  our  own  cliurch  in  the  afternoon, 
delivered  in  an  earned,  affeftionate  manner. 
We  had  a folcmn  feafon  likewife  at. the  room ; 
fo  that  this  day  was  a day  of  joy  and  thank  fgiv- 
ing. 

The  wind  being  contrary  niIl,onMond.  3.  I rode 
once  more  to  Bandon.  But  though  Icame  un- 
expefied,  the  houfe  was  too  fmall  to  contain 
one  half  of  the  congregation.  So  I preached  in 
the  dreet  both  this  evening,  and  at  five  on 
Tuefday  mornirg  : the  moon  giving  us  as  much 
light  as  we  \can;ecl  till  the  fun  fuppllrd  her  place. 
I then  returned  to  Cork;  on  Frid.  6,  the  (htp 
being  under  fail,  we  took  boat,  and  came  to 
Cove  in  the  evening.  All  the  inns  being  full, 
we  lodged  at  a private  houfe.  But  we  found 
one  inconvenience  herein.  We  had  nothing  to 

eat  ; 


[ 235  ] 

eat : for  our  provifions  were  on  board,  and  there 
was  nothing  to  be  bought  in  the  town  : neither 
flefh,  nor  fifii,  nor  butter,  nor  cheefe.  At  length 
we  procured  fome  eggs,  and  bread,  and  were 
well  contented. 

Sund.  8.  We  were  called  early  by  the  pilot, 
and  told  we  inuft  rife  and  go  on  board.  We  did 
fo,  and  found  a large  number  of  paffengers:  but 
the  wind  turning,  moft  of  them  went  on  fhore. 
At  eleven  1 preached  to  thofe  that  were  left. 
About  fix  it  blew  a ftorm.  But  we  were  anchor- 
ed in  a fafe  harbour,  fo  it  neither  hurt  nor  dif- 
turbed  us. 

Mond.  9.  Finding  there  was  no  probabilty  o-f 

failing  foon,  we  went  up  to  Mr.  P ’s,  near 

paffage.  I preached  there  in  the  fireet  about 
four,  to  molt  of  ihe  inhabitants  of  the  town. 
They  behaved  very  quielty  ; but  very  few  feem- 
ed  either  convinced  or  affected. 

Tuef.  10.  We  had  another  violent  ftorm.  It 

made  Mr.  P ’s  houfe  rock  to  and  fro,  tho’  it 

was  a new,  ftrong  houfe,  and  covered  on  all 
fides  with  hills  as  well  as  with  trees.  We  after- 
wards heard,  that  feveral  flrlps  were  loft  on  the 
coaft.  Only  one  got  into  the  harbour,  but  griev- 
oufly  fiiattered,  her  rigging  torn  in  pieces,  and 
her  main-maft  gone  by  the  board. 

kVed.  11.  I rode  to  Corke  once  more,  and 
was  very  luliy  employed  all  the  dav.  I he  next 
morning  we  returned  to  Cove,  and  about  noon 
got  out  of  the  harbour.  We  immediately  found 

the 


[ 236  ] 

the  effefts  of  the  late  ftorm,  the  fea  ftill  boiling 
like  a pot.  The  moon  fet  about  eight,  but  the 
northern  lights  abundantly  fupplied  her  place. 
Soon  after  God  fmoothed  the  face  of  the  deep, 
and  gave  us  a fmall,  fair  wind.  * 

Frid.  13.  I read  over  Pafcal’s  Thoughts. 
What  could  polTibly  induce  fuch  a creature  as 
Voltaire,  to  give  fuch  a author  as  this  a good 
word  ? Unlefs  it  was,  that  he  once  wrote  a fa- 
tire  ? And  fo  his  being  a falirift  might  atone, 
even  for  his  being  a Chriflian. 

Sat.  14.  About  feven  we  failed  into  Kingroad 
and  happily  concluded  our  little  voyage.  Inow 
relied  a week  at  Briflol  and  Kingfwood,  preach- 
ing only  morning  and  evening. 

Sund.  22.  Having  heard  grievous  complaints  of 
the  fociety  in  Kingfwood,  as  if  there  were 
“ many  diforderly  walkers  therein,”  I made  a 
particular  enquiry.  And  I found  there  was  one 
member  who  drank  too  much  in  Jan.  or  Feb; 
laft.  But  I could  not  find  one,  who  at  this  time 
lived  in  any  outward  fin  whatever.  When  fhall 
we  be  aware  of  the  accufer  of  the  brethren  ? 
How  long  fhall  we  be  ignorant  of  his  devices  ? 
And  fuffer  him  by  thefe  loofe,  indeterminate  ac- 
ctifations,  to  make  our  minds  evil-affe£led  toward 
each  other  ? 

Wed.  25.  I rode  to  Wick,  and  rejoiced  over  a 
people  who  have  run  well  from  the  beginning. 
The  perfon  at  whofe  honfe  I preached,  was 
fuppofed  to  be  at  the  point  of  death.  But  eafe  or 

pain, 


[ 237  ] 


pain,  life  or  breath,  was  welcome  to  her.  She 
defired  indeed  to  depart,  and  to  be  with  Chrift. 
But  it  was  with  perfeft  refignation  ; her  will  be- 
ing fwallowed  up  in  the  will  of  him,  whom  her 
foul  loved. 

Thurf.  26.  The  remains  of  Elizabeth  Man, 
being  brought  to  the  room,  I preached  on, 
Blejfed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord.  How 
plain  an  inftance  is  here  of  grace  fo  changing  the 
heart,  as-to  have  no  trace  of  the  natural  temper  ? 

I remember  her  fretful,  peevifh,  murmuring, 
difcontented  with  every  thing.  But  for  more 
than  a year  before  Ihe  died,  God  laid  the  axe  to 
; the  root  of  the  tree.  All  her  peevifhnefs  and 
fretfulnefs  were  gone.  She  was  always  content, 
always  thankful.  She  was  not  only  conftant  in 
' prayer,  and  in  all  the  ordinances  of  God,  but  a- 
il  bundant  in  praife  and  thankfgiving.  Often  her 
I foul  was  fo  filled  with  love  and  praife,  that  her 
i body  was  quite  overpowered.  On  Sunday  morn- 
ji  ing,  fhe  faid,  “ I am  ftruck  with  death  ; her 
pains  were  violent  all  the  day.  But  they  inter- 
I rupted  not  her  prayer  and  praife,  and  exhortation 
j to  thofe  about  her,  till  about  three  in  the  morn- 
ing, having  finiflied  her  work,  fhe  was  fet  at 
liberty. 

Sund.  29.  W as  an  ufeful  day  to  my  foul,  I 
found  more  than  once  trouble  and  heavinefs  ; 
j but  I called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  he 
gave  me  a clear  full  approbation  of  his  way,  and 
j a calm,  thankful  acquiefence  in  his  will. 

I cannot 


[ 238  ] 

1 cannot'but  {land  amazed  at  the  goodnefs  of 
God.  Others  are  moft  adaulted  on  the  weak 
fide  of  their  foul.  But  with  me  it  is  quite  other- 
wife.  If  I have  any  ftrength  at  all,  Tand  I have 
none  hut  what  I have  received)  it  is  in  forgiving 
injuries.  And  on  this  verj'  fide  am  I alTaulted, 
more  frequently  than  on  any  other.  Yet  leave 
me  nothere  one  hour  to  myfelf,  or  I fball  betray 
myfelf  and  theel 

Mond,  30.  I rode  to  Salifhury,  and  in  the 
two  following  days, ‘examined  feverally  the  mem- 
bers of  the  fcciety,  and  on  Thurfday  left  them 
determined  to  hand  in  the  good  old  wav,  in  all 
the  ordinances  and  commandments  of  God. 

In  the  evening  I endeavoured  re-unite  the 
little  fcattered  flock  at  Winterhurn. 

Frid.  Nov.  3.  I rode  to  Reading,  and  on  Sa- 
tuiday  to  London. 

Mond,  6.  A remarkable  note  was  given  me  in 
the  evening  : it  ran  in  thefe  words  ; * “ James 
Thompfon,  bailor,  on  board  the  George  and . 
Mary,  a Sunderland  collier,  bound  for  Middle- 
borough,  in  September  lall,  met  with  a gale  of 
wind,  which  wrecked  heron  the  Baynard  bands, 
off  the  croaft  of  Zealand.  Here  every  fcml  perifh- 
ed,  favehimfelf,  who  was  for  three  days  and  three 
nights,  floating  on  a piece  of  the  wreck,  with 
another  man  dead  by  his  fide,  in  which  time 
the  poor  fufferer  had  loft  his  fenfes.  At  length 
he  was  taken  up  by  the  Dolphin  Packet,  and 
efcaped  fafe  to  land.  He  is  now  willing  to  re- 
turn 


[ 239  ] 

turn  hearty  thanks  to  God,  and  to  proclaim  his 
deliverance  to  the  Mmrld,  that  all  who  hear  it 
may  praife  the  Lord  for  his  goodnefs,  and  declare 
the  wonders  that  he  doth  for  the  children  of  men." 

In  the  remaining  part  of  this,  and  in  the  fol- 
lowing month,  I prepared  the  reft  of  the  books 
ior  ihe  Chrijiian  Library:  a work  by  which  I 
have  loft  above  two  hundred  pounds.  Perhaps 
the  next  generation  may  know  the  value  of  it. 

Mond.  Jan.  i.  1753.  ^ congregation 
met  at  four,  and  praifed  him  with  joyful  hearts 
and  lips,  who  had  given  us  to  fee  another  year. 

Tuef.  2.  I breakfafted  at  Ephraim  Bedder’s. 
How  ftrangeiy  diverlified  is  the  fcene  of  his  life  ? 
How  often  had  he  been,  both  outwardly  and  in- 
wardly in  the  deep  ! But  at  length  God  has  lift- 
ed up  his  head. 

Thurf.  4.  I vifited  one  on  the  borders  of  eter- 
nity, who  did  not  know  his  intereft  in  Chrift, 
Ohow  melancholy  is  it,  to  .leave  all  below,  un- 
lefs  we  have  an  earneft  of  a better  inheritance  ! 
How  can  any  reafonable  man  bear  the  thoughts 
of  death,  till  he  has  a profpeft  beyond  the  grave  ? 

Sund.  7.  I breakfafted  with  M Y — - — , 

an  uncommon  monument  of  mercy.  For  a long 
time  he  was  turned  back  as  a dog  to  his  vomit, 
and  wallowed  in  all  manner  of  wickednefs.  Yet 
his  wife  could  never  give  him  up,  nor  could  he 
ever  efcape  from  the  hell  within,  till  (he  faid  to 
him  one  day,  “ Go  up  flairs,  and  afk  of  God, 
and  you  know  not  but  he  may  yet  blefs  you.” 

He 


[ 240  ] 

He  went,  but  with  a dull,  heavy  heart,  and  ftay- 
ed  about  two  hours.  When  he  came  down,  fhe 
flared  upon  him,  and  faid,  “ What  is  the  mat- 
ter now  ? What  is  come  to  you  ? You  do  not 
look  as  you  did.”  He  anfwered.  “ No,  for  I 
have  found  the  Lord.”  And  from  that  hour  he 
has  endeavoured  to  walk  worthy  of  God,  who 
has  again  called  him  to  his  kingdom  and  glory. 

Mond.  15.  We  had  our  firft  watch-night  at 
Snow’s-fields.  Scarce  any  went  away  till  be- 
tween twelve  and  one.  How  is  it,  that  never 
any  one  in  England  or  Ireland,  has  been  hurt 
for  all  thefe  years,  in  going  to  all  parts  at  the 
dead  of  night  ? Are  not  the  hairs  of  our  head  all 
numbered  ? 

Sat.  20.  I advifed  one  who  had  been  troubled 
many  years  with  a flubborn  paralytic  diforder  to 
try  a new  remedy.  Accordingly  flie  was  ele£lri- 
fied,  and  found  immediate  help.  By  the  fame 
means  1 have  known  two  perfons  cured  of  an 
inveterate  pain  in  the  flomach  ; And  another  of 
a pain  in  his  fide,  which  he  had  had  ever  fmce 
he  was  a child. Neverthelefs,  who  can  won- 

der, that  many  gentlemen  of  the  faculty,  as  well 
as  their  good  friends,  the  apothecaries,  decry  a 
medicine  fo  fhockingly  cheap  and  eafy,  as  much 
as  they  do  quickfilver  and  tar-water. 

Sund  28.  A folemn  awe  fpread  over  the 
whole  congregation,  while  1 was  explaining  at 
Weft-flreet,  the  parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins  : 

More 


[ 24‘  ] 

More  efpeciaily  thofe  who  knew  they  had  not 
Oil  ih  their  lamps. 

Sat,  Feb.  3.  I vifited  one  in  the  Marfhalfea 
prifon,  a nurfery  of  all  manner  of  wlckednefs. 
O fhame  to  man,  that  there  fhould  be  fuch  a 
place,  fuch  a pi61ure  of  hell,  upon  earth  ! And 
fhame  to  thofe  who  bear  the  nameof  Chrift,  that 
there  fhould  need  any  prifon  at  all  in  Chrif- 
tendoml 

Thurf.  8.  A propofal  was  made  for  devolv- 
ing all  temporal  bufmefs,  books  and  all,  intirely 
on  the  ffewards  ; So  that  I might  have  no  cat^ 
upon  me  (in  London,  at  leallj  but  that  of  the 
fouls  committed  to  my  charge.  O when  fhall  it 
once  be  ! From  this  day  ? In  me  mora  non  erit 
uUa. 

In  the  afternoon  I vifited  many  of  the  fick  ; 
But  fuch  fcenes,  who  could  iee  unmoved  ? 
There  are  none  fuch  to  be  found  in  a Pagan 
■country.  If  any  of  the  Indians  in  Georgia  were 
fick,  (which  indeed  exceeding  rarely  happened, 
till  they  learned  gluttony  and  drunkennefs  from 
the  Chrillians)  thofe  that  were  near  him,  gave 
him  whatever  he  wanted.  Oh,  who  will  convert 
the  Englifh  into  honeft  Fleathens  ? 

On  Friday  and  Saturday,  I vifited  as  many 
more  as  I could.  I found  feme  in  their  cells, 
underground;  others  in  their  garrets,  halfffarved 
both  with  cold  and  hunger,  added  to  weaknefs 
and  pain.  But  I found  not  one  of  them  unem- 
ployed, who  was  able  to  crawl  about  the  room.  So 
VoL.  XXIX.  L wickedly, 


C 242  ] 

wickedly,  devilifhly  falfe  is  that  common  objec- 
tion, “ They  are  poor,  only  became  the^v'  are 
idle.”  If  you  faw  thefe  things  with  your  own 
eyes,  could  you  lay  out  money  in  ornaments  or 
fuperfluities  ? 

Sund.  11.  I preached  at  Hayes.  Here  we 
have  a fair  inftance,  of  overcoming  evil  with 
good.  All  but  the  gentry  of  the  parifh  patiently 
hear  the  truth.  Many  approve  of,  and  fome  ex- 
perience it. 

Thuf.  15.  I vifited  Mr.  S , flowly  re- 

•overing  from  a fevere  illnefs.  He  exprelf  much 
love,  and  “ did  not  doubt,  he  faid,  in  as  much,  as 
I meant  well,  but  that  God  would  convince  me 
of  my  great  fm,  in  writing  books  ; feeing  men 
ought  to  read  no  book  but  the  bible.”  I judged 
it  quite  needlefs  to  enter  into  a difpute,  with  a 
fea  captain,  feventy-five  years  old. 

This  day  Mr.  Stuart,  was  releafed.  For  two  or  . 
three  years  he  had  been  injlant  in feafon^  out  oj 
feafon  doing  the  work  of  an  evangelfl,  and  making 
full  p^oof  of  his  minijlry.  Three  or  four  weeks 
be  fell  ill  of  a fever,  and  was  for  a while  in  heavi- 
nefsoffoul.  Lafl  week  all  his  doubts  and  fears 
vanifhed,  and  as  he  grew  weaker  in  body,  be 
grew  ftrongcr  in  faith.  This  morning  he  expreft 
an  hope  full  of  immortality,  and  in  the  afternoon, 
went  to  God. 

Sat.  17.  From  Dr.  Franklin’s  letters  I learned ; 

1.  That  eleflrical  fire,  (or  ether)  is  a fpe*ies  of 
fire,  infinitely  finer  than  any  other  yet  known. 

2.  That 


C 243  ] 

2.  That  it  is  diffufed,  and  in  nearly  equal  pro- 
portions, through  alraoft  all  fubftances.  3.  That 
as  long  as  it  is  thus  diffufed,  it  has  no  difcernible 
effeft.  4.  That  if  any  quantity  of  it  be  collefted 
together,  whether  by  art  or  nature,  it  then  be- 
comes vifible,  in  the  form  of  fire,  and  inexpreffi- 
bly  powerful.  5.  That  it  is  effentially  different 
from  the  light  of  the  fun  ; for  it  pervades  a 
thoufand  bodies,  which  light  cannot  penetrate, 
and  yet  cannot  penetrate  glafs,  which  light  per- 
vades fo  freely.  6.  That  lightning  is  no  other 
than  eledlrical  fire  collefted  by  one  or  more 
clouds.  7.  That  all  the  effeSs  of  lightning  may' 
be  performed,  by  the  artificial  eleftric  fire.  8. 
That  any  thing  pointed,  as  a fpire  or  tree,  at- 
trafts  the  lightning,  juft  as  a needle  does  the 
eleftrlcal  fire.  9.  That  the  eleftrical  fire,  dif« 
charged  on  a rat  or  a fowl,  will  kill  it  inftant- 
ly  ; but  difcharged  on  one  dipt  in  water,  will 
Aide  off,  and  do  it  no  hurt  at  all.  In  like  man- 
ner the  lightning  which  will  kill  a man  in  a mo- 
ment, will  not  hurt  him,  if  he  be  throughly 
wet.  What  an  amazing  fcene  is  here  opened, 
for  after-ages  to  improve  upon  ! 

Wed,  21.  I vifited  more  of  the  poor  fick. 

’ The  induftry  of  many  of  them  furprized  me. 

' Several  who  were  ill  able  to  walk,  were  never- 
thelefs  at  work  : fome  without  any  fire  (bitterly 
cold  as  it  was)  and  fome,  I doubt,  without  any 
food  : yet  not  without  that  meat  which  endureth 
' to  everl'ajling  life. 

" ' L 2 Mond. 

IK  . 

t 


Mond.  26.  I fet  out  in  the  machine  for  Brif-  j 
tol ; and  on  Tuefday  evening  preached  at  Bath. 

Wed,  28.  We  rode  to  Briftol.  1 now  looked 
over  Mr.  Prince’s  Chridian  hiftory.  What  an 
amazing  difference  is  there,  in  the  manner 
wherein  God  has  carried  on  his  work  in  Eng- 
land and  in  America!  There,  above  an  hundred 
of  the  eflablinred  clergy,  m.en  of  age  and  experi- 
ence, and  of  the  greateft  note  for  fenfe  and  learn- 
ing in  thofe  parts,  are  zealoufly  engaged  in  the  work.  , 
Here,  almoftthe  whole  body  of  the  aged,  experi-  ' 
enced,  learned  clergy  are  zealoufly  engaged  a- 
gainftit;  and  few  but  a handful  of  raw,  young  ; 
inen  engaged  in  it,  without  name,  learning,  or  | 
eminent  fenfe  I And  yet  by  that  large  number  of 
honourable  men,  the  work  feldom  flouriflied  a- 
'bove  fix  months  at  a time,  and  then  followed  a 
lamentable  and  general  decay,  before  the  next  1 
revival  of  it:  w’hereas  that  which  God  hath  | 
WTOLight  by  thefe  defpifed  inflruments,  has  con-  ■ 
tinually  increafed  for  fifteen  years  together  : 
and  at  whatever  time  it  has  declined  in  any  one 
place,  has  more  eminently  flourifhed  in  others.  , 
Mond.  March  5.  I called  on  Mr.  Farley,  and 
faw  a plain  confutation  of  that  vulgar  error,  that  ! 
confumpiions  are  not  catching.  He  caught  the 
confumption  from  his  fon,  whereby  he  foon  fol-  t 
lowed  him  to  the  grave. 

"Wed.  14.  I preached  at  Frome,  a dr\' barren,  un-  ■ 
comfortable  place.  The  congregation  at  Shafifburv 
in  the  evening  were  of  a more  excellent  Spirit.  . 

Frid.  16.  I returned  to  Briftol.  And,  on  1 

Mond, 


[ 245  ] 

Mond.  19.  Set  eut  with  my  wife  for  the 
North.  I preached  in  the  evening  at  Wallbridge 
near  Stroud  ; the  houfe  being  too  fmall,  many 
flood  without : but  neither  before  nor  after 

preaching,  (much  lefs  while  I was  fpeaking)  did 
I hear  the  found  of  any  voice  ; no,  nor  of  any 
foot  ; in  fo  deep  a filence  did  they  both  come, 
hear,  and  go  away. 

Tuefd.  20.  I preached  in  the  Town-hall  at 
Evefham  At  the  upper  end  of  the  room,  a 
large  body  of  people  were  flill  and  attentive. 
Mean  time  at  the  lower  end,  many  were  walk- 
ing to  and  fro,  laughing  and  talking,  as  if  they 
had  been  in  Weftminfler-Abbey. 

Wed.  21.  After  dinner,  abundance  of  rabble 
gathered  near  the  Town- hall,  having  procured 
an  engine,  which  they  exercifed  on  all  that  came 
in  their  way.  So  I gave  them  the  ground,  and 
preached  at  our  own  room,  in  great  quietnefs. 

Thurf.  22.  I rode  to  Birmingham.  A few 
poor  wretches,  1 found,  had  occafioned  fredt 

difiurbance  here.  The  chief  was  Sarah  B- , 

with  whom  I talked  at  large. 

Sat.  24.  She  faid,  “ I am  in  heaven,  in  the 
fpirit.  But  I can  fpeak  in  the  flefli.  I am  not 
that  which  appears,  but  that  which  difappears. 
I always  pray,  and  yet  I never  pray.  For  what 
can  1 pray  for  ? I have  all.”  I afked,  “ Do  not 
■ you  pray  for  Tinners  ?”  She  faid,  no,  “ I know 
no'finners,  but  one.  I know  but  two  in  the 
world.  God  is  one,  and  the  devil  is  the  other.” 
L 3 I afked, 


[ 2^6  ] 

I afked,  “ Did  not  Adam  fm  of  old  ? And  do  not 
adulterers  and  murderers  fin  now,”  She  replied, 
“ No,  Adam  never  finne  d.  And  no  man  fins 
now.  It  is  only  the  devil.”  “ And  will  no  man 
ever  be  damned?”  “ No  man  ever  will.” 
" Nor  the  devil  ?”  “ I am  not  fure,  but  I be- 
lieve not.”  “ Do  you  receive  the  facrament  ?” 
" No  ; I do  not  want  it.”  Is  the  word  of  God 
your  rule  ? “ Yes ; the  word  made  llefh ; but 
not  the  letter.  I am  in  the  fpirit.” 

Sund.  25.  Upon  enquiry,  I found  thefe  wild 
enthufialls  were  fix  in  all,  four  men  and  two 
women.  They  had  firft  run  into  the  height  of 
antinomianifin,  and  then  w'ere  given  up  to  the 
Ijpirit  of  pride  and  blafphemy. 

We  reached  Bilbrook  in  the  evening,  and  a 
little  before  fix,  on  Monday  26,  Poole,  near 
Nantwich.  I was  pretty  much  tired,  but  foon 
recovered  my  ilrength,  and  explained  to  a feri- 
ous  people,  I determined  not  to  know  any  thing 
but  Jefus  Chrijl^  and  him  crucified. 

Tuef.  27.  We  rode  to  Chefter,  where  we 
found  the  feene  quite  changed,  fince  I was 
here  before.  There  is  no  talk  of  pulling  down 
houfes.  The  prefent  mayor,  being  a man  of  cour- 
age as  w'^ell  as  honefty,  w'ill  fuffer  no  riot  of  any 
kind,  fo  that  there  is  peace  through  all  the  city. 

Wed.  28.  The-houfe  was  full  of  ferious  hear- 
ers at  five.  In  the  evening  fome  gay  young 
men  made  a little  diflurbance  ; and  a large  mob 
was  gathered  about  the  door.  Butin  a fliorttime, 

they 


C 247  ] 


they  drfperfed  of  themfelves.  However  we 
thought  it  heft  to  acquaint  the  mayor  with  what 
had  pail;  on  which  he  ordered  the  city  crier, 
to  go  down  the  next  evening  and  proclaim,  that 
all  riots  Ihould  be  feverely  puniflied  : and  pro- 
mifed,  if  need  were,  to  come  down  himfelf,  and 
read  the  aft  of  parliament.  But  it  needed  not. 
After  his  mind  was  known,  none  was  fo  hard^ 
as  to  make  a difturbance. 

I did  not  expeft  the  mob  at  Nantwicb,  (whi- 
ther I was  now  much  prefl  to  go)  would  be  fo 
quiet  as  that  at  Chefter.  We  were  faluted  with 
curfes  and  hard  names,  as  foon  as  we  entered 
the  town.  But  from  the  time  I alighted  from 
my  horfe,  I heard  no  one  give  us  an  ill  word. 
And  I had  as  quiet  and  attentive  an  audience,  as 
we  ufe  to  have  at  Brillol,  while  I exhorted  the 
zvicked  to  forfake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous 
man  his  thoughts. 

Sat.  31.  I preached  at  Boothbank,  %vhere  I 

met  Mr.  C , (late  gardiner  to  the  Earl  of 

W .)  Surely  it  cannot  be  ! Is  it  poffible, 

the  Ear!  fliould  turn  off,  an  honeft,  diligent, 
well  tried  fervant,  who  had  been  in  the  family 
above  fibv  years,  for  no  other  fault  than  “ hear- 
ing the  Methodijls  1” 

In  the  evening  I preached  at  Manchefler,  and 
on  Monday,  Apnl  2,  at  Davy-holme.  Here  I 
found  (what  I had  nev'er  heard  of  in  England)  a 
whole  clan  of  infidel  peafants.  A neighbouring 
ale-hoLifekeeper  drinks,  and  laughs,  and  argues 
L 4 into 


[ =48  ] 


into  deifin,  all  the  ploughmen  and  dairy-men 
he  Can  light  on.  But  no  mob  lifes  againft  him. 
And  reafon  good.  Satan  is  not  divided  againft 
himfeif. 

Wed.  4.  I made  an  end  of  examining  the  fo- 
ciety  at  Mancheder,  among  whom  were  feven- 
leen  of  the  dragoons.  It  is  remarkable,  that 
(hcfe  were  in  the  fame  regiment  with  John 
Haime  in  Flanders.  But  they  utterly  depifed 
both  him  and  his  mader,  till  they  removed  to 
Mancheder.  Here  it  was,  that  one  and  another, 
dropt  in,  he  fcarce  knew  why,  to  hear  the 
preaching.  And  they  now  are  a pattern  of  feri- 
oufnefs,  zeal,  and  all  holy  converfation. 

Thurf.  5.  I rode  to  Bolton,  and  found  the  fo- 
ciety  jud  double  to  what  it  was,  when  1 was  here 
lad.  And  they  are  increafed  in  grace,  no  lefs 
than  in  number,  walking  clofely  with  God,  lov- 
ingly and  circumfpe£Uy  with  one  another,  and 
wifely  toward  thole  that  are  without. 

Sat.  7.  I rode  to  Chipping.  Sund.  8.  As 
foon  as  we  came  into  the  ide  of  the  church  from 
the  vedry,  a man  (fince  dead)  ihrud  himfeif  be- 
tween Mr.  Milner  and  me,  and  faid,  “ You 
fhall  not  go  into  the  pulpit.'*  “ I told  him,  “ I 
am  only  going  into  the  delk.”  He  fatd,  “ But 
you  fhall  not  go  there  neither,”  and  pufhed  me 
back  by  main  drength.  Eight  or  ten  noify  men 
joined  with  him  quickly,  and  fct  themfelves  in 
battle  array.  Fearing  fome  might  take  fire  on  the 
other  fide,  I defired  Mr.  Milner,  to  begin  the 

fervice. 


[ 2^9  ] 

fervice.  After  prayers  (for  he  had  no  fermon  with 
him]  great  part  of  the  congregation  followed  us 
to  the  vicaridge.  They  came  thither  again  after 
the  evening  fervice.  And  God  made  them  large 
amends  for  their  little  difappoi  ntment  in  the 
morning. 

Mond.  g.  Mr.  Milner  rode  with  us  to  Kendal. 
I preached  there  in  a large  convenient  room  ; 
(ihe  weather  not  allowing  me  to  preach  abroad) 
where  Mr.  Ingham’s  fociety  ufed  to  meet.  I was  a 
little  dlfgufled  at  their  manner  of  coming  in  and 
fitting  down,  without  any  pretence  to  any  previ- 
ous prayer  or  ejaculation  ; as  well  as  at  their 
fitting  during  the  hymn,  which  indeed  not  one 
(though  they  know  the  tune)  fungwithme.  But 
it  was  far  otherwife  after  fermon : for  God  fpake 
in  hi.'  word.  At  the  fecond  hymn  every  perfon 
Hood  up,  and  moft  of  them  fang  very  audibly'. 
And  greatefi  part  of  the  fociety  followed  us  to 
our  inn.  Nor  did  they  leave  us,  till  we  v/ent  to 
reft. 

Tuef.  10.  We  breakfafled  at  Amblefide,  where 
our  landlord  appeared  quite  open  to  convi6fion. 
We  fpoke  plainly  to  him,  prayed  with,  and  left 
him  full  of  defire  and  thankfulnefs.  Soon  after 
we  loft  our  way,  in  a vehement  fiiower  of  fnow, 
but  recovered  it  in  about  an  hour,  and  got  over 
the  mountains  fafe.  The  woman  of  the  houfe 
where  we  dined,  feemed  to  be  one  (hat  feared 
God  greatly.  Yet  when  I fpake  of  being  faved 
by  fal;h  file  appeared  to  be  utterly'  aftonifiied. 

L 5 About 


C 250  ] 

About  fix,  after  feveral  heavy  fhowers,  we  came 
moderately  weary,  to  Whitehaven. 

Wed.  11.  Upon  examining  the  focietv  I 
found  that  the  love  of  many  was  waxed  cold. 
Nev'erthelefs  1 found  a confiderable  number,  who 
appeared  to  be  growing  in  grace.  But  furely  here 
above  any  other  place  in  England,  God  hath 
chofen  the  poor  of  tills  zvorld.  In  comparifon  of 
thefe,  the  fociety  atNewcafile  are  a rich  and  ele- 
gant people.  It  is  enough,  that  they  are  rich  in 
faith,  and  in  the  labour  of  love. 

Sat.  14.  As  we  rode  to  Clifton,  John  Hamp- 
fon  and  I could  not  but  obferve  a little  circum- 
Itance.  A black  hail  cloud  was  driven  full  upon 
us,  by  a flrong  North-eafi  wind  ; till  beingjull 
over  us,  it  parted  afunder,  and  fell  on  the  right 
and  left,  leaving  us  untouched.  We  obferved 
it  the  more  becaufe  tliree  feveral  ftorms,  one 
after  another,  went  by  in  the  fame  manner. 

Sund.  15. 1 preached  in  the  afternoon  at  Coek- 
ermouth,  to  well  nigh  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
town.  Intending  to  go  from  thence  into  Scot- 
land, I inquired  concerning  the  road,  and  was  in- 
formed, I could  not  pafs  the  arm  of  the  fea, 
which  parts  the  two  kingdoms,  unlefs  I was  at 
Bonas,  about  thirty  miles  from  Cockermcuih, 
foon  after  nvc  in  the  mornin  j.  At  fir*.  I dioutrht 
of  taking  an  hour  or  two’s  llcep,  and  fefing  out 
at  eleven  or  twelve.  But  upon  farther  confidera- 
tion  we  chofe  to  take  out  journey  fiifl,  and  reft 
afterward.  So  we  took  horfe  about  feven,  and 

having 


[ 2J1  ] 

liav'ing  a calm  moondiiny  night,  reached  Bonas 
before  one.  After  two  or  three  hours  deep,  we 
fet  out  again,  without  any  faintnefs  or  drowfi- 
nefs. 

Our  landlord,  as  he  was  guiding  us  over  the 
fands,  very  innocently  afked,  “ How  much  a year 
we  got  by  preaching  thus?”  This  gave  me  an 
opportunity  of  explaining  to  him  that  kind  ot 
gain,  which  he  feemed  utterly  a ftranger  to.  He 
appeared  to  be  quite,  amazed,  and  fpake  not  one 
word,  good  or  bad,  till  he  took  his  leave. 

Prefently  after  he  went,  my  mare  ftuck  faft  in 
a quagmire,  which  was  in  the  midft  of  the  high 
road.  But  wc  could  well  excufe  this.  For  the  road 
all  along,  for  near  fifty  miles  after,  was  fuch  as  I 
never  faw  any  natural  road,  either  in  England  or 
Ireland;  nay,  far  better,  notwithftanding  the 
continued  rain,  than  the  turnpike  road  between 
London  and  Canterbury. 

W e dined  at  Dumfries,  a clean  well-built  town, 
having  two  of  the  moff  elegant  churches  (one  at 
each  end  of  the  town)  that  I have  feeri.  We 
reached  Thorny-hill  in  the  evening.  What  mi- 
ferable  accounts  pafs  current  in  England,  of  th.e 
inns  in  Scotland  ? Yet  here,  as  well  as  wherever 
we  called  in  our  whole  journey,  we  had  not  only 
every  thing  we  wanted,  but  every  thing  readily 
and  in  good  order,  and  as  clean  as  I ever 
defire. 

Tuef.  17.  We  fet  out  about  four,  and  rode 
L 6 over' 


[ 2^2  ] 


over  feveral  liigh,  but  extreamly  pleafant  mbuR- 
tains,  to  Lead-hill,  a village  of  miners,  refem- 
biing  Placey,  near  Newcaftle.  We  dined  at  a 
village  called  Lefmahaggy,  and  about  eigVit  m 
the  evening  reached  Glafgow.  A gentleman  who 
had  overtaken  us  on  the  road,  fent  one  with  us 
to  Mr.  Gillls’s  houfe. 

Wednef.  i8.  I walked  over  the  city,  which  I 
take  to  be  as  large  as  NewcafUe-upon-Tyne.  The 
univeiTity  (like  that  of  Dublin)  is  only  one  col- 
lege, confining  of  two  fraall  fquares  : I think  net 
larger,  nor  at  all  handfomer,  than  thofe  of  Lin- 
coln-college  in  Oxford.  The  habit  of  the  llu- 
dents  gave  me  furprize.  They  wear  fcarlet- 
gowns,  reaching  only  to  their  knees.  Moll  I faw'- 
were  very  rlirtv  ; fome  very  ragged,  and  all  of 
ver)'  coarfe  cloth.  The  high  church  is  a fine 
building.  The  outfide  is  equal  to  that  of  moll 
cathedrals  in  England.  But  it  is  miferablv  de- 
faced within,  having  no  form,  beautv,  or  fymine- 
try  left. 

* At  feven  in  the  evening,  Mr.  G.  began  the 
fervice  at  his  own  (the  college)  church.  It  was  fo 
full  before  1 came,  that  I could  not  get  in,  with- 
out a good  deal  of  difficulty.  After  finging  and 
prayer,  he  explained  a part  of  the  catechifm» 
which  he  flrongly  and  affe£Honately  applied. 
After  fermon  he  prayed  and  fung  again,  and 
concluded  with  the  bleffing. 

He  then  gave  out,  one  after  another,  four 
hymns,  which  about  a dozen  young  men  fung. 

He 


[ 253  ] > 

He  had  before  defired  tbofe  wi}0  were  fo  mind- 
ed, to  go  aivay  ; but  fcarce  any  ftirred  till  all  was 
ended. 

Thurf.  19.  At  feven  I preached' about  a quar- 
ter of  a mile  from  the  town.  But  it  was  an  ex- 
tremely rough  and  bluftring  morning.  And  lew 
people  came  either  at  the  time  or  place  of  m\- 
preaching:  the  natural  confequence  of  which 
M'as,  that  I had  but  a fmall  congregation.  About 
four  in  the  afternoon,  a tent,  as  they  term  it,  was 
prepared,  a kind  of  moving  pulpit,  covered  with 
canvas  at  the  top,  behind,  and  on  the  fides.  In 
this  I preached  near  the  place  where  1 was  in 
the  morning,  to  near  fix  ti.mes  as  many  people  as 
before.  And  I am  perfuaded  what  was  fpoken 
came  to  fotne  of  their  hearts,  not  in  word  only, 
but  in  power. 

Frid.  20.  I had  defigned  to  preach  at  the  fame 
place.  But  the  rain  made  it  impraflicable.  So 
Mr.  G.  defired  me  to  preach  in  his  church, 
where  I began  between  feven  and  eight.  Surely 
with  God  nothing  is  impoffible ! Who  would 
have  believed  five  and  twenty  years  ago,  either 
that  the  minifier  would  have  defired  it,  or  that 
I firould  have  confented  to  preach  in  a Scotch 
kirk? 

We  had  a far  larger  congregation  at  four  in 
the  afternoon,  than  the  church  could  have  con- 
tained. At  feven  Mr.  G.  preached  another 
plain,  home,  affectionate  fermon.  Has  not  God 
{till  a'  favour  for  this  city  ? -It  was  long  eminent-* 

for 


[ 254  ] 

for  ferious  religion.  And  he  is  able  to  repair 
what  is  now  decayed,  and  to  build  up  the  wafte 
places. 

Satur.  2 1.1  had  defigned  to  ride  to  Edinburgh, 
but  at  the  defire  of  many,  I deferred  my  journey 
till  Monday.  Here  was  now  an  open  and  effec- 
tual door.  And  not  many  adverfaries:  I could 
hear  of  none  but  a poor  Jeceder,  who  went  up  and 
down,  and  took  much  pains.  But  he  did  not  fee 
much  fruit  of  his  labour  ; the  people  would  come 
and  hear  for  themfelves  ; both  in  the  morning, 
when  I explained,  (without  touching  the  con- 
troverfyj  Who JhaU  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  ej 
God’s  ded?  And  in  the  afternoon  when  I in- 
forced,  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  way  be found. 

Sund.  22.  It  rained  much.  Neveithelefs,  up- 
w’ards  (I  fuppofej  of  a thoufand  people  flayed 
with  all  willingnefs,  while  I explained  and  ap- 
plied, This  is  Life  eternal,  to  know  thee,  the  only 
true  God  and  Jifas  Chrijl  -whom  he  hath  font.  I 
was  defired  to  preach  afterwards  at  the  prifon, 
w'hich  I did  about  nine  o’clock.  All  the  felons 
as  well  as  debtors  behaved  with  fuch  reverence 
as  1 never  faw  at  any  prilon  in  England.  It  may 
be  fome,  even  of  thefe  fmners  will  occafion  joy 
in  heaven. 

* The  behaviour  of  the  people  at  church  both 
morning  and  afternoon,  i-  as  beyond  any  thing  I 
ever  faw,  but  in  our  congregations.  None  bowed 
or  curtfied  to  each  other,  either  before  or  after 
ihe  fervice  : from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of 

which, 


[ 255  ] 

which,  none  talked,  or  looked  at  any  but  the 
minifter.  Surely  much  of  the  power  of  godli- 
nefs  was  here,  when  there  is  fo  much  of  the  form 

flill. 

The  meadow  where  I flood  in  the  afternoon, 
was  filled  from  fide  to  fide.  I fpoke  as  clofely  as 
ever  in  my  life.  Many  of  the  ftiidents,  and  many 
of  the  foldiers  were  there.  And  I bear  them  wit- 
nefs,  they  could  bear  Jound  doBrine. 

Mond.  22.  I had  a great  defire  to  go  round  by 
Kilfythe,  in  order  to  fee  that  venerable  man,  Mr. 
Robe,  who  was  every  day  expefting  (what  his 
foul  longed  forj  to  depart  and  be  with  Chrif,  But 
the  continual  rains  had  made  it  imprafticable  for 
us,  to  add  fo  many  miles  to  our  day’s  journey. 
So  we  rode  on  flrait,  by  the  Kirk  of  Shots ; 
reached  Edinburgh  by  five  in  the  afternoon  ; 
lodged  at  Tranent,  and  on  Tuef.  24,  came  to 
Berwnck  in  good  time,  where  I preached  on  the 
bowling-green  at  fix.  The  wind  was  extremely 
fharp,  and  we  had  feveral  fhow’ers,  while  I was 
fpeaking.  But  I believe  fcarce  five  perfons  w’ent 
away. 

* Wednef.  25.  We  came  to  Alnwick,  on  the 
day  w'hereon  thofe  who  have  gone  through  their 
apprenticefiiip  are  made  free  of  the  coi  jioration. 
Sixteen  or  feventeen  we  were  informed,  were 
to  receive  their  freedom  this  day  : and  in  order 
thereto  (fuch  is  the  unparalleled  wifdom  of  the 
prefent  corporation,  as  w'ell  as  of  their  foref^ 
thers)  to  walk  through' a great  bog,  (purpofely 

preferved 


[ ^56  ] 


preferved  for  the  occafion  ; otherwife  it  might 
have  been  drained  long  ago)  which  takes  up  fome 
of  them  to  the  neck,  and  many  of  them  to  the 
breaft. 

Thurf.  26.  I fpokc  feverally  to  thofe  of  the 
fociety,  and  found  they  had  been  harrafl  above 
meahire,  by  a few  violent  predeftinarians,  who 
had  at  length  feparated  themfelves  from  us.  It 
was  well  they  faved  me  the  trouble ; for  I T:an 
have  no  connexion  with  thofe  who  will  be  con- 
tentious. Thefe  I rejeft,  not  for  their  opinion, 
but  for  their  fin  ; for  their  unchriflian  temper 
and  unchrillian  praflice;  for  being  haters  of  re- 
proof, haters  of  peace,  haters  of  their  brethren, 
and  confequently,  of  God. 

Satur.  28.  I returned  to  Newcaflle.  Sund.  29. 
I preached  at  Sunderland,  at  eight  and  at  twelve. 
As  we  were  riding  back,  the  wind  was  exceeding 
high.  But  as  we  entered  Newcafile  a fhower 
beean,  which  laid  the  wind,,  and  then  gave  place 
to  clear  funlhine.  I was  extreamly  weary  when 
we  came  in,  having  preached  four  times  on  Sa- 
turday. But  my  flrength  foon  returned,  fo  that 
the  whole  congregation  near  the  Keelmen’s- 
hofpital,  could  cliftinflly  hear  the  entire  fer- 
mon.  And  great  was  the  Lord  in  the  midft  of 
us. 

Thurf.  May  3.  I preached  at  Gatefhead-fell 
to  many  more  than  the  houfe  would  contain. 
The  fociety  here  was  increafed  when  I met  them 
lalf,  from  nine  or  ten  to  fixty  members.  Tliey 

are 


C 257  ] 

are  now  double  the  number,  and  I truft 
will  e’er  long  overtake  their  brethren  in  Kingf- 
wood. 

Mond.  7.  After  preaching  in  Durham  at 
noon,  I rode  on  to  Stockton,  and  took  my  ufual 
ftand  in  the  High-ftreet,  about  fix  in  the  even- 
ing. 

O 

Tuef.  8.  I rode  to  Robinhood’s-bay,  near 
Whitby.  The  town  is  very  remarkably  fituated: 
it  {lands  clofe  to  the  fca,  and  is  in  great  part 
built  on  craggy  and  fteep  rocks,  fome  of  which 
rife  perpendicular  from  the  water.  And  yet  the 
land  both  on  the  north,  fouth,  and  weft,  is  fruit- 
ful, and  well  cultivated.  I flood  on  a little  rifing 
near  the  key,  in  a warm,  ftill  evening,  and  ex- 
horted a multitude  of  people  from  all  parts,  to 
feek  the  Lord,  while  he  may  be  found.  They  were 
all  attention,  and  moll  of  them  met  me  again  at 
half  an  hour  after  four  in  the  morning.  I could 
gladly  have  fpcnt  fome  days  here,  But  my  ftages 
were  fixed.  So  on  VVed,  g.  I rode  on  to  York. 

We  had  a rough  falute,  as  I went  to  preachy 
from  a company  of  poor  creatures  in  the  way. 
But  they  were  tolerable  quiet  during  the  preach- 
ing. The  greateft  inconvenience  arofe  from  the 
number  of  people : by  reafon  of  wdiich  the 
loom  (though  unufualiy  high)  felt  as  hot  as  an 
oven. 

Frid.  1 1.  I rode  over  to  Rufforth,  and  preach- 
ed at  one  to  an  earneft  congregation.  ^ A young 

man, 


[ ^58  ] 


man,  remarkably  ferlous  and  well-behaved,  and 
rejoicing  in  his  firft  love,  who  fet  out  but  a ^e^v 
minutes  before  me,  was  thrown  by  his  horfe,  and 
(as  it  is  termed)  broke  his  neck.  Juft  at  the  in- 
ftant,  a perfon  going  by,  who  nnderftcod  the  cafe, 
took  held  of  him,  and  pulled  it  into  its  place.  O 
myftery  of  Providence  ! Why  did  not  this  man 
die,  when  he  was  full  of  humble,  holv  love  ? 
Why  did  he  live,  \.o  iurnjromtht  holy  command- 
ment  wdiichwas  then  w'ritten  in  his  heart? 

Satur.  12.  I obferved  a remarkable  change  in 
the  behaviour  of  aimoft  all  I met.  The  very  rab- 
ble were  grown  civil,  fcarce  any  one  now  fpeak- 
ing  a rude  or  an  angry  word. 

Sund.  13.  I began  preaching  at  feven,  and 
God  applied  it  to  the  hearts  of  the  hearers. 
Tears  and  groans  were  on  every  fide  among  high 
and  lo\v\  God  as  it  were,  bowed  the  heavens 
and  came  down.  The  flame  of  love  went 
before  him,  the  rocks  were  broken  in  pieces, 
and  the  mountains  flowed  down  at  his  pre- 
fence. 

I had  defigned  to  fet  out  for  Lincolnfhire  this 
morning.  But  finding  that  a day  of  God’s  power 
was  come,  I fent  one  thither  in  ray  place,  a.nd 
after  preaching  (as  I had  appointed)  at  Stanford- 
bridge,  and  at- Pocklington,  returned  to  \ork  in 
the  evening.  Let  us  work  together  with  him, 
when  and  where,  and  as  he  pleafes ! 

Every  night  while  I ftaid,  many  of  the  rich 

and 


[ m 1 

and  honourable  crouded  in  among  us.  And  is 
not  God  able,  even  of  thefe  jlones  tor aife  up  chil- 
dren to  Abraham  ? 

TImrf.  19.  I preached  at  Pocklington  again, 
and  rode  on  to  Whitglh-ferry.  It  rained  a great 
part  of  the  way,  and  juft  as  we  got  to  the  water, 
a furious  ftiower  began,  which  continued  above 
lialf  an  hour,  while  we  were  driving  to  get  John 
Haime’s  horfe  into  the  boat.  But  we  were  forced, 
after  all  to  leave  him  behind.  We  fet  out  from 
Whitgift  foon  after  four.  But  the  violent  rain 
which  attended  us  till  after  feven,  made  the  road 
fo  dirty  and  flippery,  that  our  horfes  could  very 
hardly  keep  their  feet : fo  that  it  was  nine  before 
we  reached  Epworth. 

Sund.  2».  We  had,  as  ufual,  moft  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  the  town  at  the  crofs  in  the  afternoon. 

I called  afterwards  on  Mr.  M and  his 

wife,  a venerable  pair,  calmly  haftening  into 
eternity.  If  thofe  in  paradife  know  what  pafles 
on  earth,  I doubt  not  but  my  father  is  rejoicing 
and  praifing  God,  who  has  in  his  own  manner 
and  time  accomplifhed,  what  he  had  fo  often  at- 
tempted in  vain. 

Mond.  21. 1 rode  to  Syke-houfe,  and  preached 
about  noon,  and  then  went  on  for  Leeds.  In  the 
afternoon  we  called  at  an  houfe  where  a com- 
pany of  rough,  butcherly  men,  exceeding  drunk, 
w'ere  curfing  and  fwearing  at  an  unufual  rate.  I 
fpoke  to  them,  in  fpite  of  German  prudence,  and 

they 


[ 26o  3 

they  were  not  only  patient,  but  exceeding  thank- 
ful. 

Tuef.  2 2.  Moft  of  our  preachers  met,  and  con- 
verfed  freely  together:  as  we  did,  morning  and 
afternoon,  to  the  end  of  the  week ; when  our 
conference  ended  with  the  fame  blelTing  as  it 
began.  God  giving  us  all  to  be  not  only  of  one 
heart,  but  of  one  judgment. 

This  week  I read  over  Mr.  Rimius’s  Candid 
Narrative.  It  informed  me  of  nothing  new.  I ftill 
think  feveral  of  the  inconfiderable  members  of 
that  commu'nilv  are  upright.  But  I fear  their  go- 
vernors wax  worje  and  worje,  having  iJuir  con- 
Jciencc  feared  as  with  an  hot  iron. 

Sund.  27.  I was  afraid  many  of  the  congrega- 
tion at  Birftal  would  not  be  able  to  Ijear.  But 
my  fear  was  needlefs.  For  my  voice  was  fo 
llrengthened,  that  even  thofe  who  fat  in  John 
Nelfon’s  windows,  an  hundred  yards  off,  could 
(as  they  afterwards  told  me)  diflinfUy  hear  every 
word. 

Tuef.  29.  I preached  at  Kighley,  where  the 
loving  fpirit,  and  exemplary  behaviour  of  one 
young  man,  has  been  a means  of  convincing  al- 

moft  all  the  town except  thofe  of  his  own 

boufliold. 

Wednef.  30.  I rode  to  Haworth,  where  Mr. 
Grimfliaw  read  prayers,  and  1 preached  to  a 
crouded  congregation.  But  having  preached  ten 
or  eleven  times  in  three  days,  befides  meeting 
the  focieties,  my  voice  began  to  fail.  Not  that  I 

was 


[ 26i  ] 

was  hoarfe  at  all ; but  I had  not  ftrength  to  fpeak. 
However,  it  was  reftored  at  Heptonftall  in  the 
afternoon,  fo  that  the  whole  congregation  could 
hear.  When  (hall  we  learn,  to  take  thought  only 
for  the  prefent  hour  ? Is  it  not  enough,  that  God 
gives  help  when  we  want  it  ? 

Thurf.  31.  1 rode  through  a delightful  vale  to 
General-wood,  near  Todmorden.  The  fun  was 
burning  hot  ; but  they  fet  up  a little  tent  for  me, 
refenibling  that  I had  at  Glafgow.  The  people 
Hood  or  fat  on  the  cjrafs  round  about.  The  after- 
noon  ^vas  the  hotell  I ever  remember  in  England : 
fo  'that  by  the  time  we  came  to  Bolton,  I was  fit 
for  nothing  but  to  lie  down.  Howevei  in  the 
evening  my  ftrength  was  renewed,  and  we  re- 
joiced together  in  God  our  Saviour. 

Satur.  June  2.  Hardly  knowing  how  to  give 
credit,  to  an  odd  fiory  which  I had  heard.  That 
one  of  our  preachers  was  accu domed  to  preach 
in  his  fleep,  I enquired  more  particularly  con- 
cerning it,  and  received  the  following  account. 
“ On  Erid.  May  25.  about  one  in  the  morning, 
being  then  fad  afleep,  he  began  to  fpeak.  There 
were  prefent  in  two  or  three  minutes  William, 
Mary,  Amelia  Shent,  John  Haime,  John  Hamp- 
fon,  Jofeph  Jones,  Thomas  Mitchell,  and  Ann 
Foghill. 

* He  fird  exhorted  the  congregation,  To Jing 
with  the  /pint  and  the  unde'Jlanding  al/o,  and 
gave  them  direflions  how  to  do  it.  He  then  gave 
out  that  hymn,  line  by  line, 


“ Come, 


f 262  ] 


“ Come,  holy,  Spirit,  heavenly  Dove, 

With  all  thy  quickning  powers,” 

pitching  the  tune,  and  fingingit  to  the  end.  He 
added  an  exhortation.  To  takt  heed  how  they 
heard,  “ Then  he  named  his  text,  1 John  v.  19. 
We  know  that  we  are  oj  God,  and  the  whole  world 
lieth  in  wickednejs.  He  divided  his  difcourfe  into 
fix  parts,  undertaking  to  fhew,  1.  That  all  true 
believers  are  oJ  God : 2.  That  they  know  they 
are  of  God:  3.  T\vAi  the  world  lieth  in  wicked- 
nefs.  4.  That  every  individual  who  is  of  the 
world,  is  in  this  condition.  5.  The  dreadful  end 
of  fuch.  He,  6.  clofed  with  an  exhortation  to 
thofe  who  were  oJ  God,  and  thofe  ^vho  were  of 
the  world.  • 

“ After  he  had  gone  through  two  or  three 
heads,  he  broke  off,  and  began  to  fpeak  to  a 
clergyman,  who  came  in  and  interrupted  him. 
He  difputed  with  him  for  fome  time,  leaving 
him  fpace  to  propofe  his  objeftions,  and  then 
anfwering  them  one  by  one.  Afterwards  he  de- 
fired  the  congregation,  now  the  diflurber  was 
gone,  to  return  thanks  to  God,  and  fo  gave  out 
and  fung 

‘‘  Praife  God  from  W'hom  pure  blefTings  flow.” 

“ When  he  had  done  preaching  he  defired  the 
fociety  to  meet : to  whom  he  firft  gave  out  an 

hymn. 


[ 263  ] 

hymn,  as  before,  and  then  exhorted  them  to 
love  one  another,  i.  Becaufe  they  bad  one 
Creator,  Preferver  and  Father,  2.  Becanfe  they 
had  all  one  Redeemer,  3.  Becaufe  they  had  all 
one  Sanflifier,  4.  Becaufe  they  were  walking  in 
one  way  of  holinefs,  and  3.  Becaufe  they  were  all 
going  to  one  heaven. 

“ Having  fung  a parting  verfe,  he  faid,  (as 
fhaking  each  by  the  hand)  “ Goodnight  brother; 
goodnight  fifter.  This  lafted  till  about  a quarter 
after  two,  he  being  laft  afleep  all  the  time.  In 
the  morning  he  knew  nothing  of  all  this, 
having,  as  he  apprehended,  flept  from  night  to 
morning,  without  dreaming  at  all.”  By  what 
principles  of  philofophy  can  we  account  for 
this  ? 

Mond.  4.  I rode  from  Manchefler  to  Chel- 
morton  in  the  Peak,  where  I preached  in  a 
little  meadow,  and  reached  Sheffield  in  the  even- 
ing. 

Tuef.  3.  I rode  over  to  Jonathan  Booth’s  at 
Woodfets,  whofe  daughter  had  been  ill  ni  a very 
uncommon  manner.  The  account  her  parents 
gave  of  it  was  as  follows. 

* About  the  middle  of  December,  1732,  Eli- 
zabeth Booth,  junior,  near  ten  years  old,  began 
to  complain  of  a pain  in  her  bread,  which  conti- 
nued three  days  : on  the  fourth  day,  in  a mo- 
ment, without  any  provocation,  fhe  began  to  be 
in  a vehement  rage,  reviling  her  mother,  and 
throwinff  at  the  maid  what  came  next  to  hand. 
^ This 


[ 264  ] 

This  fit  continued  near  an  hour.  Then  in  an 
inftant  flie  was  quite  calm.  The  next  morning 
(he  fell  into  a fit  of  another  kind,  being  ftretched 
out,  and  ftiff  as  a dead  carcafe.  Thus  fhe  lay 
about  an  hour.  In  the  afternoon  fhe  was  fud- 
denly  feized  with  violent  involuntary  laughter  : 
and  file  had  fome  or  other  of  thefe  fits  feveral 
limes  a-day,  for  about  a month.  In  the  intervals 
of  them  fhe  was  in  great  heavinefs  of  foul,  and 
continually  crying  for  mercy  : till  on  Saturday, 
as  file  lay  flretched  out  on  the  bed,  flie  broke  out, 
“ I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth.”  Her  faith 
and  love  increafed from  that  time:  but  fo  did  the 
violence  of  her  fits  alfo.  And  often  while  fhe 
was  rejoicing  and  praifing  God,  (he  would  cry 
out,  O Lord  ! and  lofing  her  fenfes  at  once,  lie 
as  dead,  or  laugh  violentl)',  or  rave  and  blaf- 
pheme.” 

“ In  the  middle  of  February  fhe  grew  more 
outrageous  than  ever.  She  frequently  flrove  to 
throw  heiieli  into  the  fire,  or  out  of  the  window. 
Often  fhe  attempted  to  tear  the  bible,  curfing  it 
in  the  bitterell  manner.  And  many  times  fhe 
uttered  oaths  and  blafphemies,  too  horrid  to  be 
repeated.  Next  to  the  bible,  her  greatefl  rage 
was  againft  the  Methodijis,  Mr.  W.  in  particular. 
She  frequently  told  us  where  he  was,  and  what 
he  was  then  doing  : adding,  “ He  will  be  here 
foon  and  at  another  time,  “ Now  he  is  gallop- 
ing down  the  lane,  and  two, men  with  him.”  In 
the  intervals  of  her  fits  fhe  was  unufually  fiupid 
1 and 


C ] 

aftd  moped,  as  if  void  of  common  underftand- 
ing : and  yet  fom-etimes  broke  out  into  vehe- 
ment prayer,  to  the  amazement  of  all  that 
heard. 

“ Sometimes  (he  would  llrip  h^'felf  ftark 
naked,  and  run  up  and  down  the  houfe,  fcream- 
ing  and  crying,  “ Save  me,  fave  me.  He  will 
tear  me.  in  pieces.”  At  other  times  fhe  cried 
out,  “ He  is  tearing  off  my  breafts ; he  is  pour- 
ing melted  lead  down  my  throat.  Notv  I fuffer 
what  the  martyrs  fuffered.  But  I have  not  the 
martyrs  faith.” 

“ She  frequently  fpoke  as  if  Die  was  another 
perfon,  faying  to  her  father,  “ This  girl  is  not 
thine,  but  mine.  1 have  got  poffeffion  of  her,  and 
I will  keep  her  : with  many  expreffions  of  the 
fame  kind.” 

“ She  often  feemed  to  be  in  a trance,  and  faid 
file  faw  many  vifions  : fometimes  of  heaven  or 
hell,  or  judgment;  fometimes  of  things  which 
file  faid  would  fli'ortly  come  to  pafs.” 

“ In  the  beginning  of  March,  Mrs.  G.  came 
over  from  Rotherham,”  who  herfelf  gave  me 
the  following  account.  “ Soon  after  I came  in, 
ilie  fell  into  a raging  fit,  blafpheming  and  curfing 
her  father  and  me.  She  added,  “ It  was  I that 
made  Green’s  horfe  fo  bad  the  other  day 
(which  had  been  taken  ill  in  a moft  unaccounta- 
ble manner,  as  foon  as  he  was  put  into  the  liable} 
“ I did  it  that  thou  mighteft  have  the  preaching 
VoL.  XXIX.  M 


no 


[ 266  ] 


no  more,  and  I had  almoft  perfuaded  thee  to 
it.  It  was  I that  made  thee  bad  Jaft  night.”  I 
was  then  taken  in  an  unulual  way.  All  the  time 
/he  fpoke  Ihe  was  violently  convulfed,  and  ap- 
peared to  be  in  ftrong  agony.  After  about  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  fhe  brake  out  into  prayer, 
and  then  came  to  herfelf,  only  flill  dull  and 

John  Thorpe  of  Rotherham,  had  often  a de- 
fire  to  pray  for  her  in  the  congregation.  But  he 
was  as  olten  hindered,  by  a ftrong  and  fudden 
imprelTion  on  his  mind,  that  (he  was  dead. 
When  l.c  came  to  Woodfets,  and  began  to  men- 
tion what  a de.fire  he  had  had,  the  girl  being  then 
in  a raging  fit,  cried  out,  I have  made  a fool 
of  Thorpe,  and  burfl  out  into  a loud  laugh- 
ter.” 

“ In  the  beginning  of  May  all  thefe  fymp- 
toms  ceafed.  And  Ihe  continues  in  health  both 
of  foul  and  bodv.” 

Vv’^ed.  6.  It  being  flill  fuhry  hot,  I preached 
under  a liiady  tree  at  Barley-hall,  and  in  an  open 
place  at  Rotherham  in  the  evening.  On  Frid. 
8.  we  reached  Not;ingham.  Mr.  S.  met  us  here, 
and  gave,  us  a pleafiug  account  of  his  congrega- 

tionatS , coiitiunallv  increafing,  and  growing 

more  earned  and  more  fcandalous  every  day. 
At  iNoaingham  alfo  God  is  greatly  reviving  his 
work  and  pouring  water  upon  the  dry  ground. 

In  the  afternoon  I rede  to  ^.larkfield,  ssdiere 
I carefully  read  over  Mr,  Stinflra’s  IraR  upon 

fanaticifm. 


heavy 


[ 26;  ] 

f-dnatlcifiTi.  He  is  doubtlefs  a well  meaning 
man,  but  deeply  ignorant  of  the  fubjeft  he  treats 
of.  And  Ills  arguments  are  of  no  force  at  all  ; for 
they  prove  abundantly  too  much.  They  utterly 
overthrow  many  of  the  grand  arguments  for 
Chriftianity  : and  every  man  may  on  thofe  prin- 
ciples prove  the  apoftles  to  have  been  fanaticks 
to  a man. 

June.  lo.  being  Whitfunday,  the  church  con- 
tained the  congregation  tolerably  well.  After 
dinner,  a gentleman  who  came  from  Leicefter, 
eight  miles  off  invited  me  thither.  About  eight 
I preached  there,  in  a place  near  the  walls,  called 
the  Butt-CIofe.  The  people  came  running  toge- 
ther  from  all  jiaris  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor. 
And  their  behaviour  furprized  me  ; they  were 
fo  ferious  and  attentive,  not  one  offering  any  in- 
terruption. 

Mond  11.  We  rode  to  Woburn.  Tuef.  12. 
pronufed  to  be  an  exceeding  hot  day^  But  the 
clouds  rofe  as  foon  as  we  fet  out,  and  continued 
till  we  were  near  Market-Street.  The  fun  was 
then  burning  hot  fo  that  how  my  fellow-travellers 
would  get  forward,  I knew  not.  But  God  knew. 
As  foon  as  we  fet  out,  a cloud  arofe,  and  covered 
us  again.  The  wind  than  came  about  and  blew 
in  our  faces  : fo  that  we  had  a tolerable  cool 
ride  to  London. 

I found  the  town  much  alarmed  with  Mr. 

■ Rimiiis’s  narrative,  and  Mr.  Whitefield’s /eWer 
ll  to  Count  Z.  It  feems  indeed  that  God  is  haRning 
P Mg  to 

ll 


[ 268  ] 

to  bring  to  light  thofe  hidden  works  of  dark- 
nefs. 

Tuef.  ig.  Mr.Wh,  (hewed  me  the  letters  he  had 
lately  received  from  the  Count  Coffart,  P.  Beh- 
ler,  and  J.  H.  was  amazed.  Either  furious  anger 
or  fettled  contempt  breathed  in  every  one  of 
them.  Were  they  afhamed  after  all  the  abomina- 
tions they  had  committed  ? No  ; they  were  not 
afhamed.  Thev  turned  the  tables  upon  Mr.  Wh. 

C prote (ted  before  God,  he  had  never  made 

Lvnde  any  offer  at  all.  The  C — bluflered,  like 
himfelf  and  roundly  avered,  “ He  could  fay 

fomcthing if  he  would.”  J.  H.  faid  flat,  you 

have  “ more  than  diabolical  impudence  ; I be- 
lieve the  devil  himfelf  has  not  fo  much.” 

Sund.  23.  Mr.  Wallh  preached  at  Short’s-gar- 
den’s  in  Irifh.  Abundance  of  his  country-men 
flocked  to  hear;  and  fome  were  cut  to  the  heart. 
How.  many  means  does  God  ufe,  to  bring  poor 
wanderers  back  to  himfelf? 

Sund.  July  1.  He  preached  in  Irilh  in  Moore- 
fields.  The  congregation  v;as  exceeding  large, 
and  behaved  ferioufly  ; though  probably  many 
of  them  came,  purely  to  hear,  what  manner  of 
laniruap^e  it  wasi  Eor  tiic  fake  ofthefe,  he  preach- 
ed afterwards  in  Engliih,  if  by  any  means  he 
might  gain  fome. 

Tuef.  3.1  rode  over  to  Mr.  K — ’s  at  Tedington 
anifraelite  in  indeed.  Dr.  Hales  fent  after  dinner 
to  defire  our  company,  and  flrew'ed  us  feveral  ex- 
periments. 


[ 269  ] 


perlments.  How  well  do  philofophy  and  religion 
agree,  in  a man  of  found  underftanding  ? 

Sund.  8.  After  preaching  at  the  chappel  morn- 
ing and  afternoon,  I took  horfe  with  Mr.  P . 

We  had  defigned  to  ride  only  two  or  tht'ee 
hours,  in  order  to  fhorten  the  next  day’s  journey. 
But  a young  man  who  overtook  us  near  King- 
lion,  induced  us  to  change  our  purpofe.  So  sve 
only  relied  about  half  an  hour  at  Cobham  : 
and  leaving  it  between  nine  and  ten,  rode  on 
foftly  in  a calm,  moon-lhiny  night,  and  about 
twelve  came  to  Godalmin.  We  took  horfe  again, 
at  half  an  hour  pall  four,  and  reached  Portf- 
mouth  about  one, 

I was  furprized  to  find  fo  little  fruit  here,  after 
fo  much  preaching.  That  accurfed  itch  ofdifput- 
ing  had  well-nigh  deftroyed  all  the  feed  which 
had  been  fown.  And  this  vain  jangling,  they 
called  contendingfoT  the  faith  ! I doubt  the  whole 
faith  of  thefc  poor  wretches  is  but  an  opi- 
nion. 

After  a little  refi,  we  took  a walk  round  the 
town,  w'hich  is  regularly  fortified  ; and  is,  I fup- 
pofe  the  only  regular  fortification,  in  Great-Bri- 
tain,  or  Ireland.  Gofport,  Portfmouth,  and  the 
Common  (which  isktow  all  turned  into  fireetsjmay 
probably  contain  half  as  many  people  as  Briftol. 
And  fo  civil  a people  I never  faw  before,  in  any 
fea-port  towm  in  England. 

I preached  at  half  an  hour  after  fix,  in  a open 
part  of  the  common,  adjoining  to  the  New 
M 3 church. 


[ ®7o  ] 


thurch.  The  congregation  vas  large  andyvell  be- 
haved. Not  one  fcoffer  did  I fee,  nor  one  trifler. 
In  the  morning,  Tuef.  lo.  1 went  on  board 
an  hoy,  and  in  three  hours  landed  at  Cowes  in 
the  IJle  of  Wight  ; As  far  exceeding  the  IJle  of 
Anglefey,  both  in  pleafantnefs  and  iruiifulnefs,  as 
that  exceeds  the  rocks  of  Scilly. 

We  rode  flrait  to  Newport  the  chief  town  in 
the  ifle,  and  found  a little  fcciety,  in  tolerable 
order.  Several  of  them  had  found  peace  with 
God.  One  informed  me,  it  was  abont  eight 
years  ago  fince  file  firft  knew  her  interefl  in 
Chrift,  by  means  of  one  who  called  there  in  iiis 
way  to  Pennfylvania.  But  ha\i.ig  none  to  fpeak. 
to,  or  advife  w'ith,  (he  was  lonsj  tonnen:ed  with 
doubts  and  fears.  After  fome  years,  (he  re- 
ceived a frefh  manifeftation  of  his  love,  and  could 
notdoubt  or  fear  any  more.  She  is  now'  (and  has 
been  long)  confined  to  her  bed,  and  confuniing 
away  with  pining  ficknefs.  But  all  is  good  to  he", 
for  fhe  has  learnt,  in  every  thing  to  give 
thanks. 

At  half  an  hour  after  fix,  I preached  in  the 
market-place,  to  a numerous  congregation.  But 
they  were  not  fo  ferious  as  thofe  at  Portfmouth. 
Many  children  made  much  noife ; and  many 
grown  perfons  sverc  talking  aloud,  almoft  all  the 
time  I was  preaching.  It  was  quite  otherwife  at 
five  in  the  morning.  There  was  a large  congre- 
gation again  ; and  every  perfon  therein  feemed 

10 


[ 2Jl  J 

to  know,  this  was  the  word  whereby  God  would 
judge  them  in  the  laft  day. 

In  the  afternoon,  I walked  to  Carifhbrook- 
Caftle,  or  rather  the  poor  remains  of  it.  It  hands 
upon  afolidrockon  the  top  of  an  hill,  and  com- 
mands, a beautiful  profpeft.  d'here  is  a well  in 
it,  cut  quite  through  the  rock,  faid  lobe  feventy- 
two  yards  deep,  and  another  in  the  citadel,  near 
an  hundred.  They  drew  up  the  water  by  an  afs, 
which  they  affured  us  was  fixty  years  old.  But 
all  theflately  apartments  lie  in  ruins.  Only  jull 
enough  of  them  is  left,  to  (hew  the  chamber 
where  poor  king,  Charles  was  confined,  and  tlie 
window  through  which  he  attempted  to  el- 
cape. 

In  the  evening  the  congregation  at  Newport, 
was  more  numerous  and  more  ferious  tlian  the 
night  before.  Only  one  drunken  man  made  a 
little  difturbance.  But  the  mayor  ordered  him 
to  be  taken  away, 

Thurf.  12.  We  fet  out  early  from  Newport, 
and  crofs’d  over  from  Cowes  to  Southampton. 
In  the  afternoon  we  came  to  SalirDury,  and  on 
Saturday  rode  on  to  Shaftfbury. 

I preached  in  the  New-houfe  in  the  evening  ; 
on  Sunday  afternoon,  at  Deverel  Long-bridge, 
and  on  Monday  the  i6th  before  noon,  praifed 
God  with  our  brethren  at  Briftol. 

Tuef.  17.  At  their  earnell  defire,  I preached 
to  the  poor  colliers  confined  in  Newgate,  on 
account  of  the  late  riot.  They  would  not  hear 
M q the 


C 272  ] 

the  gofpel,  while  they  were  at  liberty.  God 
grant  they  may  profit  by  it  now. 

Wed.  18.  Wefet  out  for  the  Weft,  and  on 
Tiiday  20,  came  to  Plymouth- Dock.  I found 
much  hurt  had  been  done  here  by  the  bitter  zeal 
of  two  or  three  bigots  for  their  opinion.  Two 
years  ago  they  promifed  in  the  moft  folemn  man- 
ner, to  let  all  controverfy  alone.  But  quickly 
after  the  fire  broke  out  anew,  and  has  been  de- 
vouring ever  fince. 

Sat.  21.  I endeavoured  to  convince  them, 
that  they  were  deftroying,  not  promoting,  the 
work  of  God.  And  on  Sunday,  when  I fpake 
to  the  fociety  one  by  one,  they  fcemed  once 
more  aware  of  Satan’s  devices. 

* Mond.  23.  I rode  to  Launcefion,  and  had 
the  firft  general  meeting  of  the  ftewards,  for  the 
eaftern  part  of  Cornwall.  In  the  evening  I 
preached  in  perfeft  peace  ; a great  blefling,  if 
it  be  not  bought  too  dear  ; if  the  world  does  not 
begin  to  love  us,  becaufe  we  love  the  world. 

Tuef.  24.  In  the  road  to  Camelford;  I was 
taken  with  fuch  a bleeding  at  the  nofe,  as  1 have 
not  had  fince  ray  return  from  Georgia.  For  a 
mile  or  two  it  increafed  m.ore  and  more,  and 
then  at  once  flopped  of  iifelf.  So  I rode  on 
comfortably  (though  the  day  was  extremely  hot) 
and  reached  St.  Agnes  in  the  evening. 

On  Wed.  25.  The  ftewards  met  at  St.  Ives, 
from  the  weftern  part  of  Coinwall.  The  next 
day  I began  examining  the  fociety.  But  I was 

foon 


[ 273  ] 

loon  obliged  to  flop  fliort.  I found  an  accurf- 
ed  thing  among  them  : well-nigh  one  and  all, 
bought  or  fold  uncuftomed  goods.  I therefore 
delayed  fpeaking  to  any  more,  till  I had  met 
them  all  together.  This  I did  in  the  evening, 
and  told  them  plain,  either  they  muft  put  this 
abomination  away,  or  they  would  fee  my  face 
no  more.  Friday  27.  They  feverally  promifed 
fo  to  do.  So  I trull  this  plague  is  Hayed. 

Sat.  28.  After  preaching  to  the  little  flock  at 
Zunnor,  we  rode  on  to  St.  Juft,  and  found  fuch 
a congregation  at  fix  in  the  evening,  as  we  ufed 
to  have  ten  years  fince.  I did  not  find  any  focie- 
ty  in  the  county,  fo  much  alive  to  God  as  this. 
Fifty  or  threefcore  have  been  added  to  it  lately  ; 
and  many  children  filled  with  peace  and  joy  in 
believing. 

Sund.  29.  I preached  at  eight  to  a ftill  larger 
congregation,  and  in  Morv'a  at  one,  to  near  the 
fame  number.  Many  backlliders  were  among 
them  ; to  whom  I cried.  How  Jjiall  1 give  thee 
up,  Ephraim  ? Few  of  the  congregation  were 
uninoved.  And  when  we  wreftled  with  God 
in  prayer,  we  had  a ftrong  hope,  fte  would  not 
call  them  off  for  ever. 

About  five  I began  preaching  at  Newlin,  on 
part  of  the  gofpel  for  the  day,  Except  your  righ- 
teoujnefs Jhall  exceed  the  righteoujnejs  oj  the  Scribes 
and  Phari fees,  ye  Jhall  in  no  wife  enter  into  the 
kingdoju  (f  heaven,  * In  the  morning  I waked 
between  two  and  three.  I had  had  a loofenefs 
M 5 for 


[ 274  ] 

for  feveral  days.  On  Sunday  it  increafed  every 
hour : but  I was  refolved,  with  Go  d’s  help,  to 
preach  Avhere  I had  appointed.  I had  now, 
with  the  flux,  a continual  head-acli,  violent  vo- 
mitings, and  feveral  times  in  an  hour,  the  cramp 
in  my  feet  or  legs ; fometimes  in  both  legs  and 
both  thighs  together.  But  God  enabled  me  to 
be  throughly  content,  and  thankfully  refigned  to 
him.  I defired  one  to  preach  in  my  place  in 
Ligeon  at  noon,  and  at  Helflon  in  the  evening  ; 
and  another  on  Tuefday  noon,  at  Port-kellis  ; 
promifing,  if  I was  able,  to  meet  them  in  the 
evening. 

Tuef.  31.  After  living  a day  and  an  half  on 
claret  and  water.  I found  myfelf  fo  eafy,  that  I 
thought  1 could  ride  to  Crowan.  I found  no  in- 
convenience the  firll  hour.  But  in  the  fecond  my 
diforder  returned.  However,  1 rode  on,  being 
unwilling  to  difappoint  the  congregation,  and 
preached  on.  Be  careful  for  nothing.  I then  rode 
Itrait,  as  fall  as  I conv'eniently  could,  toMr.  Har- 
ris’s in  Cambourn. 

Wed.  Aug.  1.  At  half  an  hour  after  two  in 
the  morning,  my  diforder  came  with  more  vio- 
lence than  ever.  The  cramp  likewife  returned ; 
fometime  in  my  feet  or  hand  ; fometimes  in  my 
thighs,  my  fide,  or  ray  throat.  I had  alfo  a con- 
tinual licknefs,  and  a fenfation  of  fulnefs  at  my 
ftomach,  as  if  it  were  ready  to  burft.  1 took  a 
vomit  ^ but  it  hardly  wrought  at  all : nor  did 
any  thing  I took,,  make  any  alteration.  Thus  1 

continued 


[ 275  ] 

continued  all  day,  and  all  the  following  night : 
yet  this  I could  not  but  particularly  obferve,  I 
had  no  head-ach,  no  cholick,  nor  any  pain, 
(only  the  cramp)  from  firft  to  laft. 

Thurf.  2.  Perceiving  I gained  no  ground,  but 
rather  grew  weaker  and  weaker,  my  llomach  be- 
ing drawn  downward,  fo  that  I could  not  Hand, 
nor  lie,  but  on  my  right  fide  : 1 fent  to  Redruth 
for  Mr.  Carter,  who  came  without  delay.  Here 
again  I faw  the  gracious  providence  of  God,  in 
calling  me  on  fo  fenfible  .and  fkilful  a man.  He 
advifed  me  to  perfift  in  the  fame  regimen  1 was 
in,  and  prefcribed  no  phyfic,  except  afmall  dofe 
of  rhubarb.  But  even  this  (as  I expefted  it  would) 
was  thrown  up  again  immediately. 

I was  now  well  falisfied,  having  had  the  bed 
advice  which  could  be  procured  ; though  my  dif- 
order  continued  much  as  before.  But  about  five 
in  the  afternoon,  it  ceafed  at  once,  without  any 
vifible  caufe.  The  cramp  alfo  was  gone,  my  fto- 
mach  was  eafy,.  and  I laid.  down,  and  flept  till  fix 
in  the  morning. 

Frid.  3.  I began,  to  recover  my  flrength,  fo 
that  I could  fit  up  near  two  hours  together.  And 
from  this  time,  I felt  no  inconvenience ; only 
that  I could  not  talk,  nor  ffand  long  without  reft- 
ing. 

* Sund.  5.  In  the  afternoon  I rode  to  Red- 
ruth, and  preached  to  a large  congregation,  in  an 
open  part  of  the  ilreet.  My.  voice  was  low  ; but 
tlie  day  being  calm,  I believe  all  could  hear : 
M 6 and. 


C 276  ] 

and  after  I had  done,  I felt  myfelf  confiderably 
flronger  than  1 was  when  I begun. 

Mond.  6.  1 preached  in  Gwenap,  at  five  ; 
and  afterwards  faw  a firange  fight ; a man  that  is 
old  and  rich,  and  yet  not  covetous.  In  the  even- 
ing I preached  at  Penryn,  and  found  my  flrength 
fo  reftored,  that  I could  fpeak  loud  enough  to  be 
heard  by  a numerous  congregation;  and  thrice 
the  next  day,  at  Penryn,  Bezore,  (near  Truro) 
and  St.  Ewe. 

Wed.  8.  We  were  invited  to  Mevagizzy,  a 
fmall  town,  on  the  South  Sea.  As  foon  as  we 
entered  the  town,  many  ran  together,  crying', 
“ See,  tlie  Methodees  are  come.”  ’ But  they  on- 
ly gaped  and  flared ; fo  that  v.’e  returned  unmo- 
lefled  to  the  houfe  I was  to  preach  at,  a mile 
from  the  town.  Many  ferious  people  were 
waiting  for  us,  but  mofl  of  them  deeply  ignorant. 
While  I was  fhewing  them  the  firft  principles  of 
Chriftianity,  many  of  the  rabble  from  the  town 
came  up.  They  looked  as  fierce  as  lions;  but 
in  a few  minutes  changed  their  countenance  and 
flood  flill.  Toward  the  clofc,  fome  began  to 
to  laugh  and  talk,  who  grew  more  boiflrous 
after  I had  concluded.  But  I walked  flrait 
through  the  midfl  of  them,  and  took  horfe  with- 
out any  interruption. 

* On  Thurf.  9.  I rode  to  Port-Ifaac,  and  the 
next  dav  to  Trewaider,  The  little  fociety  here, 
meet  every  night  and  morning,  with  a preacher 

or 


[ 277  ] 

or  without.  And  whoever  comes  among  them, 
quickly  feels  what  fpirit  they  are  of. 

Sat.  11.  The  rain  fiopt  at  twelve,  and  gave 
me  an  opportunity  of  preaching  in  the  Market- 
place at  Camclford.  1 faw  only  one  perfon  in 
the  congregation,  who  was  not  deeply  ferious. 
That  one,  (which  I was  forry  to  hear)  was  the 
curate  of  the  parifh. 

Almoft  as  foon  as  we  fet  out,  we  were  met  by 
fuch  a fliower  of  rain,  as  I never  faw  before  in 
Europe.  But  it  did  us  no  hurt  : we  came  very 
well,  though  very  wmt,  to  St.  Ginnis. 

Sund.  12.  I never  fa\v  fo  many  people  in  this 
church,  nor  did  I ever  before  fpeak  fo  plainly 
to  them.  They  hear  ; but  tvhen  will  iht\  feel? 
O w'hat  can  man  do,  totvard  raifing  either  dead 
bodies,  or  dead  fouls  ? 

Mond.  13.  The  rain  attended  us  all  the  way 
to  Launcefton.  I preached  at  noon,  but  was 
not  dry  till  the  evening.  Yet  I did  not  catch 
any  cold  at  all.  What  can  hurt,  without  leave 
from  God  ? 

Tuef.  14.  I willingly  accepted  the  offer  of 
preaching  in  the  houfe,  lately  built  for  Mr.  Whit- 
field, at  Plymouth-dock.  Thus  it  bchoveth 
us  to  trample  on  bigotry  and  party  zeal.  Ought 
not  all  who  love  God,  to  love  one  another  ? 

Thurf.  16.  I rode  to  Collumpton,  but  could 
not  reach  it,  till  it  was  too  late  to  preach. 

Sund.  19. 1 preached  thrice  at  Tiverton  ; rode 

to 


[ ^78  ] 

to  Middiefey,  the  next  dav;  and  on  Tuefday  to 
Briftol. 

* Frid.  24.  I endeavoured  onee  more  to  bring 
Kingfu’ood-fchool  into  order.  Surely  the  im- 
portance ol  this  defign  is  apparent,  even  from 
the  difficulties  that  attend  it.  I have  fpent  more 
money,  and  time,  and  care  on  this,  than  almoft 
any  defign  I ever  had.  And  ftill  it  exercifes  ah 
the  patience  I have.  But  it  is  worth  all  the  la- 
bour. 

Mond.  27.  I came  earfy  to  the  Mew  Paffiage  : 
but  the  wind  ffiifting,  obliged  me  to  wait  near 
fix  hours..  When  we  were  almoft  over,  it  ffiift- 
ed  again,  fo  that  we  could  not  land  till  between 
fix  and  feven. 

Tuefd.  28.  I reached  Cardiff.  Finding  I had 
all  here  to  begin  anew,  I fet  out,  as  at  firft,  by 
preaching  in  the  Caftle-yard,  on  Lord,  art 
there  few  that  be  faved?  I afterwards  met  what 
was  once  a fociety  ; and  in  the  morning  fpoke 
feverally  to  a few,  who  were  ftill  defirous  to 
join  together,  and  build  up,  not  devour,  one 
another. 

I preached  in  the.  evening  at  Fonmon  ; and 
on  Tburf.  30.  Spake  to  many  at  Cardiff,  who 
were  refolVed  to  fet  out  once  more  in  the  blble- 
way,  and  ftrengthen  each  other’s  hands  in  God. 

Frid.  31.  We  had  a pleafantride,  and  a ready 
paffage,  fo  that  we  reached  Briftol  in  the  after- 
noon. I preached  in  the  evening  over  the  re- 
mains of  Mary  Henley,  a good  foldier  of  Jefus 

Chrift^ 


[ 279  1 

Chrift,  who  died,  rejoicing  in  his  love,  the 
fame  day  I fet  out  for  Caidiff. 

Mond.  Sept.  3.  I began  vifning  the  little  fa- 
cieties  in  Somerfetlhire  and  Wiltfhire.  This 
evening  I preached  at  Shepton-mallet,  and  found 
much  life  among  the  poor,  plain  people.  It  . 
was  not  fo  at  Oakhill  the  next  day,  where  many 
once  a live  have  drawn  back  to  perdition.  But  at 
Coleford  in  the  evening  I found  many  living 
fouls,  though  joined  with  fome  who  did  not 
adorn  the  gofpel. 

Wed.  5.  I rode  ever  to  Kingfwood,  a little  town 
near  Wotton-under-edge.  Some  weeks  fmce 

W S- was  invited  to  preach  at  Wotlon, 

which  he  did  once  in  great  peace.  But  the  next 
time  he  went,  the  mob  was  fo  turbulent,  that 
he  could  not  finifh  his  fermon.  Upon  which 
one  defired  him  to  come  to  Kingfwood  : which 
he  did,  and  many  people  heard  him  gladly.  Soon 
after  I came  in,  a multitude  of  people  was  gather- 
ed from  all  parts.  A large  congregation  was  there 
at  five  in  the  morning,  and  a larger  than  ever  in 
the  evening.  The  next  morning  I accepted  of 

Mr.  B 's  offer,  and  after  reading  prayers 

preached  in  the  church.  All  the  people  expreft 
huge  good-will ; but  none  appeared  to  be  deeply 
affefted. 

At  half  an  hour  after  twelve  I preached  in  the 
flreet  at  Wickwar,  about  four  miles  from  Kingf- 
wood, where  there  has  been  a fmall  fociety  for 
fbme  years,  many  of  whom  can  rejoice  in  God. 

Tha 


[ 2§0  ] 

1 he  reft  of  the  audience  gave  a civil  attention, 
and  feemed  little  pleafed  or  difpleafed  at  the 
matter. 

Mond.  10.  I preached  to  the  condemned  ma- 
lefadlors  in  Newgate.  But  I could  make  little 
iinprefiion  on  them.  I then  took  horfe  for 
Paulton,  where  I called  on  Stephen  Plummer, 
once  ol  our  fociety,  but  now  a zealous  quaker. 
He  was  much  pleafed  with  my  calling,  and  came 
to  hear  me  preach.  Being  ftraitned  for  time,  I 
concluded  fooimr  than  ufual  : but  as  foon  as  I 
had  done,  Stephen  began.  After  I had  liftened 
half  an  hour,  finding  he  was  no  nearer  the  end, 
I rofe  up  lo  go  away.  His  fifler  then  begged  him 
to  leave  off : on  which  he  flew  into  a violent 
rage,  and  roared  louder  and  louder,  till  an  honeft 
man  took  him  in  his  arms,  and  gently  carried 
him  aw'ay. 

"^'What  a w’ife  providence  was  it,  that  this 
poor  ) oung  man  uu  ned  quaker  fome  years  be- 
fore he  ran  mad  ? So  the  honour  of  turning  his 
brain  now  refts  upon  them,  which  otherwife 
mufthave  fallen  upon  the  Methodijis, 

At  fix  in  the  evening  at  Buckland,  about  two 
miles  from  Frome,  in  a meadow  of  Mr.  Em- 
blen’s,  a wonderful  monument  of  the  grace  of 
God,  who  from  the  day  he  received  peace  (be- 
ing then  acquainted  with  no  Methodift)  has  con- 
tinually walked  in  the  light  of  God’s  counte- 
nance- The  curate  had  provided  a mob,  with 
horns,  and  other  things  convenient,  to  prevent 

the 


[ 28i  j 

the  congregation’s  hearing  me.  Bnt  the  better 
half  of  the  mob  foon  left  their  fellows,  and  lif- 
fened  with  great  attention.  The  reft  did  no 
harm  ; fo  that  we  had  a comfortable  oppor- 
tunity ; and  another  at  five  in  the  morning. 

Tuef.  11.  I rode  once  more  to  New  Kingf- 
wood.  The  hearers  were  more  numerous  than 
ever.  As  I did  not  expeft  to  fee  them  foon  again, 
I ufed  once  more  all  polTible  plainnefs  of 
fpeech.  And  their  behaviour  feemed  to  Ihew, 
that  the  word  of  God  found  its  way  into  their 
hearts. 

^ Frid.  14.  I read  with  great  attention  the 
Chevalier  Ramfay’s  “ Philofophical  Principles 
of  Religion.”  He  undertakes  to  folve  all  the 
difficulties  in  the  Chriftian  Revelation,  allowing 
him  only  a few  poftulata’s.  1.  That  human  fouls 
all  exifted,  and  perfonally  finned  in  paradile.  2. 
That  the  fouls  of  brutes  are  fallen  angels.  3. 
That  pain  is  the  only  poffible  means  whereby 
God  himfelf  can  cure  fin,  and  4.  That  he  will 
in  the  end,  by  the  pains  of  purgatory,  purify  and 
reftore  all  men  and  all  devik.  Amazing  work 
this ! 

* Mond.  17.  I began  vifiting  the  focieties  in 
Wiltffiire,  and  found  much  caufe  to  praife  God 
on  their  behalf.  Thurf.  27.  I was  defired  by 
Lady  F.  to  vifit  her  daughter  ill  of  a confump- 
tion.  I found  much  pity,  both  for  the  parent 
and  the  child,  pining  away  in  the  bloom  of 
youth;  and  yet  not  without  joy;  as  ffie  was  al- 
ready 


[ 282  ] 

ready  much  convinced  of  fin,  and  feemcd  to  be 
on  the  very  brink  of  deliverance.  I law  her  once 
more  on  Satur.  29.  and  left  her  patiently  waiting 
for  God.  Not  long  after  my  brother  fpem  fome 
time  with  her  in  prayer,  and  was  conllrained,  to 
the  furprize  of  all  that  were  piefent,  to  alk  of 
God  again  and  again,  that  he  would  perfect 
his  work  in  her  foul,  and  take  her  to  hitnfelf. 
Almoft  as  foon  as  he  had  done,  Ihc  llretched 
out  her  hands,  faid,  " Come,  Lord  Jefus,”.  and 
died. 

Mond.  Oft.  1.  I rode  to  Salifbury,  and  the 
next  day  to  a village  in  the  New  Forelf,  eight 
miles  wide  of  Southampton,  where  I preached 
in  the  evening  to  a well-meaning,  fenous  con- 
gregation, Wednef.  3.  We  rode  to  Southamp- 
ton ; thence  crofied  over  to  Cowes,  and  reached 
Newport  before  eleven. 

At  five  in  the  afternoon  I went  to  the  market- 
place. The  congregation  was  large,,  and  deeply 
attentive.  It  was  near  the  fame  at  fix  in  the 
evening.  And  all  feemed  to  diink  in  the  exhor- 
tation, to  prejcnt  themfdves  a living  JacriJice, 
holy,  acceptable  to  God. 

* A little  before  noon  we  fet  out  for  Shorhill, 
a village  fix  miles  fouth  from  Newport.  I never 
faw  a more  fruitful,  or  a more  pleafant  country, 
than  the  inland  part  of  this  ifland.  About  one  I 
preached  at  Shorhill,  to  {I  fuppofe)  all  the  poor 
and  middling  people  of  the  town.  I believe 
fome  of  the  rich  alfo  defigned  to  come.  But 

fomeihing 


[ 283  1 

fomething  of  more  importance,  a dinner,  came 
between. 

At  five  I preached  again  at  Newport  to  moil 
of  the  to'Mi,  and  many  who  came  from  the 
neighbouring  villages.  Surely,  if  there  was 
any  here  to  preach  the  word  of  God  v/ith 
power,  a multitude  would  foon  be  obedient  to 
the  faith. 

* Frid.  After  preaching  at  fix,  I left  this, 
humane,  loving  people,^rode  to  Cowes,  and  croft 
over  to  Portfmouth.  Here  I found  another  kind 
of  people,  who  haddifputed  themfelves  out  ol  tlie 
power,  and  well  nigh  the  form  of  religion. 
However,  I laboured  (and  not  altogether  in  vain) 
to  foften  and  compofe  their  jarring  fpivits,  both 
this  evening  and  the  next  day.  On  Sunday 
noon  I preached  in  the  ftreet  at  Fareham. 
Many  gave  g. eat  attention,  but  feemed  neither 
to  feel  nor  underftand  any  thing.  At  five  1 be- 
gan on  Portfinouth-common.  1 admired  not  fo 
much  the  immenfe  number  of  people,  as  the 
uncommon  decency  of  behaviour,  which  ran 
through  the  whole  congregation.  After  fermon  I 
explained  to  them  at  large,  the  nature  and  defign 
of  our  focieties.  And  defircd  that  if  any  of  them 
were  willing  to  join  therein,  they  would  call  on 
me,  either  that  evening,  or  in  the  morning.  I 
made  no  account  of  that  fhadow  of  a fociety 
which  was  before,  without  dalles,  without  order, 
or  rules:  having  never  feen,  read,  or  heard  the 

printed 


[ ^84  } 


printed  rules,  which  ought  to  have  been  given 
them  at  their  very  firft  meeting. 

Mond.  8.  I rode  to  Godalmin,  and  the  next 
day  to  London.  After  refting  there  five  days,  on 
Mond.  15.  I rode  to  Bedford.  The  melan- 
choly account  which  I received  here  was  as 
follows. 

1.  In  the  year  1739,  J' 

to  Bedford.  By  them  I was  convinced  that  I was 
in  a flateof  damnation,  though  I was  outwardly 
unblameable.  Some  of  the  Germans  came  down 
in  174J,  and  engaged,  1.  To  draw  no  one 
from  the  church.  2.  To  hold  a meeting  on 
Sunday  nights  for  us  that  were  of  the  church;. 
On  thefe  conditions  I joined  with  them.  But  in 
the  beginning  of  1742  they  dropped  the  Sunday 
night-preaching,  and  required  us  to  attend  their 
meeting  at  the  fame  hour  that  we  ufed  to  go  to 
church.  I was  much  troubled  at  this,  and  'vrote 
to  Mr.  John  Wefiey,  infreating  him  to  “come 
down  and  help  us.” 

2.  When  the  brethren  learned  this,  they  gave 
me  abundance  of  fair  words,  and  peiTuaded  me 
to  write  again,  and  defire  Mr.W.  “ not  to  come.” 
I was  then  made  fervant  at  the  love-feaft.  I flill 
received  the  facrament  at  church  once  a year; 
but  I regarded  the  church  lefs  and  lefs.  And 
being  continually  taught,  that  works  fignified 
nothing,  and  that  we  could  not  do  them  without 
trufting  in  them,  I in  a while  left  off  all  works  of 

charity. 


i 2§5  ] 

charity,  as  well  as  reading  the  bible,  and  private 
prayer. 

3.  Their  firft  church  was  fettled  here  in  the 
beginning  of  the  year  1744.  On  the  18th  of  Fe- 
bruary I was  received  into  the  congregation  at 
London,  and  likewife  into  the  helpei ’s  confe- 
rence. In  1746,  Achenwelder,  the  chief  la^ 
bourer,  infilled  on  my  putting  myfelf  out  of  the 
corporation.  I was  in  much  doubt,  whether  it 
was  right  lb  to  do.  But  he  commanded,  and  I 
obeyed.  The  next  year  he  went  to  London,  and 
at  his  return  to  Bedford  fpoke  to  this  efieft. 
“ My  brethren,  we  have  received  new  orders. 
In  London,  Yorklhire,  and  all  other  places,  no 
perfon  is  to  go  out  of  the  town,  without  the 
leave  of  the  chief  labourer.  So  it  mull  be 
here:  obferve,  no  one  mull  go  out  of  the 
town,  no  not  a mile,  without  leave  from  me.’* 

4.  In  fpring  1730  they  began  building  the 
chappel,  for  which  they  colleCled  near  two  hun- 
dred pounds,  and  borrowed  eight  hundred  more, 
for  which  eight  of  the  Finghlh  brethren  were  en- 
gaged. Two  of  the  Englilh  were  bound  for  an 
hundred  more.  But  none  of  the  ten  have  any 
fecurity  at  all.  They  prornifed  indeed  to  lodge 
the  writings  of  the  houfe  in  their  hands.  But  it 
was  never  done. 

5.  About  this  time  a relation  left  me  two 
houfes,  near  that  wherein  the  fingle  men  livmd. 
The  brethren  advifed  me  to  rebuild  them,  and 

add 


[ 286  ] 

ac^d  another,  for  a rnarriage-plan,  promifing  to 
let  me  have  whatever  ground  I wanted  behind 
the  houfes.  This  promife  they  renewed  over 
and  over.  About  Michaelmas  I began,  and  fol- 
lowed their  direftion  in  the  whole  building.  But 
the  night  before  I began,  I went  to  Antone,  the 
chief  labourer,  and  told  him,  “ The  workmen 
were  ready.  If  I am  to  have  ground,  I will  go 
on,  but  not  elfe.”  He  faid,  “ Go  on,  you  Oiall 
have  ground.  Soon  after  he  fet  out  the  ground, 
for  which  I was  to  give  eight  pounds.  But  juft 
as  the  houfes  were  finiftred,  Antone  and  Slicht 
fent  for  me,  and  told  me,  “ they  had  received  a 
letter  from  Tondon,  and  I muft  have  no  '’round 

t)  ’ 

neither  would  they  ufethe  houfes  fo-'  a marriage- 
plan.  They  were  too  near  the  Tingle  men  ; fome 
of  whom  might  perhaps  fee  a woman  fometimes 
in  the  yard.”  At  the  fame  time  they  defired,  I 
would  ftop  up  iny  d nms  and  windows  on  that 
fide.  If  1 would,  they  would  either  buy  the 
houfes,  or  take  a leafe  of  them. 

I did  as  they  defired.  \Ve  then  made  feveral 
agreements,  one  after  another.  But  they  would 
ftand  to  none  of  them.  I offered  them  to  lole 
llrirty  pounds  ; nay,  at  laft  fiftw  out  of  my 
pocket.  But  in  vain;  fo  at  this  day  I have  but 
three  pounds  a year  rent  in  all,  out  of  which  the 
land-tax  is  to  be  paid. 

6.  It  is  a general  obfervation  in  Bedford,  that 
the  brethren  are  the  worftpaymafters  in  the  town. 
They  contra£l  debts,  and  take  no  care  or  thought 

about 


r 

L 


287-  ] 


about  difcharging  them.  I have  too  much  proof 
of  this  ill  my  own  cafe  : for  many  of  them  are  in 
my  debt,  and  never  come  near  me. 

7.  Moft  of  the  Englifli  who  a’  e with  them,  that 
are  of  any  trade,  now  trade  for  the  Satioi/r ; that 
is,  tliey  work  for  the  Germans,  who  take  all  the 
profits,  and  ufe  them  as  their  journeymen.  As 
fuch  they  punfiually  give  in  their  accounts  and 
cafli  ; and  if  they  want  a coat,  or  any  thing, 
aik  it  of  the  Lrethren. 

]\Ir,  , traded jor^  and  lent  money  to  the 

Saviour,  til!  he  was  ahiolutely  ruined.  After  he 
had  funk  above  leven  hundred  pounds,  he  beg- 
ged to  have  forty  or  fifty  re-paid,  but  in  vain. 
But  at  length,  by  vehement  importr.nity,  he  pro- 
cured eighteen  pounds. 

8.  I\Ir.  Rimius,  has  faid  nothing  towhatmifrht 
have  been  faid,  concernlng^their  marriage  oeco- 
nomy.  1 know  an  hundred  times  more  than  he 
has  written.  But  the  particulars  are  too  fhocking 
to  relate.  I believe  no  fuch  things  were  ever 
praftifed  before,  no,  not  among  the  moft  barbar- 
ous Heathens. 

9.  A fortnight  before  Chrlftraas  laft,  a young 
man  of  their  congregation,  having  married  my 
daughter,  without  having  firft  obtained  the  leave 
of  their  head-labourer.  One  of  the  labourers 
came  to  my  houfe,  and  read  to  me  nearly  thefe 
words. 

“ We  the  elders  of  the  congregation  of  the 

brethren. 


brethren,  declare  to  you,  W P — , 

M P- , vourwife;  E C , 

and  E , your  daughter,  are  utterly  cut  off 

from  all  church-communion,  from  all  fellowffiip 
and  ■ connexion  whatfoever  with  the  brethren, 
and  that  for  e\  er  and  ever.” 

In  the  evening  I met  the  little  fociety,  juft 
efcaped  v.hth  the  fltin  of  their  teeth.  From  the 
account  which  each  of  thefe  likewife  gave,  it  ap- 
peared clear  to  a demonftration.  i.  That  their 
elders  ufurped  a more  abfolute  authority  over  the 
confcience,  than  the  bifhop  of  Rome  himfclf 
does.  2.  That  to  gain  and  fecure  this,  thev  ufe  a 
continued  train  of  guile,  fraud,  and  falftiood  of 
every  kind.  3.  That  they  fcrape  their  votaries 
to  the  bone,  as  to  their  worldly  fubftance,  leaving 
little  to  any,  to  fome  nothing  or  lefs  than  no- 
thing. 4.  That  {fill  they  are  !o  infatuated  as  to 
believe,  that  their’s  is  the  only  true  church  upon 
earth. 

Tuef.  16.  I preached  on  St.  Peter’s-green,  at 
fe'ven  in  the  morning  and  at  five  in  the  evening. 
It  is  amazing,  that  any  .congregation  fhould  be 
found  here,  confidering  what  ftuinbling-blocks 
have  been  thrown  in  their  way.  Above  fourteen 

years  ago,  Mr.  M rs,  then  curate  of  St. 

Paul’s,  preached  the  pure  gofpel  with  general 
acceptance.  A great  awakening  began,  and  con- 
tinually increafed,  till  the  poor  sveathercock 
turned  baptift : he  then  preached  the  abfolute 

decrees 


[ 239  ] 

decrees  with  all  his  might;  but  in  a while  the 
wind  changed  again ; and  he  turned  and  funk 
into  the  German  whirlpool.  How  many  fouls 
has  this  unhappy  man  to  anfwer  for? 

Frid.  19.  I returned  to  London.  Satur.  20.  I 
found  myfelf  out  of  order,  but  believed  it  would 
go  off.  On  Sund.  21.  I was  confiderably  worfe, 
but  could  not  think  of  fparing  myfelf  on  that  day. 
Mond.  22.  I rofe  extremely  fick.  Yet  I deter- 
mined, if  it  were  poffible,  to  keep  my  word, 
and  accordingly  fet  out  foon  after  four,  for  Can- 
terbury. At  Welling,  I was  obliged  to  flop. 
After  refling  an  hour,  I was  much  better.  But 
foon  after  I took  horfe,  my  ficknefs  returned,  and 
accompanied  me  to  Brumpton,  near  Chatham. 
In  the  evening  I preached  to  a ferious  congrega- 
tion, and  at  five  in  the  morning.  We  came  to 
Canterbury  about  one,  when  I was  prefently 
feized  w'ith  the  cold  fit  of  an  ague.  About  twelye 
I fell  faff  afleep,  and  waked  well  at  feven  in  the 
morning. 

Wednef.  24.  I preached  in  the  evening  with- 
out any  inconvenience,  and  at  five  in  the  morn- 
ing, But  about  nine,  I began  Ihlvering  again. 
After  the  hot  fit,  I lay  in  a profufe  fweat  till 
eight.  I then  gradually  cooled  till  I fell  afleep, 
and  refted  fweetly  till  the  morning. 

Frid.  25.  Being  determined  to  ufe  that  Interval 
of  health,  I procured  a chaife,  and  reached 
Brumpton  in  the  evening.  I fpoke,  as  I was  able, 

Vo  L.  XXIX.  N in 


[ 290  ] 

in  the  evening,  and  God  bore  witnefs  to  the 
word  of  his  grace.  ^ 

Satur.  26.  I came  to  London ; having  re- 
ceived no  hurt,  but  rather  benefit  by  the  jour- 
ney. 

Thurf.  Nov.  1.  I began  vifiting  the  clafies, 
though  I found  by  the  lofs  of  my  voice,  that  my 
bodily  ftrength  was  not  fo  far  recovered,  as  I be- 
fore imagined. 

Satur.  3.  I read  over  Andrew  Frey’s  reafons 
for  leaving  the  brethren.  Moft  of  what  he  fays,  I 
knew  before.  Yet  I cannot  fpeak  of  them  in  the 
manner  which  he  does  : I pity  them  too  much  to 
be  bitter  againft  them. 

* Sund.  4. 1 rode  to  Hayes,  becaufe  I had  pro- 
inifed,  thougli  I was  much  out  of  order.  It  was 
with  the  utmoft  difficulty  that  I read  prayers, 
and  preached,  and  adminiftered  the  facrament. 
I went  through  the  evening  fer\'ice  with  more 
eafe.  But  at  night  my  ftrength  quite  failed.  1 
ftiould  have  taken  fome  rhubarb  the  next  day, 
but  I had  no  time ; having  claffes  to  meet  from 
morning  to  night. 

Thurf.  8.  In  the  ni^ht  mv  diforder  returned 
more  violent  than  it  had  been  fince  I left  Cornwall. 
I ftiould  have  taken  fome  ipecacuanha  in  the 
morning,  but  had  no  time  to  fpare,  my  bufinefs 
being  fixt  for  every  hour,  till  four  in  the  after- 
noon. And  by  that  time  all  my  complaints  were 
gone,  fo  that  I needed  only  a little  food  and 
reft. 


* Mond. 


[ 291  ] 

* MonJ.  12.  I fet  out  in  a chaife  for  Leigh, 
having  delayed  my  journey  as  long  as  I could. 
I preached  at  feven,  but  was  extremely  cold  all 
the  time,  the  wind  coming  ftrong  from  a 
door  behind,  and  another  on  one  fide  ; fo  that 
my  feet  felt  juh  as  if  I had  flood  in  cold  water. 

* Tuef.  13,  The  chamber  wherein  I fat,  though 
with  a large  /ire,  was  much  colder  than  the  gar- 
den, fo  that  I could  not  keep  myfelf  tolerably 
warm,  even  when  I wasclofe  to  the  chimney.  As 
we  rode  home  on  Wednef.  14.  the  wind  was 
high  and  piercing  cold,  and  blew  juft  in  our 
face,  fo  that  the  open  chaife  was  no  defence,  but 
my  feet  were  quite  chilled.  When  I came  home, 
I had  a fettled  pain  in  my  left  breaft,  a violent 
cough,  and  a flow  lever.  But  in  a day  or  two, 
by  following  Dr.  Fothergill’s  prefcriptions,  I 
found  much  alteration  for  the  better  : and  on 
Sund.  18.  I preached  at  Spittlefields,  and  ad- 
miniftered  the  facrament  to  a large  congrega- 
tion. 

Mond.  19.  I retired  to  Shoreham,  and  gained 
ftrength  continually;  till  about  eleven  at  night, 
on  Wednef.  21.  I was  obliged  by  the  cramp  to 
leap  out  of  bed  ; and  continue  for  fome  time 
walking  up  and  down  the  room,  though  it  was 
a fharp  frofl.  My  cough  now  returned  with 
greater  violence,  and  that  by  day  as  well  as  by 
night. 

Saiur.  24.  I rode  home,  and  was  pretty  well 
N 2 till 


L 292  ] 


till  night.  But  my  cough  was  then  worfe  than 
ever.  My  fever  returned  at  the  fame  time, 
together  with  the  pain  in  my  left  breaft.  So 
that  I fliould  probably  have  flayed  at  home 
on  Sunday  25.  had  it  not  been  advertifed  in  the 
public  papers,  that  I would  preach  a charity 
fermon  at  the  chappel,  both  morning  and  after- 
noon. My  cough  did  not  interrupt  me  while 
I preached  in  the  morning  ; but  it  was  extremely 
troublefome  while  I adminiflered  the  facra- 
ment.  In  the  afternoon  I confuked  my  friends, 
whether  I fhould  attempt  to  preach  again  or 
no  ? They  thought,  I fliould,  as  it  had  been 
advertifed.  I did  fo  ; but  very  few  could  hear. 
My  fever  increafed  much  while  1 was  preach- 
ing. However  I ventured  to  meet  the  fociety. 
And  for  near  an  hour  my  voice  and  flrength 
were  reftored,  fo  that  1 felt  neither  pain  nor 
weaknefs. 

Mond.  26.  Dr.  F-  told  me  plain, 

1 mufl  not  flay  in  town  a day  longer  : add- 
ing, “ If  any  thing  does  thee  good,  it  mufl 
be  the  country  air,  with  refl,  afles  milk, 
and  riding  daily.”  So  (not  being  able  to  fit 
an  horfe)  about  noon  I took  coach  for 
Lewifliam, 

In  the  evening  (not  knowing  how  it  might 
pleafe  God  to  difpofe  of  me)  to  prevent  vile 
panegyrick,  I wrote  as  follows: 


Here 


[ 293  ] 

Here  lieth 

The  body  of  John  Wefley, 

A brand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  : 

Who  died  of  a confumption  in  the  fifty-firft  year 
of  his  age. 

Not  leaving,  after  his  debts  are  paid,  ten  pounds 
behind  him  : 

Praying, 

God  be  merciful  to  me  an  unprofitable  fervant! 

He  ordered,  that  this,  if  any,infcriplion,fhould 
be  placed  on  his  torab-ftone. 

* Wednef.  28.  I found  no  change  for  the  bet- 
ter, the  medicines  which  had  helped  me  before, 
now  taking  no  effeft.  About  noon,  (the  time  that 
fome  of  our  brethren  in  London,  had  fet  a-pait 
for  joining  in  prayer)  a thought  came  into  my 
mind  to  make  an  experiment.  So  I ordered 
fome  hone  brimftone  to  be  powdered,  mixt  with 
the  white  of  an  egg,  and  fpread  on  brown  paper, 
which  1 applied  to  my  fide.  The  pain  ceafed  in 
five  minutes,  the  fever  in  half  an  hour.  And 
from  this  hour  I began  to  recover  ftrength.  The 
next  day  I was  able  to  ride,  which  I continued 
to  do  every  day,  till  January  1.  Nor  did  the  wea- 
ther hinder  me  once  ; it  being  always  tolerably 
fair  (however  it  was  before)  between  twelve  and 
one  o’clock. 

Frid.  Dec.  14.  Having  finlfhed  all  the  books 
which  I defigned  to  infert  in  the  Chriftian  Li- 
N 3 brary, 


L 294  ] 


lirary,  I broke  through  the  docior’s  order,  “ Not 
to  write,  ’ and  began  tranfcribing  a journal  for 
iheprefs.  And  in  the  eveningl  went  to  prayers 
with  the  family,  without  finding  any  inconveni- 
ence. 

1 huff.  20.  1 felt  a gradual  increafe  of  flrength, 
till  I took  adccoction  of  which  I do  not 

find,  (fuch  is  the  peculiarity  of  my  confliiutionj 
will  agree  with  me,  in  any  form  whatever.  This 
immediately  threw  me  into  a purging,  which 
brought  me  down  again  in  a few  da)  s,  and  quite 
difappointed  me  in  my  defign  of  going  out  on 
Chrillmas-day. 

Tuef.  Jan.  1,  17,54.  I returned  once  more  to 
London. 

On  Wednef.  2.  I fet  out  in  the  machine,  and 
the  next  afternoon  came  to  Chippenham.  Here  I 
took  a poll-chaife,  in  which  I reached  Briftol, 
about  eight  in  the  evening. 

Frid.  4.  I began  drinking  the  water  at  the 
Hotwell,  having  a lodging  at  a fmall  difiance 
from  it.  And  on  Sund.  6.  I began  writing  Notes 
on  the  New  Tefiament : a work  which  I fhould 
fcarce  ever  have  attempted,  had  I not  been  fo  ill 
as  not  to  be  able  to  travel  or  preach,  and  yetfo 
well  as  to  be  able  to  read  and  write. 

Mond.  7.  I went  on  now  in  a regular 
method,  rifing  at  my  hour,  and  writing  from  five 
to  nine  at  night ; except  the  time  of  riding,  half 
an  hour  for  each  meal,  and  the  hour  between  five 
and  fix,  in  the  evening. 


Sund. 


[ 295  ] 

Simd.  13.  I went  in  a coach  to  Briftol,  and 
gave  a fhort  exhortation  to  the  fociety. 

Mond.  14.  In  the  evening  one  or  two  of  our 
neighbours  defired  to  join  in  our  family  prayers, 
a few  more  foon  made  the  fame  requeft,  fo  that 
I had  a little  congregation  every  night.  After 
a few  nights,  I began  to  add  a Ihort  exhorta- 
tion, fo  preparing  myfelf  for  a larger  congrega- 
tion. 

Satur.  ig.  Mr.  B came  with  Mr. 

M r,  who  had  been  for  fome  time  melan- 

choly, even  tomadnefs.  But  by  proper  applica- 
tion to  his  mind,  as  well  as  body,  the  diforder 
fenfibly  abated  in  a fhort  time. 

Thurf.  31.  My  wifedefiring  to  pay  the  laft  of- 
fice to  her  poor,  d)’ing  child,  fet  out  for  London, 
and  came  a few  days  before  he  went  home,  re- 
joicing and  praifing  God. 

Sund.  Feb.  3.  I went  in  a chaife  to  Kingf- 
wood,  and  adminiftered  the  facrament  to  a fmall 

congregation.  I expedfed  Mr.  M to  affilt, 

but  he  flipt  away  and  hid  himfelf,  till  I had 
done. 

Wednef.  13.  I was  fent  for  by  one  of  my 
neighbours,  dying  of  a confumption.  She  feemed 
full  of  good  defires.  But  who  does  not,  when 
death  hands  at  the  door  ? 

Wednef.  27.  My  brother  came  down  from 
London,  and  we  fpent  feveral  days  together,  in 
-Comparing  the  tranflation  of  the  evangelihs  with 
N 4 the 


C 296  ] 

the  original,  and  reading  Dr.  He)din’s  Le£iures, 
and  Dr.  Doddridge’s  Family  Expofitor. 

Sund.  March  to.  I took  my  leave  of  the  Hot- 
well,  and  removed  to  Brillol. 

Tuef.  19.  Having  finifhed  the  rough  draught, 

I began  tranfcribing  the  notes  on  the  gofpels. 

* Tuef.  26.  I preached  for  the  firft  time,  af- 
ter an  intermiffion  of  four  months.  What 
reafon  have  I to  praife  to  God,  that  he  does  not 
take  the  word  of  bis  truth  utterly  out  of  my 
mouth  ? 

Satur.  30. 1 took  my  leave  of  a venerable  mo- 
nument of  divine  mercy,  Col.  T d,  who  af- 

ter wandering  from  God  fourfcore  years,  has  at 
length  found  the  way  of  peace,  and  is  continually 
panting  after  God. 

Mond.  April  1.  We  fet  out  in  the  machine, 
and  the  next  evening  reached  the  Foundery. 
Wednef.  3. 1 fettled  all  the  bufinefs  I could,  and 
the  next  morning  retired  to  Paddington.  Here  I 
fpent  feme  weeks  in  writing  ; only  going  to  town 
on  Saturday  evenings,  and  leavdng  it  again  on 
Monday  morning. 

^ In  mv  hours  of  walking,  I read  Dr.  Calamy  s 
abridgment  of  Mr.  Baxter’s  life.  M.'  hat  a feene 
is  opened  here  ? In  fpite  of  all  the  prejudice  of 
education,  1 could  not  but  fee,  that  the  poor 
nonconformifts  had  been  ufed  without  either 
juflice  or  mercy  : and  that  many  of  the  proteflant 
bifhops  of  King  Charles,  had  neither  more  reli- 
gion 


f 297  J 

gloti  nor  humanity,  than  the  Popilh  bifhops  of 
Queen  Mary. 

Sund.  21.  Mr.  S , told  me,  “ Sir,  I in- 

tend on  Friday  next,  to  go  down  to  Bury,  and 
fettle  there.”  Finding  he  was  fully  determined 
1 faid  nothing  againft  it.  So  we  parted  civilly. 

Mond.  29,  I preached  at  Sadler’s-Wells,  in 
what  was  formerly  a play-houfe.  I am  glad 
when  it  pleafes  God  to  take  poffeffion  of  what 
Satan  efleemed  his  own  ground.  The  place, 
though  large,  was  extremely  crowded.  And 
deep  attention  fat  on  every  face. 

Tuef.  30.  I rode  to  S with  one  to  whom- 

a large  eftate  is  fallen,  by  heruncle’s  dying  with- 
out a will.  ’Tis  a miracle  if  it  does  not  drown 
her  foul  in  eve? lajling  perdition  ! 

Sund.  May  12.  I laboured  to  convince  Mr.. 
G — that  he  had  not  done  well,  in  confuting 
(as  he  termed  it)  the  fermon  I had  preached  the 
Sunday  before,  in  the  morning,  from  the  famc::- 
pulpitin  the  afternoon.  But  he  was  abfolutely 
above  conviftion.  I then  afked,  “■  Will  you 
meet  me  half  way  ? I will  never  preach  publicly 
againftjyotr.  Will  not  you  againft  me  ?”  But  he 
difclaimed  any  fuch  agreement,  and  walked  a- 
way,  as  one  who  did  not  defign  to  come  any 
more.  He  told  all  he  met,  “ I had  put  him- 
away.”  Indeed  not  I.  But  I adore  the  provi-. 
dence  of  God.  He  has  put  himfelf  away.  Nor 
ftiall  1 de fire  him  to  come  again,  till  he  has  a 
more  found  judgment,  or  a more  teachable  fpirit. 

N g Mond, 


[ 298  ] 

Mond.  13.  I began  explaining  to  the  morn- 
ing congregation,  Bolton’s  “ Dire£lions  for 
comfortable  walking  with  God.”  I wllh  all  our 
preachers  both  in  England  and  Ireland,  would 
herein  follow  my  example,  and  frequently  read 
in  public,  and  inforce  felecl  portions  of  tlie 
Chrijiian  Library, 

Wed.  22.  Our  conference  began.  And  the 
fpirit  of  peace  and  love  was  in  the  midft  of  us. 
Before  we  parted,  we  all  willingly  figned  an 
agreement,  not  to  aft  independently  on  each 
other.  So  that  the  breach  lately  made,  has  only 
united  us  more  clofely  together  than  ever. 

Sund.  26.  I rode  to  Hillingdon,  and  preach- 
ed to  a very  genteel  congregation,  who  behaved 
with  abundantly  more  decency  and  ferioufnefs 
than  I expefted.  This  is  the  church,  to  which 
many  of  Mr.  M — ’s  parifhioners  have  gone,  ever 
fince  he  preached  falvation  by  faith.  And  how 
has  God  overtaken  them  ? Who  by  the  long  ill- 

nefs  of  the  curate,  has  brought  Mr.-M to 

preach  at  this  very  place. 

June  2.  Being  Whitfunday,  I preached  at 
the  Foundery  ; which  1 had  not  done  before  in 
the  evening.  Still  I have  not  recovered  my 
whole  voice  or  ftrength.  Perhaps  1 never  may. 
But  let  me  ufe  what  I have. 

Tuef.  11.  I rode  to  Cookham.  The  next 
evening  I preached  in  a magnificent  apartment 
to  a fuitable  congregation.  How  feldom  is  the 

gofpel 


[ 299  ] 

gofpel  heard  in  a palace  ? But  what  Is  too  hard 
for  God  ? 

Mond.  17.  I took  another  ride  to  Sundon, 
and  on  the  road  read  Strada  de  Bello  Belgico : 
an  hlftorian  fcarce  inferior  In  any  refpefl,  either 
to  Livy  or  Tacitus.  As  to  his  religion,  I llrould 
rather  compare  him  to  the  former.  For  Tacitus 
was  no  friend  either  to  fuperdition  or  cruelty. 

Thurf.  20.  We  fpent  fome  hours  at  Reji,  a 
feat  of  the  late  Duke  of  Kent,  who  was  forty 
years  laying  out  and  improving  the  gardens, 
which  I cannot  but  prefer  even  before  Lord  Cob- 
ham's.  But  how  little  did  the  place  anfwer  its 
nam.e!  How  little  reft  did  its  miferable  mafter 
enjoy  ? Thou,  O God,  haft  made  our  heart  for 
thyfelf.  And  it  cannot  reft,  till  it  refteth  in 
thee  ! 

* Wed.  26.  I read  one  of  the  prettieft  trifles 
which  perhaps  Is  extant  in  the  Englifh  tongue; 
Mr.  Hay  on  deformity.  Surely  fuch  a writer 
deferves  a better  fubjeff.  • 

Sat.  July  6.  I fpent  two  hours  in  the  gardens 
at  Kenfington.  They  are  juft  fit  for  a king  ; far 
more  grand  than  pleafant.  And  yet  nothing  fo 
grand  as  many  parts  of  the  Peak  in  Derbyfhire. 

Mond.  8.  I fet  out  with  my  brother,  and  on 
Wed.  10,  reached  Lakenam,  near  Norwich. 
Here  we  had  a full  account  of  that  wretched  man 
James  Wheatley,  for  whom,  I fear,  it  had  been 
good,  if  he  had'  not  been  born.  All  Norwich  was 
in  an  uproar  concerning  him,  fo  that  it  did  not 
N 6 appeat: 


[ 300  ] 

appear  we  could  have  any  place  there,  How< 
ever  on  Sund.  14,  at  feven  in  the  morning,  my 
brother  took  his  Hand  in  the  flreet.  A multi* 
tude  of  people  quickly  gathered  together,  and 
were  tolerably  quiet,  all  things  confidered.  I 
would  willingly  have  taken  his  place  in  the 
evening,  but  had  neither  voice  nor  flrength. 
However  on  Thurf.  18.  being  a little  recovered 
from  the  illnefs  which  had  attended  me  for  feveral 
days,  after  my  brother  had  done,  I fpoke  to  the 
congregation  for  a few  minutes,  and  promifed  to 
fee  them  again,  if  God  fhouldreftore  my  ftrength, 
at  the  firfl.  opportunity. 

Frid,  19.  I rode  to  Newmarket,  and  the 
next  day  to  Bedford.  Sund.  21.  I preached  near 
St.  Peter’s  Green  ; having  never  preached 
abroad  fince  I was  there  before.  Mond.  22,  I re- 
turned to  London. 

Mond.  Auguft  c,  I fet  out  for  Canterbury.  On 
the  way  I read  Mr.  Baxter’s  Hiftor^'  of  the 
Councils.  It  is  utterly  aftoniflting,  and  would  be 
wholly  incredible,  but  that  his  vouchers  are  be- 
yond all  exception.  What  a company  of  exe- 
crable wretches  have  they  been  (one  cannot 
juflly  give  them  a milder  title)  who  have  almoft 
in  every  age  fince  St.  Cyprian,  taken  upon  them 
to  govern  the  church  ! How  has  one  coun- 
cil been  perpetually  curfing  another ; and  deli- 
vering all  over  to  Satan,  whether  predecefTors 
or  cotemporaries,  who  did  not  implicitly  re- 
ceive their  determinations,  though  generally. 

trifling. 


C 301  ] 

trifling,  fometimes  falfe,  and  frequently  unintel- 
ligible, or  felf-contradiacry  ! Surely  Mahometa- 
nifm  was  let  loofe,  to  reform  the  Chriftians  ! I 
know  not,  but  Conftantinople  has  gained  by  the 
change. 

Tuef.  6.  I w'as  much  out  of  order : however 
I preached  in  the  evening,  but  could  do  nothing 
the  next  day.  On  Thurfday  I haftened  back  to 
London,  and  came  pretty  well  to  the  Foundery. 

I confulted  Dr.  F.  the  next  morning,  who  ad- 
vifed  me  to  return  to  the  Hotwell  without  delay. 

Sund.  Ji.  I buried  the  body  of  Mary  Doxfey, 
long  a pattern  of  patience  and  gentlenefs.  Mon. 
12.  I fet  out  in  the  machine,  and  on  Tuefday 
night  (taking  horfes  at  Bath}  came  to  Briftol. 

Wed.  14.  I took  a lodging  at  the  New  Hot- 
well,  where  I was  free  both  from  noife  and  hur- 
ry, and  had  an  opportunity  of  drinking  the  wa- 
ter late  in  the  evening,  and  early  in  the  morn- 
ing. But  my  courfe  of  phyfic  was  near  being 
cut  Ihort  the  next  day,  by  a large  ftone  which 
was  hungup  as  the  weight  of  a jack.  I applied 
to  my  head  cloths  dipped  in  cold  water,  which 
prefently  flopped  the  bleeding,  and  fo  abated 
the  fwelling,  that  in  a few  hours  I found  no  far- 
ther inconvenience. 

^ Sat.  31.  After  preaching  at  Weaver's-hall, 
one  of  the  audience,  a clergyman  (who  had  then 
a pariCb  near  Bridgewater,  but  is  now,  I trufl 
in  Abraham’s  bofomj  defired  to  have  fome  coh- 
verfation  with  me,  and  fpoke  without  referve. 

Hi3 


[ 302  ] 

His  experience  M’as  of  a peculiar  kind,  much  re- 
fembling  that  of  Gregory  Lopez.  But  he  foon 
determined  to  feek  Chrift,  for  the  time  to  come, 
not  in  a defert,  but  in  the  congregation  of  his 
people. 

Mond.  Sept.  2.  I fet  out  for  the  weft.  About 
eleven  one  ftopped  me  on  the  road,  and  earneft- 
iy  defired  me  to  turn  afide,  and  pray  with  one 
who  was  near  death.  I found  her  worn  away 
to  a flceleton,  and  rotting  in  pieces  with  the 
King’s-evil,  But  her  greateft  trouble  feemed  to 
be,  th^t  fhe  was  not  fo  alive  to  God  as  former- 
ly. prayer  her  mind  was  more  compofed, 

and  fhe  could  truft  God  both  with  her  foul  and 
body. 

At  noop  I met  the  little,  loving  focietv  at 
.Shepton,  and  in  the  evening  preached  at  Mid- 
.dlefey.  My  w'ork  to-day  was  full  enough  for 
mv  ftrength. 

Tuef.  3.  We  rode  eafily  to  Taunton.  After 
w’e  had  refted  a w'hile,  one  defired  me  to  ftep 
to  his  father,  who  was  dying  of  a confumption. 
He  had  been  always  a very  honeft,  moral  man  ; 
but  now  found,  this  was  not  the  one  thing  need- 
ful, and  appeared  earneftly  defirous  of  knowing 
Chrift,  and  the  power  of  his  refurre£lion. 

A little  before  twelve  we  fet  out  from  Taun- 
ton. The  fun  fhone  exceeding  hot,  fo  that  I 
was  almoft  worn  out,  when  we  called  at  the 
houfe  of  a friend  on  Maiden-down.  But  after  a 
I little 


[ .3^3  ] 

little  reft,  my  ftrength  returned,  and  I went  on, 
not  much  tired,  to  Tiverton. 

Wed.  4.  We  took  horfe  early  and  rode  to 
Oakliampton.  Our  landlord  here  informed  us, 
he  was  upwards  of  ninety,  yet  had  not  loft  ei- 
ther his  fight,  hearing  ot  teeth.  Nor  had  he 
found  that  for  which  he  was  born.  Indeed  he 
did  not  feem  to  have  any  more  thought  about  it, 
thad  a child  of  fix  years  old. 

* We  could  not  but  obferve,  that  although 
the  Iky  appeared  continually  between  the  clouds 
which  drove  to  and  fro,  yet  the  fun  fcarce 
fhone  upon  us  for  fix  minutes  together,  from 
fix  in  the  morning  to  fix  in  the  evening.  Soon 
after  fix  I preached  at  Launcefton^  and  met  the 
fociety. 

Thurf.  5.  At  noon  I preached  at  the  Town- 
hall,  to  a very  wild,  yet  civil  congregation.  At 
two,  the  ftewards  not  only  from  the  upper  part 
of  Cornwall,  hut  feveral  from  the  weftern  focie- 
ties  met.  At  fix  I preached  in  the  Town-hall 
again  : and  for  the  fake  of  this  hour  only,  (had 
no  other  end  been  anfwered]  I fhould  have 
thought  all  the  labour  of  my  journey  well  be- 
ftowed. 

Frid,  6.  I rode  to  Plymouth-dock,  and  preach- 
ed in  the  room  lately  built.  But  though  it  was 
three  or  four  times  as  large  as  the  old,  it  would 
not  contain  the  congregation.  Is  the  time  come, 
when  evmn  thisbarren  foil  fhall  bring  forthyratVj- 
of  righteou/nefs? 


Sat. 


C 304  ] 

Sat.  7. 1 fet  out  at  three,  reached  Collumpton, 
by  fix  in  the  evening  ; and  after  half  an  hour’s 
reft  was  enabled  to  preach  in  the  little  meadow, 
without  any  faintnefs  orwearinefs. 

Suiid.  8.  In  the  evening  I preached  at  Tiver- 
ton, in  the  garden  which  adjoins  to  the  preach- 
ing-houfe.  It  was  a refrelhing  feafon. 

Mond.  9.  I preached  at  Charlton,  a village 
fix  miles  from  Taunton,  to  a large  congrega- 
tion gathered  from  the  towns  and  country  for 
many  miles  round.  All  the  farmers  here  had 
fome  time  before,  entered  into  a joint  engage- 
ment, “ To  turn  all  out  of  their  fervice,  and 
give  no  work  to  any,  who  went  to  hear  a me- 
thodift  preacher.”  But  there  is  no  counfel  a- 
gainft  the  Lord.  One  of  the  chief  of  them,  Mr. 
G — , was  not  long  after  convinced  of  the  truth, 
and  defired  thofe  very  men  to  preach  at  his 
houfe.  Many  of  the  other  confederates  came 
to  hear,  whom  their  fervants  and  labourers  glad- 
ly followed.  So  the  whole  device  of  Satan  fell 
to  the  ground  : and  the  word  of  God  grew  and 
prevailed. 

Tuef.  TO.  I rode  to  Dr.  Robertfon’s  at  Pit- 
comb  ; and  after  fpending  a few  agreeable  and 
ufeful  hours  in  that  delightful  recefs,  went  for- 
ward, about  four  miles,  to  Weftcomb.  I 
preached  on  a green  place  in  the  town  about 
eight  in  the  morning,  to  a deeply  attentive  con- 
gregation  ; and  came  In  the  afternoon  to  Briftol, 
at  Icaft  as  well  as  when  I fet  out. 


* Tuef. 


[ 3®5  ] 

*Tuef.  17.  I rode  to  Trowbridge,  where  one 
who  found  peace  with  God,  while  he  was  a 
foldier  in  Flanders,  and  has  been  much  profper- 
ed  in  bufinefs  fmce  his  difcharge,  has  built  a 
preaching-houfe  at  his  own  expence.  He  had  a 
great  defire,  that  I fhould  be  the  firft  who  preach- 
ed in  it.  But  before  I had  finifhed  the  hymn,  it 
was  fo  crowded,  and  confequently  fo  hot,  that  I 
was  obliged  to  go  out  and  ftand  at  the  door: 
there  was  a multitude  of  hearers,  rich  and  poor. 
O that  they  may  not  all  hear  in  vain  1 

Friday  27. 1 thought  I had  ftrength  enough 
to  keep  a watch-night,  which  I had  not 
done  for  above  eleven  months.  But  though  I 
broke  off  at  eleven,  I almoft  lod  my  voice  : and 
the  next  evening  at  Weaver ’s-hall,  it  intirely 
failed,  fp  that  I had  much  difficulty  to  conclude 
my  fermon. 

Mond.  30. 1 preached  at  Coleford,  our  other 
Kingfwood,  where  alfo  the  lions  are  become 
lambs.  On  Tuefday  we  went  on  to  Salifbury. 

Wed.  0£iob.  2,  I walked  to  Old  Saruro, 
which  in  fpite  of  common  fenfe,  without  houfe 
or  inhabitant,  ftill  fends  two  members  to  the 
parliament.  It  is  a large,  round  hill,  incompalfed 
with  a broad  ditch,  which  it  feems  has  been  of 
a confiderable  depth.  At  the  top  of  itds  a corn- 
field ; in  the  midft  of  which  is  another  round 
hill,  about  two  hundred  yards  in  diameter,  in- 
compaffed  with  a wall,  and  a deep  ditch.  Pro- 
bably before  the  invention  of  cannon,  this  city 


was 


[ 3o6  ] 


was  impregnable.  Troy  was ! But  now  it  is  va- 
nifhed  away,  and  nothing  left  but  the  Jlones  of 
emptinejs. 

Thurf.  3,  I rode  to  Reading,  and  preached  in 
the  evening.  Obferving  a warm  man  near  the 
door  (which  was  once  of  the  fociety)  I purpofely 
bowed  to  him.  But  he  made  no  return,  during 
the  firft;  prayer  he  flood,  but  fat  while  we  fung. 
In  the  fermon  his  countenance  changed,  and  in 
a little  while  he  turned  his  face  to  the  wall.  He 
flood  at  the  fecond  hymn,  and  then  kneeled 
down.  As  I came  out  he  catched  me  by  the 
hand  and  difmifTed  me  with  a hearty  blefling. 

Frid.  4.  I came  to  London.  On  Mond.  7.  I 
retired  to  a little  place  near  Hackney,  formerly 
a feat  of  bifhop  Bonner’s.  (Hoiv  are  the  times 
changed?)  and  flill  bearing  his  name.  Here  I 
was  as  in  a college. 

Twice  a day  we  joined  in  prayer.  The  reft  of 
the  day  (allowing  about  an  hour  for  meals,  and 
another  for  walking  before  dinner  and  fupper) 
I fpent  quietly  in  my  ftudy. 

Sat.  12.  I adminiftred  the  facrament  to  R — 
A—.  Some  years  ago  he  found  peace  with  God 
and  was  freed  at  once  without  any  human  means 
from  a dlftemper  naturally  incurable.  But  after 
three  years  on  his  falling  back  into  the  world, 
it  returned  more  violent  than  ever ; and  will 
probably  now  be  cured  no  more  but  by  the  uni- 
verfal  remedy,  death. 

Sat.  26.  Mr,  Gilbert  Tennent  of  New-Eng- 

land 


[ 307  1 

Jand  called  upon  me,  and  informed  me  of  his 
defign,  now  ready  to  be  executed,  of  founding 
an  American  college  for  proteflants  of  every  de- 
nomination. An  admirable  defign,  if  it  will 
bring  protefiants  of  every  denomination  to  bear 
with  one  another. 

Mond.  28.  I delivered  my  own  foul,  by  one 

more  converfation  with  Sir  — — ; the  fub- 

fiance  of  which  I wrote  to  him  the  next  day  in 
the  following  letter. 

SIR,  Oft.  28,  1754." 

WHETHER  I fee  you  any  more  in  this  life 
or  no,  I rejoice  that  I have  feen  you  this 
once  ; and  that  God  inabled  you  to  bear  with  pa- 
tience, what  I fpoke  in  the  fimplicity  of  my  heart. 

The  fubftance  of  what  I took  the  liberty  to 
mention  to  you  this  morning  was;  “ You  are  on 
the  borders  of  the  grave,  as  well  as  I:  (hortly 
we  muft  both  appear  before  God.  When  it  feem- 
ed  to  me  fome  months  fince  that  my  life  was  near 
an  end,  I was  troubled  that  I had  not  dealt  plainly 
with  you.  This  you  will  permit  me  to  do  now, 
without  any  referve,  in  the  fear  and  in  the  pre- 
fence of  God. 

I reverence  you  for  your  office  as  a maglftrate  : 
I believe  you  to  be  an  honeft,  upright  man ; I 
love  you  for  having  protefted  an  innocent  peo- 
ple from  their  cruel  and  lawlefs  oppreffbrs.  But 
fo  much  the  more  am  I obliged  to  fay  (though 
I judge  not;  God  is  the  judge)  1 fear  you  are 
covetous ; that  you  love  the  world.  And  if  you 

do. 


[ 3o8  ] 

do,  as  fure  as  the  word  of  God  is  true,  you  are 
not  in  a ftate  of  falvation. 

The  fubftance  of  your  anfwer  was,  that  many 
people  exhort  others  to  charity,  from  felf-in- 
tereft ; that  men  of  fortune  rauft  mind  their  for- 
tune ; that  you  cannot  go  about  to  look  for  poor 
people;  that  when  you  have  feen  them  yourfelf, 
and  relieved  them,  they  were  fcarce  ever  fatisfi- 
ed  : that  many  make  an  ill  ufe  of  what  you  give 
them:  that  you  cannot  truft  the  account  peo- 
ple give  of  themfelves  by  letters : that  neverthe- 
lefs  you  do  give  to  private  perfons  by  the  hands 
of  Colonel  Hudfon  and  others  ; that  you  have 
alfo  given  to  feveral  hofpitals,  an  hundred  pounds 
at  a time  : but  that  you  muft  fupport  your  fami- 
ly : that  the  Lowther  family  has  continued  above 
400  years : that  vou  are  for  great  things ; for 
public  charities,  and  for  faving  the  nation  from 
ruin;  and  that  others  may  think  as  they  pleafe  ; 
but  this  is  your  way  of  thinking,  and  has  been 
for  many  years. 

To  this  I replied,  1.  Sir,  I have  no  felf-intcr- 
ell  in  this  matter  ; I confult  your  inlereft,  not 
my  own  : I want  nothing  from  you ; I defire 
nothing  from  you  ; I expeft  nothing  from  you. 
But  1 am  concerned  for  your  immortal  fpirit, 
which  rauft  fo  foon  launch  into  eternity.  2.  It 
is  true  men  of  fortune  muft  mind  their  fortune, 
but  they  muft  not  love  the  world.  If  any  man 
hve  the  morld,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in 


[ 309  ] 


him.  3.  It  is  true  likewife  you  cannot  go  about 
to  look  for  poor  people  : but  you  may  be  fufR- 
ciently  informed  of  them  by  thofe  that  can.  4. 
And  if  fqme  of  thefe  are  never  fatisfied,  this  is 
no  reafon  for  not  relieving  others.  5.  Suppofe 
too,  that  fome  make  an  ill  ufe  of  what  you  give, 
the  lofs  falls  on  their  own  head.  You  will  not 
lofe  your  reward  for  their  fault.  What  you  laid 
out,  God  will  pay  you  again.  6.  Yet  certainly 
you  do  well  to  have  all  the  alTurance  you  can, 
that  thofe  to  whom  you  give,  are  likely  to  make 
a good  ufe  of  it:  and  therefore  to  expeft  a 
ftronffer  recommendation  of  them  than  their 
own,  whether  by  letter  or  otherwife.  7.  I re- 
joice that  you  have  given  to  many  by  fo  worthy 
a man  as  Colonel  Hudfon,  whofe  word  is  cer- 
tainly a fufficient  recommendation.  8.  I rejoice 
likewife  that  you  have  given  fome  hundreds  of 
pounds  to  the  hofpitals,  and  wifh  it  had  been  ten 
thoufand.  9.  To  the  fupport  of  the  family  I did 
not  obje£l ; but  begged  leave  to  afk,  whether 
this  could  not  be  done,  without  giving  ten  thou- 
fand  a year  to  one  who  had  as  much  already  ? 
And  whether  you  could  anfwer  this  to  God,  in 
the  day  w'herein  he  fhall  judge  the  world.  10. 
I likewife  granted,  that  the  family  had  con- 
tinued above  400  years ; but  obfex’ved  mean- 
time, that  God  regarded  it  not  a jot  the 
more  for  this:  and  that  400  or  1000  years 

are  but  a moment  compared  to  eternity.  11. 
I obferved  likewife,  that  great  things  may 

be 


[ 310  J 

be  done,  and  little  things  not  left  undone.  12, 
And  that  if  this,  or  any  other  way  of  think- 
ing be  according  to  fcripture,  then  it  is 
found  and  good  : whereas,  if  it  be  contrary 
to  fcripture,  it  is  not  good,  and  the  longer 
we  are  in  it,  fo  much  the  worfe. 

Upon  the  whole,  I mull  once  more  ear- 
neflly  intreat  you  to  confider  yourfelf  and 
God,  and  eternity.  As  to  yourfelf,  you  are 
not  the  proprietor  of  any  thing : no,  not  of 
one  fhilling  in  tlie  world.  You  are  only  a 
fleward  of  what  another  intrufls  you  with, 
to  be  laid  out  not  according  to  your  will 
but  his.  And  what  would  you  think  of  your 
iteward,  if  he  laid  out  what  is  called  your 
money,  according  to  his  own  will  and  plea- 
fure  ? 2.  Is  not  God  the  foie  proprietor  of 
all  things  ? And  arc  not  you  to  give  an  ac- 
count to  him  for  every  part  of  his  goods  ? 
And  O how  dreadful  an  account,  if  you  have 
expended  any  part  of  them  not  according 
to  liis  will,  but  your  own  ? 3.  Is  not  death 
at  hand  ? And  are  not  you  and  I juft  ftep- 
ping  into  eternity  ? Are  we  not  juft  going 
to  appear  in  the  prefence  of  God  ? And  that 
naked  of  all  worldly  goods  ? Will  you  then 
rejoice  in  the  money  you  have  left  behind 
you  ? Or  in  that  you  have  given  to  fup- 
port  a family,  as  it  is  called  : that  is  in  truth 
to  fupport  the  pride  and  vanity  and  luxury, 
which  you  have  yourfelf  defpifed  all  your 

life 


[ 311  ] 

life  long  ? O fir,  I befeech  you  for  the  fake 
of  God,  for  the  fake  of  your  own  immortal 
foul,  examine  yourfelf,  whether  you  do  not 
love  money  ? If  fo,  you  cannot  love  God. 
And  if  we  die  without  the  fear  of  God,  what 
remains  ? Only  to  be  banilhed  from  him  for 
ever  and  ever  ! 

I am,  with  true  refpett.  Sir, 

Your  fervant  for  Chrill’s  fake. 


The  End  Twenty-ninth  Volume. 


THE 

CONTENTS 


Of  the  Twenty-ninth  Volume. 


Page. 

ExtraB  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Wefley’s 
Journal,  from  Nov.  25,  1736,  \.o  July 
20,  1731.  3 


ExtraB  of  the  Rev.  A/r.John  Wefley’j  Jour- 
nal, from  July  20,  1731,  to  OBober 
28,  1754.  184 


'k  - 


. vl 


l«* 


~f 

n 


! 


\ ■ 


■V 


■;f 


y. 


r 


L: 


1 


/» 


7 


I _ < ' ✓ 


1 


J ; 


4' 


(A 


I 


•ws. 


^ :•  ■ 


•>> 


,\ 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

