


| Tm








eeeepies Gree Cheek
ag A. Ye 2, “eota


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711





.








THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


NEW TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.





By VARIOUS AUTHORS


~ In Eleven Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Sigaee
POS A HOMILETIC


v.26 -


COMMENTARY


ON THE


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES


BY THE


REV. THOMAS WHITELAW, M.A., D.D.
Author of Expositions and Homiletics in ‘‘Pulpit Commentary’’ on Genesis, ‘‘An
Exegetical and Homiletical Commentary on the
Gospel of St. John,’’ etc., etc.





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





THE


PREACHER’S HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY.





THE ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


—_»—_


INTRODUCTION.


WHILE the present volume does not aim at furnishing an elaborate and ex-
haustive discussion of such topics as are usually included in the department of
Introduction, on the following points, as likely to be useful to the student, a
tew observations may be offered—the title and contents; the integrity and
credibility ; the author and date; the sources and aim of the Acts.


§ I. Titte Anp ConTENTs.


1. The Title.—Like the name “ Gosp¥l,” ciayyédov, prefixed to the first four
Books of the New Testament, that of “The Acts of the Apostles,” pages rav
droorokwv, Acta or Actus Apostolorum—in some MSS. “ Acts,” “ Acts of all the
Apostles,” and “‘ Acts of the Holy Apostles ”—though of long standing, is not
eriginal, but was added by a later hand. Neither can it be pronounced remark-
ably appropriate, since the volume to which it is prefixed is mainly occupied
with the words and deeds of the two principal apostles, Peter and Paul, and does
little more than mention the others—the eleven once (i. 13), Judas (i. 16, 25),
and Matthias the twelfth (i. 23, 26) twice, and John five times (iii. 1, 11, iv. 13,
viii. 14, xii. 2)—while it introduces a variety of persons who were not of
apostolic rank, such as Stephen and Philip, Barnabas and Mark, Silas and
Timothy. If for the author himself the work had a title, that was probably
“The Second Treatise” as distinguished from “The First,” or the Gospel of
Luke, which claims to have proceeded from the same pen, and to have been
addressed to the same patron, the most excellent Theophilus (i. 1; Luke i. 3).

2. The Contents.—These, as just indicated, concern chiefly the apostolic and


missionary activity of Peter and of Paul—of the former in planting and
|


inTRODUCTION. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








establishing the Christian Church within the bounds of the Holy Land, of
the latter in carrying the Gospel into regions beyond. Beginning with what
might be styled “The Acts of Peter” (i.—xii.), after a brief account of the
appearances of our Lord to the eleven during the forty days which intervened
between His resurrection and ascension (i. 1-11), the writing treats in succession
of (1) the election of a twelfth apostle, at Peter’s instigation, to supply the place
left vacant by Judas (i. 12-26); (2) the descent of the Holy Spirit on the day
of Pentecost, with Peter's sermon explanatory of the wonderful phenomena that
followed thereupon (ii.) ; (3) the growing acceptance of the New Faith among
the inhabitants of Jerusalem consequent upon Peter’s healing of a lame man (iti. i
(4) the first symptoms of Jewish Opposition against the Church, shown in the
imprisonment of Peter and John (iv.); (5) the first signs of corruption inside
the Church, with the strong measures used by Peter for its suppression (v.);
(6) the first murmurs of division in the ranks of the disciples, with the means
adopted by the Twelve for its removal (vi. 1-6) ; and (7) the first actual persecu-
tion that assailed the Church, which arose in connection with Stephen (vi. 8—
viii. 3); after which (8) it traces the forward movement and outward spread
of Christianity from Jerusalem as a centre, till first the Gospel is planted in
Samaria (viii. 4-24), carried north to Damascus (ix.), preached in Cmsarea
(viii. 40, x—xi. 18), and finally established in Antioch (xi. 19—xii.). Then
continuing in what with equal fitness may be termed “The Acts of Paul,” it
reports how, through the missionary enterprise of that illustrious servant of
Jesus Christ whose conversion has been related in the preceding part (ix.), the ~
Gospel finds its way now from Antioch as a centre, first through Asia Minor, in
Paul’s first missionary journey with Barnabas (xiii—xv.) ; next to the shores of
Europe, in a second journey with Silas and a third with Timothy (xvi.—xxi.) ;
and ultimately, through Paul’s imprisonment, reaches Rome, the capital of the
world (xxviii.).

Though the continuously flowing narrative contains no indications of divisions
properly so called, yet various attempts have been made to arrange its material
into appropriate sections. Zeller, for example, distributes it into three groups of
passages, of which the first (i—v., xii.) “ treats” of the original apostles and the
Jerusalem Church, while the second (vi.—xi., with the exception of ix. 1-30)
deals with the two Hellenist deacons, Stephen and Philip, and the third
(ix. 1-30, xiii—zxxviii.) narrates the history of Paul. As this, however, is
rather a rearrangement of the contents of the work for study than a natural
division of these into sections, a different method of partition is usually adopted.
The threefold division, corresponding roughly to the three centres of activity,
Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, has found pretty general acceptance, only the
dividing lines between the sections are not always dvawn by different writers in
the same places, Weiss inserting them at viii. 4 and xv. 33, Schulze at vi. 7
and xix. 20, and Baumgarten at viii. 4 and xii. 25. The Rev. J. O. F,
Murray, M.A., in the Cambridge Companion to the Bible, p. 71, following our
Lord’s words in i. 8, arranges the contents of the Book thus: I. The witness


in Jerusalem (1—v.). I. The witness in Judea and Samaria (vi.—ix. 31) in
»


é


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. 1ntTRODUCTION.


three stages ; (1) the dispersion caused by Stephen’s martyrdom (vi. 8 —viii. 3) ;
(2) the work of Philip (viii. 4-40); and (3) the conversion and early preaching
of Saul of Tarsus (ix. 1-31). III. The witness unto the uttermost parts of
the earth (ix. 32—xxviii. 31) again in three sub-divisions: (1) the opening of
the door for world-wide extension of the gospel by the baptism of Cornelius
(x. 1—xi. 26), (2) the activity of the Church at Antioch through its accredited
representatives, Barnabas and Saul (xi. 27—xiv.); and (3) the independent
missionary activity of Paul (xv.—xxviii.). Perhaps, however, the simplest
distribution of the material is that already indicated, which divides it into
two parts, of which the first (i—xii.) reports the development of the Church
under the leadership of Peter and within the Holy Land, from Jerusalem as a
centre, till it reaches Antioch, and the second (xiii.—xxviii.) rehearses the story
of its progress, through the missionary activity of Paul, outside those limits in
Asia Minor and on the shores of Europe, or in other words from Antioch to Rome.


§ 2. InrEGRITY AND CREDIBILITY.


1. The Integrity—That the Book of Acts is no mere patchwork or mosaic of
literary fragments left by a variety of writers and put together by a late editor
who flourished at some considerable distance of time from the incidents narrated,
but a homogeneous composition, proceeding from one hand, may be said to
admit of almost unchallengeable demonstration. In its second part, indeed, occur
portions (the “we” passages as they are commonly styled, xvi. 10-17, xx. 5-15,
xxi. 1-18, xxvii. 1—xxviii. 16) which excite suspicion of diverse authorship ; but
as the result of investigations conducted by Gersdorf, Credner, and Zeller, it may
now be confidently maintained that both portions of the Book—the first in which
the writer preserves the third person throughout, and the second in which he
occasionally speaks in the first person—have emanated from one mind and been
set down by one pen. ‘The actual composer may have utilised pre-existing
documents, or such other helps as were-available for his purpose; he may even
have modified and combined these according to the plan and aim he had in view
in the construction of his narrative ; but there can be no ground for charging
him with having simply set these documents, side by side without regard to any
particular design. What is signified by asserting the unity and integrity of the
work is that such documents as may have been possessed by the author were not
inserted unchanged in his pages without respect to any connection between them
and the main thread of his history, but were employed by him as sources of
information from which to draw materials for his work, so that the work itself
could in no sense be regarded as a collection of fragments, but constituted a
homogeneous whole. Those who care to understand how completely this
character has been vindicated for the Acts will find a thoroughgoing dis-
cussion of the question in the Apostelgeschichte of Zeller (pp. 387 ff), who
has conclusively shown not only that the two portions of the Book possess points
of resemblance in respect of diction and style, doctrinal contents and method cf
composition, as well as of forward and backward reference of passages in the
different parts to one another, but that the citations commonly adduced as

3


INTRODUCTION. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a Se a aa a SST


presenting traces of different authorship are totally insufficient to support the
thesis for which they are produced. So satisfactorily has the unity of Acts
been established that no one now thinks of assailing it on this point. The Acts
of the Apostles is admittedly the work of one composer.

2. The Credibility—(1) The grounds upon which this has been challenged,
though varied, may be reduced to six: (a) the miracles reported in its narrative,
which, after the manner of rationalising critics, are ascribed to the mythical
tendency of a later age to embellish the historical facts of an earlier generation ;
(8) the speeches it contains, which, objectors allege, were never delivered as set
down, but can only be regarded as having been manufactured by the author ;
(y) the artificial structure of its narrative, which shows itself in the parallelisms
apparent in the histories of Peter and of Paul; (8) its author’s defective under-
standing of the antagonisms of the apostolic age; (e) the supposed conflict
between its statements and those of Paul’s epistles; and (¢) its remarkable
silence about the differences between Paul and the other apostles.

With regard to (a), the miracles reported in the Acts, unless criticism is to start
with the presupposition that anything approaching the supernatural in a writing
is sufficient to discredit it, these must be held to be, abstractly considered, neither
impossible nor incredible; while their authenticity, in each particular instance,
must be determined by the marks of truthfulness or its opposite which appear in
the document reporting them. But apart from the dogma that “ miracles are
incredible, if not impossible,” it has never been proved either that the super-
natural phenomena incorporated in the Acts are susceptible of natural explanation,
or that the parts of Acts which record these phenomena are intrinsically contra-
dictory or untrustworthy ; while in almost every instance marks of verisimilitude
can be pointed out which justify the reader in accepting both the record and the
fact recorded as true.

Concerning (f), the speeches which it is alleged the speakers never spoke, but

the author manufactured, it may suffice to answer, that while on the one hand
it is not denied that the author may have set down not the ipsissima verba
-which were uttered, but the substance of what was spoken, and may have
frequently done so with more or less of touching up from his own pen, on the
other hand it cannot be demonstrated either that he ever drew upon his imagina-
nation instead of deriving his information from written documents or reliable oral
communications (see below on the sources of the Acts), or that he ever deviated
by so much as a hair’s breadth from the truth, so as to convey to his readers an
impression different from what they would have received had they listened with
their own ears to the speech.

In support of the third charge (y), the artificial structure of the narrative, it
is customary to affirm that there is no sort of act or experience ascribed to Peter
in the first division of the Acts that has not its counterpart in the second
division which relates the history of Paul. “ Both epistles begin their miraculous
healings with the restoration of a lame-born man (iii. 2, xiv. 8). Peter works
miracles through his own shadow (v. 15) ; Paul through his aprons and napkins


(xix. 12). Peter’s name is feared by demons (v. 16, viii. 7); as afterwards is
4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. .nrrRopvuction.





that of Paul (xvi. 18, xix. 11, 15, xxviii. 9). If Peter overcomes Simon Magus
(viii. 18), so does Paul overthrow Elymas (xiii. 6) and the Ephesian wizards
(xix. 13). Miracles of punishment are performed in the above-cited cases by
Paul as well as by Peter (v. 1). To awaken the dead is just as possible to
the one as to the other (ix. 36, xx. 9). To Tabitha corresponds Eutychus,
as to Aineas (ix. 33), Publius’s father (xxviii. 8). Does Cornelius fall down
and worship Peter (x. 25)? So is Paul deemed worthy of divine honour at
Lystra (xiv. 11) and Malta (xxviii. 6), which he refuses in almost the same
words as Peter. . . . Is Paul imprisoned and placed before the judgment-seat ?
The same thing happens first to Peter and John, and afterwards to all the
apostles. Has Paul been beaten at Philippi before the two Duumviri? So
were the first apostles before the Sanhedrim. Was Paul stoned at Lystra? So
was Stephen in Jerusalem. Has an angel delivered Peter from his prison? An
‘earthquake does the same thing for Paul” (Holtzmann, Hinleitung, pp. 410, 411).
The correspondences are undoubted, but after all they exist in only a few
instances, and seldom in any instance in more than a few particulars. Anything
like a complete parallel between the histories of Peter and Paul such as the
Tiibingen critics suggested cannot be made out. ‘ Where,” for instance, “ are
the parallels to the Pentecostal wonder, to the choice of the Seven, to the sea
voyage of Paul, or to his four years’ imprisonment in Cesarea and Rome ?”
And “ Why,” more particularly, “ did the composer forget to set the crown upon
his whole presentation [of history] by bringing Peter to Rome and making both
apostles die as martyrs in the same persecution?” (Holtzmann, Linleitung,
p. 415.) The truth is, as the writer just cited remarks, the parallel is almost
always accidental (which proves it to have been undesigned), and always breaks
down in its most crucial point, as, for example, when attempted to be
established between the stoning of Paul at Lystra and the stoning of Stephen
in Jerusalem. If the writer wished to make the two correspond, why did he
allow Paul to rise up and walk away unhurt after lapidation, when he knew
that Stephen lost his life in passing through a similar experience? In short,
whatever resemblances exist between the two histories are “not more than
might be expected in any age from simple parity of situation and condition”
(Sanday, Inspiration, p. 327), and all the rest is, on the part of critics, baseless
imagination.

The charge (8) of not understanding the antagonisms of the apostolic age,
which some have pressed against the author of the Acts, is entirely a matter of
opinion; and concerning this the judgment of so competent a scholar as Professor
Sanday will probably have as much weight as the contrary allegation. ‘ Looking
at the matter with such a measure of intelligence as I can command for myself,”
writes he, “ I should say that the Acts showed, on the whole, a very good under-
standing of the different opposing forces which brought the history to the point
at which the author left it” (Jnspiration, p. 321). With this verdict the
majority of candid readers will agree. The first conflict which arose within the
Church out of the supposed or real neglect of the widows of Hellenistic Jews in
favour of those of native-born Palestinians is introduced and explained in a


5


IntTRODUCcTION. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE AOS:





manner which shows the writer to have been in possession of authentic informa-
tion about the whole dispute; while it is sbeer assertion to maintain that the
author of the Acts failed to comprehend the controversy which inevitably sprung
up and for some time fiercely raged around the question of what terms of com-
munion should be imposed upon Gentile converts. Nor is there ground for
contending that the author inadequately grasped Paul's theological teaching, of
which the central doctrine, that of Justification by Faith, is reported by him in
the Apostle’s speech at Antioch (xiii. 38 /), and that of the Atonement in the
address to the elders at Miletus (xx. 28), though even could it be established
that he did not thoroughly comprehend the Pauline theology in all its details,
that would not prove him to have been incapable of writing authentic history.

As to (c), the pretended conflict between the statements in Acts and certain
uther statements in Paul’s Epistles, more is made of this than the actual facts
wf the case will warrant. When it is urged, for example, that because Paul’s
epistles never refer to his second visit to Jerusalem in company with Barnabas
(xi. 30), or to the apostolic decrees (xv.), these cannot have been historical ;
or that the chronicles in Acts cannot be trustworthy because of not men-
tioning either Paul’s bodily weakness (1 Cor. iv. 9 ff; 2 Cor. i. 8, 9; Gal. iv.
13, 14), or the stake in the flesh (2 Cor. xii. 7) under which he suffered,
or the ‘deaths oft,” ‘“ prisons more abundant,” “three shipwrecks,” and “ eight
bodily punishments” of which he speaks (2 Cor. vi. 5, xi. 23-25), or the journey
he made to Arabia (Gal. i. 17), or the dispute he had at Antioch with Peter
(Gal. ii. 11); any one can perceive that such reasoning is not conclusive, unless
it can be shown that a writer is always bound to mention everything he knows ;
while as for the so-called contradictions between the Acts and Epistles which
critics so confidently parade as evidence of the unreliable character of the former,
these mostly exist in the imaginations of the critics. The intellect which can
discern irreconcilable antagonisms between such statements as that Paul went
up to Jerusalem as the messenger of the Church at Antioch (xv. 2), and
likewise in obedience to divine revelation (Gal. ii. 2); that he laid his own
personal views about the gospel before a private meeting of the apostles (Gal. ii. 2),
and afterwards the public question concerning the terms of communion for
Gentile converts before a general assembly of the apostles and elders (xv.
6, 12, 23, 25); that he refused to circumcise Titus because of the false brethren
who wanted to enforce this rite upon all Christians (Gal. ii. 3), and afterwards
in Lystra circumcised Timothy, whose mother was a Jewess (xvi. 3), in order
(it is believed) to make his ministry more acceptable to the Jews; that when
Paul reached Rome the Jews spoke as if Christianity had scarcely been heard
of in that city (xxviii. 21, 22), whereas the Apostle had years before written
that the faith of the Roman Church was spread abroad throughout the whole
world (Rom. i. 8); the intellect that can see in these propositions irreconcilable
antagonisms deserves to be pronounced incapable of reasonable criticism.

The last objection (£) the silence of Acts concerning the differences between
Paul and the other Apostles, and in particular Peter, is no real difficulty
unless, as already explained, on the assumption that a writer is always bound,


A
HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. i rropucrion.


soso ae ee cs ee SRE a ae
on pain of losing his reputation for truthfulness, to communicate all he knows.
Besides, by the time the Acts was penned, the supposed friction between the two
Apostles, if it ever reached the severity suggested by this objection, which there
is no reason to believe it did, must have been considerably allayed, so that no
good purpose could have been served by recalling it to the remembrance of
Christian readers, or even by disturbing the flow of his narrative through the
introduction of personalities, which probably both good men regretted, the more
especially as the story had already been told to the Church in the Epistle to the
Galatians.

(2) The positive evidence in support of the trustworthy character of the Acts
is extremely satisfactory.

(a) A considerable portion of the Book—the “we” passages already more
than once alluded to—consists of reports from an eyewitness, who, even on the
supposition of a late authorship for the whole work, must have been a fellow-
traveller of the Apostle in those districts to which his reports refer ; while, if the
writer of the “ we” passages was the actual author of the whole, a presumption
arises from his having been a contemporary of Paul’s, that he had access to
reliable sources of information for what he wrote. (See below on the sources of
the Acts.)

(8) The undesigned coincidences which have been detected between state-
ments in the Acts on the one hand, and statements in the Epistles of Paul on
the other, furnish a second testimony to the accuracy of the author of the Acts.
For these Paley’s Hore Pauline, Blunt’s Undesigned Coincidences, and Birks’s
Hore Apostolice, should be consulted, though the following instances may be
studied as illustrations of the sort of-evidence that is meant :—





ACTS. EPISTLES,





vili. 3, ix. 1-10 .| Paul’s conversion . ‘a .| 1 Tim. i. 13-16.

ix. 23-25 . . | Paul’s escape from Damascus. . «| 2 Cor, xi, 32, 33!

ime 20 KV. 2, KX. Paul’ ststo.J 1 Gal. i. 17, 18, ii.1; Rom. xv.

16, may. 17 aul’s visits to Jerusalem : é A 25 26,

xiv. 19 0 . | Paul’s stoning at Lystra . be -| 2 Cor, xi, 25.

xvi, 16-22 . - | Paul’s sufferings at Philippi . ‘ .| Phil. i. 29, 30, ii. 1,2; 1 Thess.
ii. 2, iii. 4.

xvii. 5-9. . | Paul’s sufferings at Thessalonica . .| 1 Thess, iii. 4.

xvii. 16 5 - | Paul left alone at Athens E : .| 1 Thess. ii. 18, ii?. 1, 6, 7,

xviii. 1, xx.2 .| Paul’s two visits to Corinth . ; lek Cor dnelo ive Loy xviea.

XViii. 24-28. . | Work of Apollos at Corinth . . 1 Cor, i. 12, iii. 6.

xix. 20, 26 . . | The “effectual door” opened at Ephesus 1 Cor. xvi. 9.

xix. 29, 30 . .| “Fighting with wild beasts” at Ephesus | 1 Cor. xv. 32.

xix. 33 . .| Alexander the silversmith . = >| 2Lim: iv. 14:

Sears . . | Gospel preached in Ilyricum . ° .| Rom. xv. 9. |

xx.4. ° . | Tychicus known to the Ephesians . .| Eph, vi. 21.

xx. 4 . | Trophimus left at Miletus. ¢ . | 2 Tim. iv. 20.

XXVili. 16- 20 . | Paul a prisoner é < é . | Eph. vi. 19, 20. |





\

(y) The speeches in the Acts which purport to have been delivered by Peter,
Paul, and James, when compared with the Epistles left by these writers, are
found to exhibit an agreement with them which could hardly have existed haa
the speeches been fictitious. Of the correctness of this assertion one may quickly
convince himself by means of a concordance. Nor does it accord with fact, as is


7


inrropucrton, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





sometimes asserted, that the characteristics of Luke run through the discourses
of Peter and Paul, but on the contrary, by “the general type of their teaching
and minute peculiarities of style,” these are most carefully distinguished from
Luke’s compositions (Ebrard, The Gospel History, p. 501, E. T.).

(8) The knowledge now possessed of the countries and age to which Acts
refers enables the correctness of its statements to be placed beyond dispute.
Not only does the writer show himself accurately informed about the titles
of Roman magistrates in the first century, calling Sergius Paulus (xiii. 7) and
Gallio (xviii. 12) proconsuls and governors of senatorial provinces, dyOvzarot,
the magistrates of Thessalonica (xvii. 6) politarchs, rodurdpxar, those of Philippi
(xvi. 21), pretors, orparyyoi, and the governor of Melita merely head man,
mparos (xxviii. 7), but he can tell that in Asia Minor (xiii. 50), and indeed
throughout the Roman empire (xvii. 4, 12), during the first century women
exercised great social influence, that Iconium, though from s.c. 100 to A.D.
100 regarded by the Romans as included in the district of Lycaonia, was by
the native population distinguished as belonging to Phrygia (xiv. 6), and that
until towards the close of the first century Christians were never persecuted
by the Roman State for being Christians, but only for being disturbers of
the peace and (supposed) enemies of social order (xvi. 7, xxiv. 5, 6). (See
Ramsay’s The Church in the Roman Empire, pp. 37, 38, 67, 68, 194, 195.)
Recent archeological discovery also has set its seal on the historical character
of such narratives as those of Paul’s three years’ residence in Ephesus (Jbid.,
143), and of Paul’s voyage to Rome. In short, notwithstanding the minutest
criticism to which this work has been subjected, it may be fairly said that
no single instance can be produced in which the writer has erred in
graphical, political, or social allusion. Indeed it has been well said, “A man
who could have.been so wondrously accurate in his forgeries concerning countries
so widely separated, as the writer of the Acts must have been, would have been
a greater miracle than the greatest miracle which his pen records” (George T.
Stokes, D.D., Recent Discoveries and the Christian Faith; Sunday at Home,
August 1889, p. 552).


§ 3. AuTHoR AND DarTE.


1. The Author.—The following line of thought’ may aid in arriving st a just
conclusion with respect to the personality of the writer from whom Acts
emanated. x

(1) The writing claims to have proceeded from the pen which composed the
Gospel of Luke (i. 1; Luke i. 3); and an examination of the two treatises
abundantly confirms this claim. Not only do the two bear a close resemblance
to one another in diction, in the use of words and phrases either peculiar to them-
selves or more frequently occurring in them than in other writings, but the Acts
in several instances refers to incidents which are mentioned elsewhere only in
Luke—as, ¢.g., the command not to depart from Jerusalem (Luke xxiy. 29), and
the return of the eleven to the city after the Ascension (Luke xxiv. 52), while


its catalogue of the Apostles (i, 13) agrees with that of Luke (vi. 14-16),
e


8 &


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. intTRoDUCTION.


rather than with that of Matthew or with that of Mark, in calling Simon
the Zealot rather than the Canaanean (Matt. x. 4; Mark iii. 18), and in
substituting for Thaddeus (Matt. x. 3; Mark iii. 18) Judas the son of James.
It has also been observed that Stephen’s prayer (vii. 59) echoes words of our
Lord which have been preserved by the third evangelist alone (Luke xxiii. 34).
Hence whatever arguments go to establish Luke’s authorship of the Third
Gospel (upon which it is not proposed to enter here) may be reasonably claimed
as making for Luke’s authorship of the Acts.

- (2) The writing has so manifestly emanated from one composer (see above on
the integrity), that, if the author of one portion of it can be agreed upon, that
person must be forthwith pronounced responsible for the whole. Now the “ we”
passages leave no uncertainty upon the mind as to their authorship. They must
have proceeded from a travelling companion of the Apostle, who joined him at
Troas (xvi. 10), left him at Philippi (xvi. 40), was again picked up by him
in that city some years after (xx. 5, 6), and journeyed with him to Jerusalem
(xxi. 17), Ceesarea (xxvii. 1), and Rome (xxviii. 16). Of course the hypothesis
is far from being impossible, that a late writer—say about the end of the
first or beginning of the second century—having obtained access to these
“we” documents, incorporated them in his own narrative without alteration,
only it does not appear why so skilful a composer as the author of Acts
should not have changed the “ we” into ‘“‘they,” unless it was that he desired
his readers to understand that he himself was included in the “we.” In other
words, it is hard to resist the inference that the hand which recorded the ‘“ we”
passages wrote the whole book.

(3). As to who the author of the “ we” passages actually was, the best existing

te Rrid@ico points to Luke, the beloved physician who was with Paul in Rome
(Col. iv. 14). Claims have been advanced for Timothy, Titus, and Silas, but the
considerations favourable to any one of these are outweighed by those which
speak for Luke. The way in which the first ‘‘ we” passage (xvi. 10) is introduced
excludes the supposition that Timothy composed it, while xvi. 19 does the same
for Silas. Again, when “we” reappears (xx. 6), Silas is not among Paul’s
companions, though Timothy, already excluded, is. As for Titus, who certainly
accompanied Paul to the Jerusalem council (Gal. ii. 1), no reason exists for
believing that he attended Paul and Silas on the second missionary journey, or
was ever with Paul in Philippi. So that Luke alone remains as a possible
author of the passages in question. It only needs to be added that this conclu-
sion harmonises with the almost unanimous verdict of ecclesiastical tradition.

2. The Date.—The authorship of Luke established, the contention of those who
relegate the Acts to the second century will need no refutation. Internal evidence
reveals that the work belongs to the first century ; and the sole question calling
for solution is at what point of time in Luke’s own life it was issued. That it
presupposed the existence of Luke’s Gospel is apparent. As, according to some
critics, that Gospel could not have been composed till after the destruction of
Jerusalem, then the date of the Acts must be looked for after a.p. 70. As,
however, no plausible reason for assigning the Gospel to this late date can be

9


IntRopuction. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a a UE


found, except the dogmatic assumption that Luke xix. 43 could not have been
written till after the event, those who still regard prediction in the strict sense
of the term as neither impossible, nor incredible may be excused if they demand
stronger evidence for setting aside the widely accepted belief that Acts was
composed in the lifetime and during the imprisonment (Dollinger, Langen,
Michaelis, Kuinoel, Tholuck, Ebrard, Godet, etc.) of Paul, and therefore about
A.D. 62. Had Paul been dead when Luke wrote, it is at least likely that some
hint would have been dropped that the great missionary had finished his course.


§ 4, Sources anp Aim.


1. The Sources.—(1) It is obvious that for the “we” passages Luke would
require simply to draw upon his own recollection or notes of the scenes and
incidents of which he had been an eyewitness.

(2) Of those portions of Paul’s missionary journeys of which he had not been
an eyewitness his information would most likely be derived from the Apostle
himself. Whether Paul had prepared such a travel document as Ramsay
contends for (The Church in the Roman Empire, p. 6) may be uncertain, though
highly probable. It is undeniable that Luke, through long companionship with
Paul at Cesarea and at Rome—two years in each—had ample opportunity for
hearing the story over and over again from the Apostle’s lips, while “it is hard
to believe that Paul’s letters were unknown to Luke” (Ramsay, Sé. Paul the
Traveller, and the Roman Citizen, p. 16).

(3) Nor could he have experienced much difficulty in becoming acquainted
with the facts recorded in the earlier chapters of his Book, as, while Paul could
have told him all about the martyrdom of Stephen, Philip the Evangelist, whom
he met at Caesarea (xxi. 8), could as readily have informed him about the
conversion of Cornelius of Czsarea (x.), of which he must have often heard,
of the conversion of the Eunuch, which was brought about through his own
instrumentality (viii. 26), and of the preaching in Samaria, which also had been
carried on by himself (viii. 1-24). About the Pentecostal wonder and the
commencement of the Church in Jerusalem, as Luke accompanied Paul to the
Jewish metropolis, and without doubt (xxi. 18) was introduced to James and the
elders, it is easy to perceive that he stood in immediate connection with those
to whom the history of the first days was perfectly familiar. If amongst these
written documents already existed, beyond question Luke would not be denied
access to them ; if written documents did not exist, Luke would have had no
difficulty in preparing them from the oral accounts to which he listened.

Norzt.—With the explanation above given corresponds in some measure that
put forth by Friedrich Spitta (Die Apostelgeschichte, ihre Quellen und deren
geschichtlicher Wert, 1891), who detects in the Acts “two separate documents
—one, A, probably composed by Luke, beginning with the report of the
Ascension, in Luke xxiv. 50-53, containing the ‘we’ passages, and concluding
with the narrative of Paul’s voyage to Rome; another, B, commencing with the
Ascension story in the Acts, and ending with Paul’s discussion with the Jews
in Rome ; and both put together by an editor, R, who worked still in the first

10


!


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE AOTS. 1nrTRopuctioN.





century.” The different characteristics of these documents are: thus indicated :
“In A the history is authentic, while that in B, which relates the miracles, is
manufactured. From A the editor extracted the speeches, but from B the
narratives about the miracles. In A the question chiefly is about Paul’s
relation to the Jews, whilst his relation to the Gentiles retreats into the back-
ground; in B, on the other hand, Paul’s relation to the Gentiles steps to the
front, whilst his relation to the Jews retires into the shade. Hence it is in B
that signs first appear of the separation of the Jewish Christians from the Law-
free Gentile Christians. For R the question is the combination of these two
sources. Neither A nor B concluded with the two years’ imprisonment of Paul
at Rome, where R stops. This writer had in view the composition of a third
essay, a tpitos Adyos, though he appears never to have carried it out” (A.
Hilgenfeld wm Zeitschrift fiir wissenschaftliche Theologie (1895), 1, pp. 67, 68).
Though a good deal of this is fanciful and arbitrary, yet its main idea of
“separate documents” may be harmonised with what has been stated above by
supposing that A was a record written by Luke of what he had seen and
heard, while B consisted in large part of narratives prepared by Paul and
others, and that Luke himself was R. (Compare Ramsay’s The Church in the
Roman Empire, pp. 6-8, 148-168; and St. Paul, the Traveller, etc., pp. 10 #7).

2. The Aim.—(1) That Luke’s aim in composing this work was neither, as
Grotius imagined, to write a biography of the two principal apostles, nor, as
Credner suggested, to prepare a Pauline Church history, may be regarded as
self-evident. To neither of these conceptions does the treatise answer.

(2) Still less can the view of Schneckenburger, Zeller, Baur, and their followers
be entertained—that it was written for the purpose of conciliating the opposing
parties in the early Christian Church (the Petrine or Jewish and the Pauline
or Gentile), by showing that, while on the one hand Paul was an orthodox Jew,
on the other hand Peter was in full sympathy with Paul’s universalism. In
support of this theory, besides pointing to the parallelism (designed, as this
theory requires it to have been) between the acts and experiences of Peter and
of Paul, it is usual to call attention to the facts that the first Gentile mission
was undertaken by Peter, who opened the door of the Church to Cornelius (x.),
and that Paul, by his constant practice of offering the gospel first to the Jews
(xiii. 16, xiv. 1, xvii. 2, xviii. 4), by his frequent journeyings to Jerusalem to
keep the feasts (xviii. 21, xx. 16), by his circumcision of Timothy (xvi. 3), and
by his Nazarite vow (xxi. 24), showed himself to be deeply and heartily attached
to the old Hebrew faith. But while all this is true, it is pure imagination to
assert either that such antagonism as is ordinarily depicted by the Tiibingen
critics raged between the Petrine and Pauline parties among the early
Christians—if, indeed, the existence of such parties at all is not a fiction of the
critical mind—or that the reconciliation of such parties formed any part of
Luke’s object in writing his treatise. If it was, he assuredly took a most
unfortunate way to do so, by calling attention so repeatedly and emphatically
as he does to the unbelief of the Jews, and by accentuating at the very crises
in Paul’s history (xxi. 20) the jealousy which was felt towards him by his

11


intropuction. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


< aree:


countrymen. Besides, as Weiss pertinently asks, what hope could there have
been of gaining over the Paulines by setting up a criterion of the apostolate
(i. 21, x. 41) which, in view of the Judaists, would have excluded Paul from it?
(A Manual of Introduction to the New Testament, ii., pp. 330, 331.) And
“ How,” inquires Holtzmann, “does it agree with the conciliatory character of
the work that exactly that tangible token of brotherly love, the collection, which
Paul brought to Jerusalem from his third journey, is scarcely mentioned?”
(Hinleitung, p. 416.) In short, so inadequately can this theory be made out,
that not a few advanced critics are becoming disposed to give it up, like
Schenkel, who says: “ Having never been able to convince myself of the sheer
opposition between Petrinism and Paulinism, it has also never been possible for
me to get a credible conception of a reconciliation effected by means of a litera-
ture sailing between the contending parties under false colours” (Das Christus-
bild der Apostel, etc., Preface).

(3) A third object with which the writer of the Acts is credited is that of
preparing an apology which should make Christianity acceptable to the Roman
or Gentile public by representing its distinguished champion as a Roman citizen,
who, in the tumult raised against him by the Jews as he passed from city to
city preaching Christ, constantly found protection against their violence at the
hands of Roman magistrates, and who, ultimately conveyed to Rome by a
Roman centurion, carried on in the metropolis the duties of his apostleship under,
the protection of Roman laws (Schwegler, Schneckenburger, Overbeck). ‘“ Every-
where,” says Haweis, “there is a wide sympathy with the Gentiles. The future
of the Church is felt to be with them. Luke’s respect for the Roman officials
and the Roman government is quite Pauline. Gallio, the Corinthian magistrate,
the Ephesian town-clerk, the Roman soldiers, the Roman governors, even Felix
and Agrippa, appear to advantage. The Roman police are kind to Paul; the
judges are indulgent and conciliatory. One hears him gladly; another wishes
to set him at liberty ; a third only wants a little bribe, but means no harm to
~ Paul” (The Story of the Four, p. 132). Those who embrace this view of the
aim contemplated by the author do not hold the just-recited details of Paul’s
history to be historical occurrences, but look upon them as pure invention. This
opinion, however, may in just retort be characterised as “ vain imagination,” as
no ground whatever can be found for challenging either the Roman citizenship
of the Apostle or the authenticity of his reported appeal to the Roman tribunal ;
while, if he enjoyed the protection of Roman officials, this harmonised exactly
with the attitude of the Empire to Christianity during the first century (see
Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire, p. 194).

4, The only tenable account of Luke’s aim is that which is indirectly given
by himself (i. 8)-—that he wished to show how the apostles, in carrying out
their commission to be “ witnesses for Christ in Jerusalem, and in all Judea,
and Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth,” bad borne the glad
tidings of salvation through a crucified and risen Christ first through the Holy
Land as far as to Antioch, and then from Antioch to Rome, the metropolis of
the world.


12


PART TI.


THE CHURCH OF CHRIST IN PALESTINE; OR. ITS PROGRESS FROM
JERUSALEM TO ANTIOCH.—THE ACTS OF PETER.


CHAPTERS L—XII.





CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY—PREPARATIONS FOR THE FounDING oF THE CHURCH.


€ |. The Two Treatises ; or, the connection between the Acts of the Apostles and
the Gospel of Luke (vers. 1, 2).

§ 2. The Forty Days; or, the Interval between the Resurrection and the
Ascension of Christ (vers. 3-5). ,

§ 3. The Taking Up of Jesus; or, the Exaltation of the Church’s Head
(vers. 6-11).

§ 4. The Ten Days before Pentecost ; or, Waiting for the Promise (vers. 12-14).

§ 5. Completing the Apostleship; or, the Election of Matthias (vers. 15-26).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. The former treatise have I made.—Better, the first (mp&ros for mpédrepos, as in
John i. 15-30, unless rpros was intended to point to a rpiros: Ramsay) treatise (Néyos in
ancient written speech meaning the separate book rolls in a connected work—Holtzmann)
Imade, That the first treatise was the Gospel of Luke the name of its recipient (Luke
i. 3) declares.

Ver. 2. Through the Holy Ghost.—Should be connected with “ given commandments ”—see
John xx. 22 (Meyer, Weiss, Overbeck, Spitta, and others), rather than with either ‘ chosen”
(De Wette, Wendt, Holtzmann, Zéckler, and others)—though see xx. 28—or ‘‘ taken up,” the
Ascension never being in Scripture ascribed to the Spirit, but commonly represented as the
work of the Father (ii. 33; Eph. i. 20; Phil. ii. 9), though sometimes depicted as the free act
of Christ Himself (John xx. 17; Eph. iv. 10; Heb. i. 3),

Ver, 3. Being seen of them, or showing Himself to them, not in a subjective vision, but object-
ively and really, during (éi¢ with gen. as in v. 19; xvi. 9) forty days—i.e., not continuously,
but at intervals. Compare the forty days of Moses on Mount Sinai (Exod. xxiv. 18), of Elias’s
journey (1 Kings xix. 8), and of Christ’s fasting in the wilderness (Matt. iv. 2; Mark i. 13;
Luke iv. 2), Holtzmann regards the forty days, for which the Valentinians, according tc
Ireneus, had eighteen months, as a kind of propyl@on or “porch” for the following
historical narration; while Weizsicker consigns them to the domain of legend on the ground
that they indicate “a desire” on the part of the narrator “to gain time for a more advanced
instruction of the apostles in the life of Jesus, and consequently for their preparation to
receive the spirit.”

Ver, 4. Being assembled, or eating together with them (compare x.41; Luke xxiv. 30, 41-43),
not assembling them, though the witb, which occurs only here in N,T., has this meaning in
Josephus (Wars, III, ix. 4),

13


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee ee ee


Ver. 5. With water, v5a7., the element by which the outward rite of baptism was per-
formed. With, rather in (év) the Holy Ghost, the element in which the spiritual baptism
should take place.

Ver. 6. When they were come together.—(The Sinaitic codex omits together.) This was
not the meeting referred to in ver. 4, but the last interview recorded in Luke xxiv. 36-53,
which began in Jerusalem and ended near Bethany. Wilt, rather dost Thou? ei introducing
a direct question, “ which is contrary to classical usage, though not uncommon in the N.T.
and the LXX.” (Hackett). The kingdom to Israel shows that as yet the expectations of the
apostles had not passed beyond the bounds of their own nation.

Ver. 7. Put, set, fixed, or appointed in His own power—i.c., in the sovereign exercise of it.
Compare Matt. xxiv. 36, and 1 Thess. v. ].

Ver. 8. After that the Holy Ghost is come upon you.—Literally, the Holy Ghost having
come upon you. This should be the source of their power. “ Before the Ascension the
disciples were led through the Spirit as a transcendent power standing over them; first with
the Pentecostal event does He become an immanent principle” (Holtzmann). Witnesses unto
Me should be My witnesses, the reading pov being preferable to uo. Compare Luke xxiv. 48.
In Jerusalem, etc., gives a hint about the plan of the book.

Ver. 9. When He had spoken, rather saying these things, and while they beheld, or they
behold, He was taken, or was raised up into the air, but not yet into heaven, ér7jp0y being
different from dvedpOn (ver. 2) and brédaBev, received up from under.

Ver. 10. The two men who stood or were standing by them in white apparel or garments
were angels, as in Mark xvi. 5; Luke xxiv. 4; John xx. 12.

Ver. 11. In like manner signified that Christ’s return would be in the air and visible.
Compare Mark xiv. 62; Luke xxi, 27; Rev. i. 7.

Ver. 12. A Sabbath day’s journey—according to Josephus six (Ant., XX. viii. 6) or five
(Wars, V. ii. 3) furlongs—marked the distance of the Mount of Olives from Jerusalem, not of
Bethany, which was fifteen furlongs from the city (John xi. 18), Luke (xxiv. 50) does not
say the Ascension took place at, but over against (pés) Bethany. Nor does Acts affirm that
it occurred at the sixth furlong from the city, but merely that Olivet, the scene of the
Ascension, was distant a Sabbath day’s journey from Jerusalem. The two statements do not
collide. From the latter statement it has been inferred that the Ascension happened on a
Sabbath ; but ver. 3 rather points to a Thursday, the exact date being 28th April, A.D. 29,
shortly before midday (Holtzmann).

Ver. 13, Come in. —“ To the city probably, not the house” (Hackett); though Holtzmann
considers it was the temple they entered (compare ii. 46; Luke xxiv. 53). Not an but the
upper chamber should be read, meaning “‘of the private house” where they were abiding—
most likely that mentioned in Mark xiv. 15; Luke xxii. 12.

Ver. 14, With one accord, or with one mind. Omit “supplication” and “the” before
women. Last mention in Scripture of Mary, the mother of Jesus, whose reappearance after
the crucifixion (John xix. 27) is noteworthy. His brethren were most probably Mary’s
reaaeers though the idea that they were only His kinsmen or relatives is not excluded by
the term.

Ver. 15, Those days lay between the Ascension and Pentecost. For disciples, uaéyrdv, the
R.V. reads brethren, dde\pGv, as in Matt. xxv. 40; Acts ix. 30, xi. 29; 1 Cor. v.11. Names =
persons, as in Rev. iii. 4, xi. 13. Unclassical. Together, éri 7d aird, has always a local sig-
nification. (See iii. 1; Luke xvii. 35.)

Ver. 16. Scripture . .. which the Holy Ghost spake.—A testimony to the Inspiration of
the Old Testament. Compare 2 Peter i. 21. By the mouth of David seems to guarantee that
David was the author of some parts of the Psalter—in particular of Psalm lxix., and perhaps
also of Psalm xli. Who was (or became) guide. Originally a disciple, Judas turned to be a
traitor, and acted as a leader to the Roman cohort which apprehended Christ (Matt, xxvi. 47;
John xviii. 3).

Ver. 17. For, 87, indicates that Judas supplied the conditions that were requisite to
enable him to fulfil the Scripture. The figurative expression lot, «\fpos, used in its literal
sense in ver. 26, is here employed, as in viii. 21, xxvi. 18, to denote anything obtained by lot,
and hence generally any portion, share, or office without regard to the mode of its attain-
ment. The term “ clergy ” is derived from «\fpos, the order of the ministry being viewed as
divinely appointed. ;

Ver. 18. Purchased.— Obtained (R.V.), got possession of (Plumptre), or caused to be
purchased (Hackett); what was bought with Judas’s money being considered as bought by
himself. Qui facit per aliwm facit per se. Falling headlong.— Having probably first hanged
himself, and afterwards, through the breaking of the rope, fallen to the ground, which would
cause him to burst asunder in the midst. Matthew’s account (xxvii. 5) suggests this, “The
traitor may have struck in his fall upon some pointed rock, which entered the body and
caused his bowels to gush out” (Hackett). Papias was acquainted with a version of this
story, which reported that Judas died of a loathsome disease.


14


a HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





Ver. 19. Aceldama, ’Axe\daud, formed from the Syro-Chaldaic x91 ‘pn, and signifying
“field of blood ” —i,e., either purchased by the blood money paid to Judas and returned by
him (Matthew), or sprinkled with the traitor’s blood when he fell (Luke). Perhaps both
reasons contributed to the fixing of the name subsequently borne by the potter’s field, which
became a burial place for strangers. According to tradition Aceldama lay on the south side
of Mount Zion.

Vers. 18 and 19 are commonly regarded as no part of Peter’s speech, but an interposition
by Luke (Calvin and others) ; yet ov (ver. 18) renders this doubtful (Holtzmann).

Ver. 20. In the Book of Psalms.—'The two citations (Psalm Ixix. 25, cix. 8), given with slight
modifications from the LXX. recite the doom of the enemies of David and his kingdom, and
therefore of the enemies of Christ and His kingdom, of which the former were types; con-
sequently also of Judas, “as the first and most notable of these” (Alford).

Ver. 21. Went in and out among us.—“ An exact construction of the Greek would have
placed ‘unto us,’ é¢' quads, after ‘went in’ or ‘came in,’ and inserted ‘from us, dd’ judr,
after ‘went out’” (Hackett). Compare ix. 28; John x. 9.

Ver. 22, The baptism of John signified not John’s baptism of Christ, but John’s baptism
generally as a well-known date.

Ver. 23. They, %.e., the congregation and the apostles, appointed, or put before God, or
before themselves for selection.

Ver. 24, Thou Lord.—Whether addressed to God or Christ is disputed. For the former
opinion (Meyer, Plumptre, Holtzmann) appeal is taken to xv. 7, 8, in which God is called
Kapévoyvdéorns, and Peter represents himself as being chosen by God. For the latter
(Olshausen, Alford, Hackett, Spence) it is argued (1) that in the N.T. generally Christ is
usually styled Lord; (2) that Christ is stated in ver. 2 to have selected the other apostles ;
(8) that the first Christians were in the habit of praying to Him (vii. 59, ix. 14) ; and (4) that
Peter in the Gospel (John xxi. 17) ascribes to Christ the knowledge of all things, which cer-
tainly include the hearts of all men.

Ver. 25. Fell.—Went aside by transgression. His own place.—His own proper destiny,
Gehenna, or the place of punishment, from which he (Judas) was kept back so long as he
was in the apostleship.

Ver. 26. Lots.—These were either tablets or slips of parchment with the names of the
candidates written upon them, which were cast into a vase or other vessel, which was then
shaken, when the first tablet or slip thrown out indicated the candidate elected.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—2.


The Two Treatises ; or, The Connection between the Acts of the Apostles and the
Gospel of Luke.

J. Their names.—1. Of the former treatise, the Gospel of Iuke. Recognised by
being addressed like the Acts to Theophilus. 2. Of the latter, the Acts of the
Apostles. In some MSS. “ Acts of all the Apostles, “Acts of the Holy Apostles,”
or some other such variation. Neither title originated with the author of the
writing, but was afterwards appended when the writing found a place in the
Canon.

II. Their contents.—1. Of the former, the earthly, or pre-ascension ministry of
Christ. Not everything Christ said and did (see John xxi. 25), but as many of
His deeds and words as were needful to furnish an adequate picture of Him as
a teacher and worker. 2. Of the latter, the post-ascension or heavenly ministry
of Jesus. The word “ began” suggests that Christ’s activity did not terminate
with His taking up, but continued after. Hence the Acts, which records that
activity, is neither a full series of apostolica] biographies, the actions and
utterances of Peter and Paul only being narrated at any length, while of the
other apostles, the sons of Zebedee alone are incidentally mentioned; nor a
complete Church history, since it leaves untold much that happened, and carries
the story of the Church no further than the time when Paul reaches Rome ;
but an account of Christ’s doing and teaching since His Ascension through the
instrumentality of the two above-named Apostles, their colleagues, and assistants
(Stephen, Philip, James the Brother of the Lord, Barnabas, Mark, Silas,
Timothy, Titus, Apollos, and others), first, in founding and developing the


As)


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





Church at Jerusalem and within the Holy Land, and, secondly, in extending
snd establishing it among the Gentiles in Asia Minor and in Europe.

III. Their author.—The writer of the “we” passages in the Acts (xvi. 10,
11, xx. 5, 6). 1. Mot Timothy, whom the writer of the Acts distinguishes from
himself (Acts xvi. 10). 2. Stzdl less Silas, an opinion having no better support
than the resemblance ingeniously detected between Silvanus (from silva, a wood)
and Lucanus (from ducus, a grove). 3. But Luke, a physician by profession
(Col. iv. 14), who joined Paul as a companion in travel at Troas (xvi. 10), and
was with him as a fellow-worker at Rome (2 Tim. iv. 11; Phil. 24). See
Introduction.

IV. Their recipient.—Theophilus. Possibly his baptismal name (Ramsay).
Most likely a Gentile Christian, probably a member of the Roman Church ;
manifestly a patron of learning and an inquirer after truth. That his social
rank was high may be inferred from the epithet “ most excellent” given him
by Luke (i. 3)—a title of honour used by Paul in addressing Felix (xxiii. 26)


and Festus (xxvi. 25).


Lessons.—1. The inter-connection of the various books of Scripture.
purely natural way in which the existing Scriptures arose.


2. The
3. The value of


Scripture independent of a knowledge of the authorship of its several parts, 4.
The excellence of grace in persons of high station.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Zhe Earthly Ministry of
Christ; or, the work and wisdom (the
doing and doctrine) of Jesus.

I. The Work of Jesus.—1. Personal.
—He fulfilled all righteousness
(Matt. ii, 15). 2. Philanthropical.—
He healed all manner of sickness and
disease among the people (Matt. iv. 23 ;
Acts x. 38). 3. JLegal—He made
atonement for the sins of men (John i.
29). 4. Social._He founded a kingdom
of heaven upon earth (Matt. v. 1-20;
John xviii. 36).

II. The Wisdom of Jesus.—1l. He
revealed the nature (the Trinity) and
character (love) of God (John iii. 16).
2. He taught the necessity and natwre
of the New Birth for man (John iii. 3).
3. He promulgated the way of salva-
tion —through faith in His name
(John vi. 47). 4. He disclosed the
certainty of a future life of blessed-
ness for believers (John xiv. 1, 2),
5. He announced the terms of citizenship
in the kingdom of God (Matt. v. 1-8).

Conclusion.—Christ’s pre-eminence
in both departments. The noblest
worker and the loftiest teacher the
world has ever seen.


The Heavenly Worker.
I. His name. — Jesus, signifying
16


Saviour, of whom Luke had already
written in the Gospel (ii. 21).

II. His sphere.—On earth and
among men, as distinguished from
His pre-existent and post-resurrection
theatres of activity.

III. His character.—As a worker.
1. Faithful. 2. Loving. 3. Unwearied.
4. Effective. 5. Disinterested.

IV. His continuance.—1. Until the
day of His Ascension. 2. Until now
(John v. 18).


The Incomparable Teacher.

‘I. His person.—Jesus, who spoke of
Himself as the Truth (John xiv. 6),
and whom men recognised as a Teacher
(John iii. 2, xi. 28).

II. His doctrine.—1. What it con-
cerned.—(1) God, whom He revealed
(John i. 18). (2) Man, whom He un-
veiled as to His nature, character,
responsibility, destiny (Luke vi. 8;
John ii. 24, v. 42, xvi. 30). (3) Salva-
tion, as to its essence and conditions
(John iii. 16). (4) The future life, as
to its rarity, and the means of attaining
thereunto (John xiv. 1-6). 2. Whence
at came.—Not of Himself or from men,
but from above (John v. 20; vii. 16).

III. His method.—1. Simple (Mark
xii, 37). 2. Gracious (Luke iv. 22).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





3. Authoritative (Matt. vii.


4, Original (John vii. 46).


29).


The Name of Jesus.

I. A historic name.— Borne by
Joshua, the successor of Moses (vii. 45 ;
Heb. iv. 8).

IJ. A personal name—As dis-
tinguished from that of Christ (Luke
ii, 21), or Messiah, an official name.

III. A symbolic name.—Signifying
Saviour and foreshadowing its posses-
sor’s work (Matt. i. 21).

IV. An exalted name.—Glorified
above every other name in heaven or
on earth (Phil. ii. 9).

VY. A powerful name.—1. The ground
of salvation (iv. 12). 2. The plea of
prayer (John xiv. 13). 3. The potent
instrument of working miracles (Mark
xvi. 17).


A Momentous Beginning—that of the
ministry of Jesus. In relation to—

I. Jesus Himself.—In respect of —
1. His ability to finish what He had
begun (Luke xiv. 28). And 2. The
consequences it would entail upon Him-
self if carried out and finished (John
xii. 27).

II. The Old Testament Dispensa-
tion.—Of which the work of Jesus was
—1l. The fulfilment (Matt. v. 17), and
2. The setting aside (Heb. vii. 19, viii.
13).

a The World.—Of this, it was
destined to be either—1. The salvation,
or 2. The condemnation, according as
it was accepted by the world or rejected.


The Christ of God and Christian
History.—The expression, “all that
Jesus began to do and teach,” is a
peculiar one, and seems to imply two
things: jirst, that the Gospel was to
be a record of the doings and sayings
of Jesus from the very beginning,
which it pre-eminently is, recording
the previous prophecy, the angelic
annunciation, the conception and birth
of Jesus. Of the human side of Jesus,
the Christ of God, Luke especially
records the beginning. And all, from
the very first, is grace and truth.


But the expression “began” means,
secondly, that this record is the begin-
ning or fountain head of all subsequent
Christian history; that out of these
doings and teachings have flowed all
things connected with the Church of
God down to the last. It is a fontal
record; a root; a well-spring; the
source of a river which is still flowing
amongst us, and refreshing the sons of
men.

I. We connect all subsequent testi-
mony with Christ’s doings and sayings,
—AIl the testimony delivered by Chris-
tian witnesses goes back to Christ’s
life ; and is, as it were, a prolongation of
His own voice, a continuation of His
own doings. It is of His life and
death that the witnesses speak ; and
it is that life and death that contain
the power which their testimony em-
bodies. The power of our testimony
lies in the directness of its communica-
tion with the manger and the cross ; as
well as with all between. It is Jesus
Himself that is working His miracles
before our very eyes, and speaking to
us still.

II. We connect each individual con-
version with Christ's sayings and
doings.—The soul, in the moment of
its mighty change, is brought into
direct communication with these ; it is
transported back over eighteen cen-
turies, and feels itself in the very pres-
ence of Jesus of Nazareth—speaking,
working, loving, blessing, saving, par-
doning, comforting. Virtue goes out
from these sayings and doings of this
personal Christ to lay hold on the sinner.
And this is the beginning of his eternal
history !

III. We connect each planting of a
church with what Jesus did and
taught.—We see this very clearly in
Luke’s story of the planting of Chris-
tianity. Trace up the history of a
church—at Jerusalem, or Samaria, or
Antioch, or Thessalonica—to its true
source, and you are landed at once
among the scenes of Christ’s life on
earth. There is no church where there
is no direct link of this kind. Other
foundation can no man lay; other


G 17


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i RS


soil can no church root itself in ; round
no other centre can any church revolve.
For what is the temple if the shekinah
be not there? What is a church or
congregation if the Holy Ghost, re-
vealing Christ in His grace and glory,
be not the indwelling and inworking
energy?

IV. We connect each true revival


preached.—No quickening can_ be
genuine save that which goes back to
this, and takes its rise from this.
Excitement, earnestness, impression,
there may be; but only that is authen-
tic, and divine, and abiding, which
springs directly out of that which Jesus
began to do and to teach.—H. Bonar,
DD;


of religion with what Jesus did and


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 2


The Forty Days ; or, Fellowship with the Risen Christ.

I. The termini of this interval—l. The terminus a quo. The resurrection.
Demonstrated to be a reality by many “ proofs” or “infallible signs.” (1) Te
the eye, manifestations. “ Being seen of,” or appearing unto His disciples, forty
days—not continuously, but from time to time, and not always in the same
place but in different localities. Of these manifestations of the risen Christ
Scripture records eleven or twelve, of which at least three are narrated by
Luke (see below). (2) To the ear, words: “ Speaking of the things concerning
the kingdom of God.” Of this examples are furnished by Luke in the conver-
sations Christ had with the Emmaus travellers, and the eleven in the upper
room (Luke xxiv.). (3) To the touch, an invitation to satisfy themselves, by
handling, that He was no bodiless apparition, but a veritable human person,
clothed with “flesh and bones.” Though not mentioned in the Acts, this is stated
in the Gospel (Luke xxiv. 39). Whether the disciples accepted the invitation is
not recorded. Most likely, as Thomas afterwards (John xx. 28), they felt this
to be unnecessary, and prostrated themselves before Him in adoring worship, if
they did not audibly exclaim—‘“ My Lord! and my God!” (See “ Hints on ver. 3.”) —
2. The terminus ad quem. The ascension. Spoken of in the passive voice, this
was none the less a free act of Christ Himself (John vi. 62, xiv. 2, xvi. 5,
xx. 17; Eph. iv. 10; Heb.iv. 14). Though referring principally to a change of
condition, an exaltation from the form of terrestrial existence in which Christ
had accomplished His redeeming work to that of celestial glory which He had
with the Father before the world was (John xvii. 5), there is no room for
doubting that it likewise pointed to a visible departure from the earth and


5.





passage through the opened heavens (John vi. 62; Heb. iv. 14), (See on
vers. 9-11).
II. The transactions of this interval—l. The occupation of Christ. (1) Ap-


pearing, manifesting Himself to His disciples. This was needful for the
confirmation of their faith in His resurrection, and by consequence in His
Messiahship and Divinity. The forty days constituted an important link in the
chain of evidence which bound together the superstructure of the Christian
religion. (2) Teaching. Enlightening the minds of His disciples. ‘Speaking of
the things concerning the kingdom of God.” These were chiefly “things con-
cerning Himself” as the Founder and Head of the kingdom. About the
significance of His earthly career of humiliation, which culminated in the
decease accomplished at Jerusalem (Luke ix. 31); about the import of His
resurrection, as attesting at once the divinity of His Person, and the atoning
work of His sufferings; about the meaning of His exaltation for Himself, for
them, and for the world (see next ‘“‘ Homily”) ; and about the terms of His gospel
message of which they were henceforth to be the bearers. (3) Commanding.
Laying injunctions on the hearts of His disciples. In particular, enjoining them


18


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





“not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father ”—a
command reasonable on the part of Christ, who was henceforth more than ever
to be their Lord and Master, since to Him alone belonged the prerogative of pre-
scribing their duty, while the injunction laid upon them related to the reception
of a gift He alone could bestow; suitable to the condition of the disciples, inas-
much as it was fitted to discipline them in greatly needed virtues, such as patience.
caution, expectation, submission, courage ; and necessary for the proper execution
of their work, which could only be injured by overhasty action and insufficiently
qualified zeal. (4) Promising. Holding out to His disciples a prospect of
blessing, ‘‘ Ye shall be baptised with (or in) the Holy Ghost, not many days
hence.” A great promise—the entering into them of the Holy Ghost ; practically
the implantation in them of the life of the Risen Christ, the exaltation of them to
spiritual fellowship with Him, and the endowment of them with a power proceed-
ing from Him. A certain promise—the words first uttered by the Baptist
(Luke iii. 16; John i. 33), and again by Christ before His death (John xiv. 16,
xv. 26, xvi. 7), being a third time repeated after His resurrection, when on the
eve of departing to secure their fulfilment. A near promise—“ not many days
hence,” intimating the decisive moment when this baptism should come upon them
to be at hand, 2. The business of the disciples. This corresponded to Christ’s
occupation, and consisted of four things : (1) Beholding. Contemplating, not with
the spirit’s eye merely, but with the body’s eye also, Christ’s manifestations of
Himself. The former a main part of the duty of believers still (John xiv.
21,22). The latter will be possible for believers only in the day of Christ’s glorious
appearing (Titus ii. 13; 1 Peter i. 7; 1 Johniii. 2). (2) Listening. The more
attentively because His “‘comings” were intermittent, and everything connected
with them betokened their speedy cessation—last words are always precious—
because the theme on which they talked was one in which they were profoundly
interested—the restoration of the kingdom to Israel, though as yet their con-
ceptions both of the kingdom and of the manner of its restoration were somewhat
carnal. To hear Christ’s words with faith and love, an abiding mark of disciple-
ship (John xviii. 37). (3) Obeying. Whatever commandments Christ laid upon
them, it may be assumed, they promptly honoured. Obedience is always
required of Christ’s followers (John xv. 14).
“ Theirs not to reason why ;
Theirs but to do er die.”— Tennyson.

(4) Waiting. This also formed part of the business of the apostles during the
forty days. The context tells us they waited for the promise as directed,
Waiting one of the hardest tasks of the Christian life, demanding strong faith,
resolute self-control, and eager hope. Thousands can act who cannot wait. Yet
is waiting not less needful than acting for the proper development of the
individual life, and the successful conduct of Christian work (1 Cor. i. 7;
2 Thess. iii. 5); while it certainly is highly beneficial to all who practise it in
patient humility (Isa. xl. 31).

Learn.—1. The value of God’s intervals in providence and in grace. 2. The
main business of a Christian, which is to study, hear, obey, and wait for his
Lord. 3. The mistake of undue haste in working for Christ. 4. The certainty
that all God’s promises will be fulfilled.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. “ Alive after His passion”; of New Testament Scripture—1. Of
or, Did Jesus Christ actually rise from Paul, not only in his preachings in the
the dead ? Acts (xvii. 31, xxvi. 23), but also in

I, This is undoubtedly the teaching his Epistles (Rom. i. 4, iv, 24, vi. 4,


\9


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





viii. 11, x. 9; 1 Cor. vi. 14, xv. 4, 20;
Eph. i. 20; Col. i. 18, ii, 12; 2 Tim.
ii. 8). It is impossible to doubt that
Paul both taught and believed in an
actual bodily resurrection of Christ.
2. Of Peter, in his sermons (ii. 24,
iii. 15, iv. 10, x. 40) and letters
(1 Peter i. 3, 21, iii. 18, 21). Just as
clearly was Christ’s resurrection an
article in Peter’s creed and teaching.
3. Of the Gospel writers, who report
that not only was Christ’s tomb seen
to be empty by those who visited it
(Matt. xxviii. 6; Mark xvi. 6; Luke
xxiv. 3, 6; John xx. 2, 6, 7), but that
He was subsequently beheld by His
disciples (Matt. xxviii. 9, 17; Mark
xvi. 9, 12, 14; Luke xxiv. 15, 36;
John xx. 14, 19, 26, xxi. 1). Unless,
therefore, these New Testament writ-
ings are all unhistorical—a conclusion
which criticism has not only not esta-
blished, but successfully disproved—a
presumption in favour of Christ’s re-
surrection is created by their conjoint
testimony.

II. The hypotheses which have been
started to account for this unanimous
belief in the resurrection, without ad-
mitting its truth, are al. unsatisfactory.
—These hypotheses may be reduced to
five: 1. The theft theory, propagated
originally by the Jews (Matt. xxviii.
11-15), and resuscitated by rationalist
theologians like Reimarus—a theory
“with which,” says Professor Bruce,
“men of all<choolsin modern times would
b ashamed to identify themselves” (Apo-
logetics, p. 385). 2. The swoon theory,
proposed by Paulus, that Jesus never
really died, but simply lost conscious-
ness on the cross, and regained it in the
cool cavern in which His seemingly
lifeless body was deposite1—a theory
on which both Strauss and Keim turn
their backs as totally inadequate, if
not absurd, Strauss (Wew Life of Jesus,
i, 412) saying “it is impossible that a
being who had stolen half dead out of
the sepulchre, who crept about weak
and ill, wanting medical treatment,
who reyuired bandaging, strengthening,
and indulgence, and who still at last
yielded to His sufferings, could have


20)


given to the disciples the impression
that He was a Conqueror over death
and the grave, the Prince of Life, an
impression which lay at the bottom of
their future ministry,” and Keim, after
mentioning other difficulties, echoing
his predecessor’s sentiments: “ ‘Then
there is the most impossible thing of
all, the poor, weak, sick Jesus, with
difficulty holding Himself erect, in
hiding, disguised, and finally dying—
this Jesus an object of faith, of exalted
emotion, of the triumph of His ad-
herents, a risen conqueror and Son of
God! Here, in fact, the theory begins
to grow paltry, absurd, worthy only of
rejection, since it makes the apostles
either miserable victims of deceit, or
with Jesus themselves  deceivers”
(Jesus von Nazara, vol. vi. p. 330,
E. T.). 3. The vision theory, espoused
by Celsus, Strauss, Renan, and others,
that first Mary Magdalene, and after
her others of the disciples, had visions,
which were the result of nervous ex-
citement, and in which they fancied
they beheld Christ alive after His
passion, and resuscitated from the tomb,
against which also lie a number of
insurmountable objections which have
been skilfully urged by various critics—-
as, e.g., (1) That the interval between
the resurrection and the commencement
of these visions—viz., three days—was
too short for their origination by the
excited feelings of the disciples;
(2) That so far from being in a state
of expectancy with regard to Christ’s
resurrection during these days the
disciples were in an exceedingly de-
pressed state of mind, and had no hope
whatever of His resurection (Luke
xxiv. 11, 21, 37; John xx. 25);
(3) That if widespread excitement was
ab this time characteristic of the dis-
ciples, it is not easy to understand why
the visions were so few in number—
limited at most to ten instances—and
why they ceased altogether after forty
days, and why the apostles so soon after
returned to a grave and sober con-
dition of mind such as they exhibit in
the Acts; (4) that if all the Christo-
phanies were purely subjective visions


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP. I.





it is surprising either that they should
have differed from each other, as they
did—Mary having first thought that
the person on whom she looked was
not her Lord, but the gardener (John
xx. 15), and the Emmaus travellers
that the companion who joined them
was not Christ but a stranger (Luke
xxiv. 16)—or, if differences were to be
expected, that they (the visions) did
not differ from each other more than
they did; and (5) that the facts just
adverted to concerning Mary and the
Emmaus travellers that they did not
at first recognise Jesus but mistook
Him for another, afford strong proof
that Christ’s appearances were not sub-
jective visions, but objective manifesta-
tions (compare K 6stlin’s Der Glaube und
seine Bedeutung fiir Erkenntniss, etc.,
pp- 38, 39). 4. The telegram theory,
suggested by Keim, that Jesus signalled
to His disciples from heaven that He
was still alive, by causing an objective
image or likeness of His body as they
had known it to appear before their eyes,
and that out of this grew their faith
in His resurrection. But against this
hypothesis it has been forcibly urged
that the production of such an image
of Christ’s body was no less a miracle
than the rising of the actual body
would have been, and that on this
theory, equally with the proceeding, the
faith of the disciples would be made to
rest on a halluciation (Bruce, Apolo-
getics, pp. 392, 393). 5. The legendary
theory, favoured by Weizsicker and
Martineau, that Christ not only never
rose, but that there were no ap-
pearances to explain, the doctrine of
Christ’s resurrection being only a later
legend manufactured for the purpose
of expressing the Church’s strong con-
viction that Jesus still lived—a theory
which does not harmonise with the
experiences of the first disciples, whose
visions of Christ (Paul’s included) were
not purely spiritual, as this class of
critics so dogmatically assert, and
which does not account satisfactorily
for the legend of a physical resurrection,
saying as it does that “faith in the
continued existence of Jesus produced


the later tradition of optical visions,
not such visions the faith” (Bruce,
p. 397).

III. The results that flow from a
denial of Christ’s resurrection are ab-
solutely incompatible with an ac-
ceptance of the Christian religion —
These results may be thus summarised :
If Christ never rose fiom the dead,
then—1. Christ was a false prophet and
a deceiver, since He distinctly claimed
that He would rise (Matt. xvi. 21,
xx. 19, xxvi. 32; Mark ix. 9; John
ii. 19), and a false prophet could
neither have been sinless nor divine,
neither a Messiah for Israel nor a
Saviour for the world. 2. Christ’s dis-
ciples and first followers were all victims
of hallucination, and hence were far
frcm being trustworthy teachers of
religion for after ages. If they were
wrong in teaching that Christ rose,
what guarantee exists that they are
right in teaching He will come again?
3. The whole magnificent structure of
Christianity rests upon a lie, which is
barely conceivable, even though Mo-
hammedanism and Buddhism originated
with founders whose claims to divine
inspiration cannot be conceded. 4.
Christians must be of all men most
miserable, since there can be no atone-
ment and no salvation, no resurrection
and no eternal life, if so be that Christ
never rose (1 Cor. xv. 12-19). See
“ Hints” on xxv. 19,


The Appearances of the Risen Christ.

I. Their time.—1. After His passion.
This clause implies that Christ had
really died, and excludes the idea that
He had merely swooned. 2. After His
resurrection. That His resurrection was
not merely spiritual, but physical, is
involved in the term “alive,” which
points not to a disembodied existence
like that of the “spirits of just men
made perfect” (Heb. xii. 23), but to a
corporeal formeof being like that which
Christ possessed before He died.

If. Their continuance. — During
forty days. This precludes the notion
that they weve mere subjective illusions,
since it is hardly supposable that illu-


21


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








sions would repeat themselves always
in the same form to different persons
and at different times throughout so
lengthened a period.

III. Their number.—Ten. To—
1. Mary Magdalene at the sepulchre
(John xx. 11). 2. The women, return-
ing to Jerusalem (Matt. xxv. 8).
3. Peter, on the resurrection morning,
hour and place unknown (Luke xxiv.
34), 4. The Hmmaus travellers, the
afternoon of the same day (Luke xxiv.
13-31). 5. The ten, the evening of the
same day, in the upper room (Luke
xxiv. 33 ; John xx. 19). 6. The eleven
in the upper room, eight days later
(John xx. 26). 7. The seven in Galilee.
beside the lake (John xxi. 1). 8. The
fwe hundred brethren at once, time
and place unknown (1 Cor, xv. 6).
9. James, the Lord’s brother, time and
place also unknown (1 Cor. xv. 7).
10. The eleven at Bethany (1 Cor xv.
7; Luke xxiv. 50).

IV. Their certainty.—Proved by
many infallible signs ; such as—l. Their
number and continuance, as above ex-
plained. 2. Christ's eating and drink-
ing in presence of His apostles (ver. 4;
x. 41). This is fatal to the hypothesis
that Christ’s manifestations were purely
spiritual and subjective. 3. His request
that the disciples should handle Him
and see (Luke xxiv. 39; John xx. 27),
Christ would never have subjected
Himself to such a test had He not
been corporeally - present with His
disciples.

V. Their object.—Probably three-
fold. 1. To attest the reality of His
resurrection, which, as the central fact
in Christianity, was to form the theme
of apostolic preaching. 2. To confirm
the fuith of His disciples at once in His
Messiahship and His divinity. 3. To
instruct them concerning the kingdom
He was setting up, and whose heralds
the apostles were soon to be.


The Words of the Forty Days.

I. Words spoken to the whole body,
or to the majority of the apostles,—
1, A benediction. “Peace be unto
you” (Luke xxiv. 36; John xx. 19,


22


21). 2. A commission. “As the
Father hath sent Me, even so send I
you” (John xx. 21). 3. An instruction.
“Go ye into all the world and preach
the gospel to every creature” (Matt.
xxvil. 19, 20; Mark xvi. 15). 4. A
dotation. “Receive ye the Holy
Ghost ” (John xx. 33). 5. An exposi-
tion. “ Thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer and rise again
from the dead” (Luke xxiv. 46).
6. A prediction. “Ye shall receive
power when the Holy Ghost is come
upon you” (i. 8). 7 A caution.
“Tt is not for you to know the times
and seasons” (i. 7). N.B.—Thess
seven words express the indispensable
conditions of all apostleship or
ministerial service in the Christian
Church.

IT. Words spoken to individual dis-
ciples.—1. To Mary at the sepulchre.
“Woman! why weepest thou?” A
question for Christian mourners, 2. To
the women on the way. “ All hail!”
(Matt. xxviii 9.) A salutation to
anxious seekers. 3. To Thomas in the
upper room. ‘Reach hither thy
finger !” (John xx. 27.) An invitation
to doubters. Also “ Because thou hast
seen Me thou hast believed,” etc.
(John xx. 29.) ‘A commendation of
faith without sight. 4. To Peter at
the lake side. (1) ‘‘ Lovest thou Me?”
(John xxi. 16.) A question for self-
examination. (2) “Feed My lambs.”
“Tend My sheep” (John xxi. 15, 17)
A promotion for the penitent.
(3) ‘ Verily, verily, I say unto thee,”
etc. (John xxi. 18.) A trial for faith,
(4) “If I will that he tarry till 1
come,” etc. (John xxi. 23.) An
admonition for the forward.

III. Words spoken to apostles and
disciples combined. 1. To the seven
on the sea. “Children, have ye any
meat?” (John xxi. 5.) An inquiry of
love and solicitude. 2. “Cast ye on
the right side of the ship,” ete. (John
xxi. 6.) A direction for desponding
workers, always to obey Christ’s orders.
3. “Bring of the fish ye have now
taken” (John xxi. 10). An encourage.
ment for all faithful servants,


ms HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. f.





Things concerning the Kingdom.

I. Concerning the founding of the
kingdom, which accomplished itself in
His (Christ’s) person after He, through
His death and resurrection, had com-
pleted His work.

IJ. Concerning the collection of the
kingdom, which was to be effected
through the instrumentality of the
apostles, and by the ministry of the
word,

III. Concerning the perfecting of
the kingdom, which should be carried
forward by the power of the Holy
Ghost whom He was to send from the
Father, and who should sanctify all
who believed on His (Christ’s) name.

IV. Concerning the revelation of
the kingdom which should take place
at the end of time when He came again
from heaven in the glory of His Father.
— Besser.


The Kingdom of God.

I. The underlying conception.—
“The kingdom of God is that perfect
arrangement of all things, in which
God Himself is the Ruler and His
will alone is active and decisive. The
conception includes three elements or
ingredients: 1. A people. 2. A con-
stitution. 3. A land, a sure dwelling-
place and possession. Only where
these three things are united can we
speak of a kingdom” (Bornemann’s
Unterricht im Christenthum, p. 30).

II. The threefold realisation.—1. The
Israelitish, or the past. (1) The people
were the children of Abraham after
the flesh. (2) The constitution was
the law, moral and ceremonial, pro-
mulgated by Moses at Sinai. (3) The
land was Canaan, into which the people
were conducted by Joshua. 2. The
Christian, or the present. (1) The
people are professed believers on the
Lord Jesus Christ, (2) The constitu-
tion may be said to consist of repentance
toward God and faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. (3) The land is the earth
which has been given over to the Church
for subjugation and _ occupation.
3. The heavenly, or, the future. (1) The
people will be those who are truly born


again and united to Christ by the
spirit. (2) The constitution will be
the possession of perfect holiness, or
absolute submission to Christ. (3) The
land will be the heavenly Canaan, or
an eternal life of uninterrupted and
intimate fellowship with Christ.


Ver. 4. The Command of the Ascend-
ing Lord.

I. Depart not from Jerusalem.—
1. Neither in fear for your safety.
It would not have been surprising had
the apostles, in alarm for their persons,
withdrawn from the holy city when
Christ ceased appearing to them.
Human nature is not naturally coura-
geous, but essentially weak; and
though the apostles were by this time
renewed in the spirit of their minds,
being Christians, yet were they not
entirely delivered from the power of
their constitutional infirmities, while
the unusual circumstances in which
they would be placed by Christ’s
ascension would tend to excite these
into more than ordinary activity.
Still they were not to retire from the
metropolis till they got the signal from
their Lord. Premature flight would
(1) reveal a lack of fortitude on their
part, showing them to be afraid of
what man might do unto them, in
which case they would not prove
efficient preachers of the _ gospel;
(2) display a feebleness of faith, as if
they could not trust an unseen equally
with a seen master to protect them,
which would likewise prove fatal to
their success ; and (3) indicate a dulness
of understanding which failed to per-
ceive that in retiring from Jerusalem
they would be practically acknowledg-
ing defeat, and surrendering the cause
of. their Master. 2. Wor from eax-
uberance of zeal. The world might ap-
pear to them to be perishing for lack
of knowledge, and they might be eager
to spread abroad the tidings of sal-
vation, they might even be desirous of
proving on the instant their devotion
to their Master, and their willingness
to champion His cause, yea, the time
before their Master’s return might


23


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





seem too short to admit of being
wasted in delay. Yet nothing would
be gained by precipitate haste. It was
not for them to give the signal to ad-
vance. Their duty was to follow, not
to lead, not to order, but to obey.

II. Wait for the promise of the
Father.—1. Without this only failure
would attend their efforts. In spiritual
matters nothing can be successfully
accomplished without divine help
(Zech. iv. 6; John xv. 5). In the
kingdom of heaven upon earth the
prime actor is the Holy Spirit.
Apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors,
and teachers are subordinate instru-
ments. 2. With this success would be
certain. The Holy Ghost would clothe
them with power—power to understand
and expound the truth (John xvi. 13),
power to convince gainsayers (Luke
xi, 15; Acts vi. 10), power to touch the
conscience (2 Cor. iv. 2)—which nothing
and no one would be able to resist,
3. Waiting for this would be an admir-
able test of their faith.—Only in the
strength supplied by a living faith
could they hope to successfully dis-
charge their commission. 4. Waiting


Sor this would evoke the best and strongest

qualities in their characters. The Lord
is always good to them that wait for
Him, and only great men can wait.
“'Phey that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength,” and “they also
serve that only stand and wait.”

Two Lessons.—1. ‘‘There are seasons
in our lives when God appears to call
us simply to wait”; and 2. True pro-
gress is often better secured by waiting
than by working.


Ver. 5. The Two Baptisms.


I. John’s baptism.—1. Waterial.
A water baptism. 2. Huxternal.
Affecting the body. 3. Symbolic.


Representing moral cleansing. 4. Pre-
paratory.—In anticipation of Christ’s
coming. 5. Zemporary. Intended
only for a season.

II. The baptism of Jesus.—
1. Spiritual. A baptism in the Holy
Ghost. 2. Internal. Descending on
the heart. 3. Hssential. Imparting
spiritual renovation. 4. Complemen-
tary. Realising what had been symbol-
ised by John’s rite. 5. Permanent.
Designed to abide for ever.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 6—11.


The Ascension ; or, the Exaltation of the Church’s Head.

I. The attendant circumstances.—1. The place. Olivet. - This agrees with the
statement of Luke (xxiv. 50), that the scene of the “taking up” was near
Bethany, and contradicts not the account of Mark (xvi. 14-19), which seema
to, but really does not, indicate as the point of departure the upper room in
Jerusalem, in which Christ had appeared to His disciples as they sat at meat.
The words “so that” (Mark xvi. 19) refer not necessarily to the immediately
preceding conversation, but to the “speakings” in general of the Lord with His
disciples during the forty days. (Compare Weiss, The Life of Christ, iii. 408,
E. T.) 2. The time. The last of the forty days, the day of the Bethany
manifestation, which, however, was not the interview enjoyed by the ten
(John xx. 19; compare Luke xxiv. 36-49), but that granted to all the apostles
(1 Cor. xv. 7), which most likely happened in Jerusalem on the evening of the
fortieth day. In this case the journey to Bethany would be performed during
night, and the ascension accomplished in the early morning, at the dawning of the
day. 3. The spectators. The eleven. That others besides them should have
witnessed the departure was not necessary, since to them alone, as His ambassa-
dors, was about to be committed the task of witnessing both concerning and for
Him. But that others along with them were in the upper room when Christ
came to lead them forth is the natural deduction—others from whom they were
withdrawn, who were left behind (compare Gen. xxii. 5; 2 Kings ii. 6), and to
whom they returned (see ver. 13) when the sublime spectacle was over.


Aas
a


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





II. The supernatural phenomenon.—1. The antecedent conversation. (1) The
curious question, “ Lord ! dost Thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel ?”
Surprising that the apostles, after three years’ training in the school of Christ,
after the tragic event of the crucifixion, after the transcendent experience of the
resurrection, and after listening to the risen Christ’s exposition of the things con-
cerning the kingdom, should have still clung to the idea of a temporal monarchy.
Yet neither unnatural nor difficult to understand when one remembers how full
the air then was of materialistic and carnal conceptions of the coming Messianic
kingdoms, how the apostles from their youthful days had drunk in these ideas
and practically lived upon them, and how invincible, even in good men, early
prejudice is. (2) The discouraging reply. Leaving their mistaken notions to be
corrected by the Holy Ghost (John xvi. 13), the risen Christ assured them their
wisdom lay in not endeavouring beforehand to know times and seasons in con-
nection with the kingdom—a hint to students of prophecy; that times and
seasons were solely within the ken of the Father who had appointed these in the
sovereign exercise of His own authority (Deut. xxix. 29); and that their
special task would be that of witnessing for Christ, beginning at Jerusalem
(Luke xxiv. 47), but progressing “to the uttermost parts of the earth ”—light
upon the mission of the gospel. (3) The comforting assurance, Great and
arduous as the work of witness-bearing would unquestionably prove, they
would not be left for its execution to their own unaided strength, but, by the
Holy Ghost about to come upon them, would be endowed with power sufficient to
meet every emergency that might arise in their sacred calling—a word of conso-
lation to Christians in every sphere, but especially to preachers and missionaries.
2. The immediate exaltation. (1) He was taken up, raised into the air, im-
mediately after He had ceased speaking, and while the apostles were looking at
Him in wondering adoration, Luke (xxiv. 50, 51) describes Him at the moment
as lifting up His hands and blessing them, and as in the act of stepping back and
being parted from them. (2) A cloud received Him out of their sight, folding
round Him like a fleecy garment. “He maketh the clouds His chariot”
(Psalm civ. 3). Imagination may picture the upward path of the ascending king.
Scripture leaves that unpainted, and confines itself to state the unadorned fact
that He was taken up,” that ‘“‘ He passed through the heavens” (Heb. iv. 10;
1 Peter iii. 22), that He “took His seat at the right hand of God” (Col. iii. 1 ;
Heb. xi. 12). 3. The subsequent vision. Two men in white apparel stood beside
the apostles as they looked steadfastly into heaven. Not Moses and Elias
(Ewald), who had talked with Christ on the Transfiguration Mount, else Luke
would have named them as he does in the Gospel, but two angels, probably the
two who had figured at the resurrection (Luke xxiv. 4; John xx. 12). (1) Re-
proving the heaven-gazers, thereby reminding them their duty henceforth would
be not so much contemplation as action, these celestial monitors (2) comforted
them with the assurance that Christ would in like manner return as they had
seen Him depart, thereby confirming Christ’s promise that He would come again
(Matt. xvi. 27; Luke ix. 26; John xiv. 3), and (3) directed them to look for His
future appearing (Phil. iii. 20; 1 Thess. i. 20; Heb. ix. 28).

III. The doctrinal interpretation.—1. What the Ascension signified to Christ.
—(1) The termination of His earthly humiliation and the commencement of His
heavenly glory. (2) The conclusion of His redeeming work and its formal
acceptance as well as reward by His Father. (3) The cessation of His direct
visible activity on the earth, and the inauguration of His indirect and invisible
working from heaven and through the Spirit. 2. What the Ascension signified
to the apostles. (1) The certainty of Christ’s resurrection. If Christ visibly
withdrew from the earth He must have really risen from the dead. (2) The
confirmation of their faith in Christ’s Messiahship and Divinity. This followed


25


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





as a consequence from their faith in His resurrection. (8) The verification of
Christ’s authority as a Teacher, Christ having before the Crucifixion announced
that the Son of man should ascend up to where He had been before (John vi. 62).
When the apostles beheld this prediction fulfilled, they must have reasoned that
in like manner all His other promises would be Yea and Amen! And in
particular that His word about the Holy Ghost would not fail. (4) The
necessity of henceforth knowing Christ no more after the flesh. This probably
was the import of His word to Mary—‘Touch Me not! for I am not yet
ascended ” (John xx. 17). (5) The certainty that they would ultimately follow
whither He had gone, This had been promised at the supper table (John
xiv. 3). When, therefore, they saw Christ exalted to the right hand of the
Majesty on high, they would no longer fear, if they ever feared, that He might
not be able to implement His loving word concerning and gracious purpose
toward them. 3. What the Ascension signified in the world. (1) The trustworthy
character of Christ’s redeeming work. His exaltation supplied proof that He
was able to save unto the uttermost all that came unto God through Him
(Heb. vii. 25). (2) Christ’s supremacy over all things and persons on earth.
This was an unavoidable deduction from Christ’s investiture with all power in
heaven and on earth (Matt. xxviii. 18; John xiii. 3). If Christ had “ gone into
heaven, angels, authorities, and powers being made subject unto Him” (1 Peter
iii. 22), one might rest assured that all things on earth had likewise been placed
beneath His feet (Eph. i. 22), so that henceforth He should be Lord of both the
living and the dead (Rom. xiv. 9). (3) The certainty that Christ would
eventually conquer His foes. ‘“ He must reign till He hath put all His enemies
under His feet ” (1 Cor. xv. 25; compare Heb. x. 12, 13).

Learn.—1. The title Christ has to be worshipped (Phil. ii. 10, 11).
duty of seeking those things which are above (Col. iii. 1).
looking for Christ’s return (Titus ii. 13).


2. The
3. The propriety of


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. A Questionable Question.— sidering: 1. That the Father hath
‘Lord, dost Thou at this time restore arranged these in the exercise of His


the kingdom?”

I. Authorised.—When dictated by:
1. Shows faith, which expects the
kingdom, 2. Tender love, which wishes
the salvation of the world. 3. Holy
grief, which feels for the miseries of
the times.

II. Unauthorised —When prompted
by: 1. Carnal impatience, which wishes
to see the kingdom of God coming with
external show. 2. Spiritual curiosity,
which will pry into what the Father
hath reserved for Himself. 3. Pious
indolence, which with folded hands looks
at the clouds instead of working for
the kingdom of God in the calling
entrusted to it.—Gerok.


Ver. 7. Not for Man to know Times
and Seasons.
I. A reasonable restriction. Con-


26


own sovereign authority ; 2. That in
other realms besides that of religion
man’s capacity to forecast the future
is limited ; and 3. That a knowledge
of the times and seasons might act
injuriously on man.

II. A beneficial arrangement.—As
tending: 1. To inspire humility,
teaching man that some subjects are
beyond hisken. 2. To repress curiosity,
which is always prone to overstep the
bounds of what is legitimate. 3. To
cultivate submission, directing man to
leave secret affairs in the hands of the
Father. 4. To discipline faith, training
it to believe that He doeth all things well.


_ Ver. 8. Christ's Witnesses.—Christ-
lans in their several spheres and
capacities should be testifiers :


I. Of the facts of Christ’s history.—


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTA RY*:” DHE VACT TS.


Of His incarnation, life, death, re-
surrection, and ascension, to those who
are ignorant of these.

II. Of the doctrines of His Gospel.
—Of His vicarious sacrifice for sin,
His free offer of forgiveness, and His
gift of the Holy Spirit to believers, to
such as are in need of these.

III. Of the character and destiny of
His Church.—Of its spiritual nature,
holy calling, and ultimate victory over
the world, to those who are outside its
pale.


The Christian’s vocation.

I. Its glory.—Witnesses of
Exalted King, His witnesses.

II. Its lowliness.—Only His wit-
nesses, nothing more.

III. Its sufferings.—Witnesses of
the Lord in a hostile world.

IV. Its promise.—Strength from
above.—Gerok.


the


Power for Service.

L In what it consists—The in-
dwelling of the Holy Ghost. Whence
the power is_ 1. Supernatural in its
character; 2, Natural in its operations,
employing man’s ordinary faculties ;
and 3, Adequate in its measure, meeting
all the necessities of those who serve.

II. From whom it comes.—From
the Father as its source, and from
Christ as its dispenser. Hence to be
sought from these alone by : 1. Obedient
waiting (ver. 4); 2. Earnest praying
(i. 14, ii, 1); and 3, Humble self-
emptying.

III. To whom it is given.—1. To
those who are chosen, as the Apostles
were by Christ. 2. To those who
surrender themselves unreservedly for
Christ’s service. 3. To those who
believingly wait for the heavenly gift.

IV. For what it is granted.—To
enable its recipients to witness for
Christ. This the Holy Ghost does by
witnessing for Christin them. Without
the Spirit’s help no words of apostle,
prophet, evangelist, or preacher could
efficiently testify for Christ—z.e., testify
in such a way as to savingly reach the
hearts and consciences of hearers.


CHAP. If,





Pentecostal Power.—Let us look at
this pentecostal power and see some
of its characteristics and conditions.
What is it? 1, First, it is the power
of religious earnestness, Half-hearted
religion is no religion at all. God
wants the whole heart or none.
Harnestness is working at religion, not
playing at it. Earnestness makes
religion one’s chief business. It goes
at it as men dig for gold in the moun-
tains, determined to have it if it is
there. That was the way with these
first disciples. They knew the power
existed and was meant for them. So
they were going to have it. They
would meet God’s conditions, 2. Pen-
tecostal power is the power of wnion.
In union there is strength. In division
or separation there is weakness. Again
and again are we told that those one
hundred and twenty disciples were all
in that upper room—not one hundred
and nineteen, but one hundred and
twenty. All there, and all with one
accord. The heat generated fused all
hearts into one. Did you ever see the
hard, cold pieces of iron melt and flow
together in the furnace? Then the
moulder can make whet he pleases
out of the molten mass. The lack of
union destroys the power of the human
body or of the Christian Church.
Think how a few church members who
never unite in prayer and work with
the rest shear the Church of strength.
3. Pentecostal power is the power to
witness for Christ. Christianity is a
religion that advances by means of
testimony; and only so. Where no
one speaks for it, it dies. Imagine
Peter spending a week or a month
without mentioning the name of Jesus.
Imagine groups of the disciples meeting
and talking about the weather, the
crops, politics, or finances, and not say-
ing a solitary word about their ascended
Lord. True, holy living is good testi-
mony for Christ. Without it talk is
mere hypocrisy. But true, also, that
out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh, but when the heart is
as full of Jesus as were the hearts of
the first disciples, the tongue reveals


27


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


fr ene Ce ee eee ee


the fact. How many Christians are
tongue-tied! 4. Again, Pentecostal
power is the power of the Word of
God. Have you noticed at Pentecost
what a reasoner, what an expositor,
what an orator Peter became? Have
you observed how his eloquence burned
its way into the hearts of his auditors ?
What gave him that power to move
men? Read over his address, and you
will find nothing there you can explain
by the ordinary rules of rhetoric or
canons of secular eloquence. It is the
plainest kind of a speech. Did you
ever know an earnest student of God’s
Word that did not grow in piety?
Did you ever know a Church that fed
on God’s Word that did not have some-
thing like Pentecostal power? Did
you ever know that power to come
where the Divine Word was not
honoured? 5. Pentecostal power was
the power of prayer. 6. There are
many other characteristics of this Pen-
tecostal power. It is the power of a
complete consecration, the power of an
indomitable courage, the power of
spiritual concentration, the power to
win souls to Jesus Christ. But they
are all summed up in this, it is the
power of the Holy Ghost—the power
of human hearts when taken posses-
sion of by the Divine Spirit. Will
there be any mistaking this power?
Will there be any doubt what has hap-
pened to us when we are filled with the
Holy Ghost? Did any one ever try
to make you believe that a kerosene
lamp or a gas-jet or even an electric
light was the spring or summer sun ?
Could electric lights enough be manu-
factured to make the earth put forth
her buds, and flowers, and fruits? Oh,
how easily the sun awakens the sleep-
ing forces of nature, and clothes the
earth with verdure! What transfor-
mations when the sun goes to work!
And what transformations when the
Holy Ghost descends! Are the re-
sources of the Holy Spirit limited? Is
He not infinite? Are not all things
possible with God? We have waited
six thousand years for steam and elec-
tricity ; but these forces existed even in


28


Eden, and might have been used if we
had only known how. We have waited
two thousand years since Christ for
the promised conversion of the world.
The power to bring it about exists. It
is possessed by the Holy Ghost. It is
Pentecostal power. Shall we have it?
Have it now? Or wait another two
thousand years, while the world rolls on
in iniquity and generation after genera-
tion passes on into hell !—/. P. Berry.


Ver. 9. The Ascension of Christ and
its Lessons.

I. The doctrine of the Ascension of
our Lord holds a foremost place in
apostolic teaching.—‘ The doctrine of
the Resurrection, apart from the doc-
trine of the Ascension, would have
been a mutilated fragment, for the
natural question would arise, not for
one, but for every age: If Jesus of
Nazareth has risen from the dead,
where is He?”

II. The Ascension of our Lord
meant His withdrawal from this
earthly scene—‘‘The Book of the
Acts does not describe our Saviour as
ascending through infinite space. It
simply describes Him as removed from
off this earthly ball, and then a cloud
shutting Him out from view, Christ
passed into the inner and unseen
universe wherein He now dwells.”

III. The Ascension of our Lord was
a fitting and natural termination of
Christ’s ministry.—“ The departure of
the eternal King was like His first
approach, a part of a scheme which
forms one united and harmonious
whole. The Incarnation and Ascension
were necessarily related the one to the
other.”

IV. The Ascension of our Lord was
a necessary completion and finish to
His earthly work.—“‘ For some reasons
secret from us, but hidden in the
awful depths of that Being who is the
beginning and the end, the source and
condition of all created existence, the
return of Christ to the bosom of the
Father was absolutely necessary before
the outpouring of the Divine Spirit of
Life and Love could take place,


al HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, I.





V. The Ascension of our Lord ren-
dered Christ an ideal object of worship
for the whole human race.—The
Ascension of Jesus Christ was ab-
solutely necessary to equip the Church
for its universal mission, by with-
drawing the bodily presence of Christ
into that unseen region which bears
no special relation to any terrestrial
locality, but is the common destiny,
the true fatherland of all the sons of
God.

VI. The Ascension of our Lord
glorified humanity as humanity, and
ennobled man simply as man.—“ The
Ascension thus transformed life by
adding a new dignity to life and to
life’s duties. From the beginning
Christianity declared to all the dignity
and glory of human nature in itself.
Much of modern speculation tends to
debase and belittle the.human body. ...
The doctrine of evolution, to say the
least, has not an elevating influence
upon the masses... . The doctrine of
the Ascension teaches men a higher and
nobler view.” —G. 7’. Stokes, D.D.


The Ascension of Christ—What it
meant.

I. A continuation of the redemptive
work of Christ.— Without it the king-
dom of God would have been but a
divine dream. So long as the apostles
were under Christ’s visible guidance
they could not dissociate His kingdom
from the empire of physical conquest
which had so long been the vision of
Jewish passions and prejudices. ‘“ Not
until they could no longer speak to
Christ face to face did a purer faith
draw them within the sweep of God’s
redemptive purpose, and open their eyes
to the invisible kingdom of truth and
justice, of love and moral beauty.”

II. A revelation of the unity of
life.—‘ Instead of being a parting it
was a drawing near of the Lord in a
higher and migatier fellowship with
man, in a more fruitful and compre-
hensive relationship.” ‘‘ He was taken
from the sight of His aisciples that He
might come into touch with all the
springs of human thought and action.”


III. An enlargement of Christ's
personal influence.— Death does not
change but intensifies human relation-
ships. Death is the gate through
which the soul of the disciple ascends
with Christ to larger life and more
blessed influences.” “Moses and Paul
are greater forces in human society
now than they ever dreamed of being
while in the flesh. The influence of
Calvin increases not only in power but
in purity with each succeeding genera-
tion.” So with Christ, whose ascension
was “an uplifting and glorifying of all
human life.”—George D. Herron, D.D.


The Ascension of Jesus.
I. The conclusion of the appearances
of the Risen One in the past.

II. The counterpart of His future
return.

III. The point of entrance for His
present sovereignty.—Bornemann.


Taken up; or, Views of the Ascension.
Christ ascended into heaven.

I. As a servant, to receive His re-
ward. Having finished His Father’s
work He ascended to receive His stipu-
lated recompense (Heb. xii. 2).

II. As a Son into His Father’s
bosom. Out of this having come, into
this He delighted to return (John
xvii. 5).

III. Asa High Priest, to intercede
for His people. Having offered Him-
self once for all as a sacrifice, He passed
into the heavens, there to appear in the
presence of God for them for whom He
shed His blood (Heb. ix. 24).

IV. As a King, to sit upon His
throne. As appointed mediator He is
Lord of all (x. 36).


The Ascension of Christ a Necessity.

I. Because the polluted earth was not
suited as an abode for the glorified
Body of the Redeemer.—Heaven was
its appropriate sphere of existence,
Before it could tabernacle again in this
world, the new heavens and the new
earth must be introduced.

II. Because an essential part of His
priestly office was to be exercised in


29


CHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


o_O


Heaven.”—‘“‘ What the high priest
did in the earthly temple it was neces-
sary for the High Priest of our pro-
fession to do in the temple made with-
out hands in the heavens.”

III. Because it was necessary that
redemption should not only be acquired
but applied.—*“ Men if left to them-
selves would have remained in their
sins, and Christ would have died in
vain.” To avert this the Holy Ghost
required to be given, and heaven was
the place whence the Holy Spirit
could be outpoured.

IV. Because Heaven itself required
to be prepared for His people.—Hence
Christ said, “I go to prepare a place
for you,” ete. (John xiv. 2, 3).—Charles
Hodge, D.D.


The Visible Ascension.

I. The most befitting, and naturally
to be expected attestation of Christ's
heavenly origin (John iii. 13, vi. 62,
xvi. 28).

II. The final and most evident—for
the first witnesses indispensable—exhi-
bition of the truth that the kingdom
of Jesus should be established by the
Spirit from heaven.

III. The most assuring guarantee of
Christ’s heavenly power.

IV. The strongest pledge of His
future visible return.—Stier.


Clouds that conceal Christ.

I. Clouds of vapour conceal His
glorious form from the eyes of sense.

II. Clouds of ignorance conceal His
image from the eyes of the under-
standing.

III. Clouds of unbelief conceal His
grace from the eyes of the heart.

IV. Clouds of sin conceal His pre-
sence from the eyes even of faith.


Ver. 11. Why stund we gazing into
heaven ? Because we see—

I. Jesus crowned with glory and
honour (Heb. ii. 9).

II. Humanity glorified in Him
(Heb. iv. 15).

III. Redemption fully completed by
Him (Phil. ii. 9),

30


IV. The whole creation in future
recovered by Him (Rev. xi. 15).—


Oosterzee.


The Second Coming of Christ.

I. Personal.—The same Lord Jesus.

II. Visible—In like manner as ye
beheld Him going.

III. Glorious——On the clouds of
heaven.

IV. Certain.—He shall come.


Vers. 9-11. Was Christ's Ascension a
visible phenomenon ?

I. Against this the following con-
siderations are commonly urged:
1. Scientific. The idea of a “local”
heaven beyond the atmospheric fir-
mament and out in the depths of
space has been rendered inconceivable
by modern astronomy. But without
admitting that.heaven cannot pos-
sibly be a place, all that the Ascension
as narrated in Scripture involves is
merely a visible withdrawal beyond the
limits of this sensible sphere. 2. Theo-
logical. ‘The proper Christian faith
conception of the present exaltation of
Jesus Christ is not dependent on that
external ascension which is reported
in the Acts, the last not being
for the Christian faith essential, and
fundamental, while the first is (Borne-
mann). A statement such as this,
however, is incorrect, since without a
visible bodily ascension, not only would
the doctrine of Christ’s bodily resurrec-
tion be insecure, but the doctrine of
Christ’s mediatorship would be im-
perilled (see Heb. iv. 14-16). 3. Criti-
cal. (1) The account of Luke (xxiv. 20),
which seems to place the Ascension at
or near Bethany, fifteen furlongs from
Jerusalem, whereas Acts represents it
as having occurred only five or six fur-
longs from the city. See this ditticulty
met in Critical Remarks and Homileti-
cal Analysis. Of course, if the reading
which omits “and was carried up into
heaven” be adopted, the difficulty
vanishes. (2) The representation in
Mark (xvi. 19, 20), which places (or
appears to place) the Ascension imme-
diately after the interview with the


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP. I.





eleven as they sat at meat. But not to
insist upon the incongruity of repre-
senting Christ as vanishing through
the heavens from a dining-room and at
night, there is no more nécessity for
supposing that Christ immediately went
forth from the chamber and ascended
than there is for thinking that the
apostles rose from their seats at the
banquet and went forth to preach.
(3) The silence of Matthew (xxviii.),
which at least suggests that he did not
know of any such occurrence as Luke
and Mark report. But Matthew may
have simply regarded the Ascension as
lying beyond the scope of his Gospel
history, or may have regarded it as
directly implied in the Saviour’s
prvmise, “ Lo! I am with you always,”
ete., “since it could not have been
unknown to any Christian at that time,
that Christ was no longer with His
people ‘in the flesh,’ but had ascended


Xvi.


to heaven” (Ebrard, Gospel History,
§ 102).

II. For this the undermentioned
arguments should be weighed. 1. Scien-
tific. There can be nothing scientific-
ally impossible in the idea of Christ
ascending into heaven, since Christ’s
body had already undergone a trans-
formation of which science can take no
cognisance. 2. Theological. If Christ
actually rose from the grave in a bodily
form, a visible departure from earth
would seem to be necessary to avert the
suspicion that He may again have died.
3. Critica. The concurrent testimony
of the Gospel and Epistle writers is too
strong to be set aside. Compare Mark
19; Luke xxiv. 50, 51; Eph.
iv.6, 105 1 elimi. 16; Heb, iy. 14,
vi. 20, viii. 26, ix. 12; 1 Peter i. 22,
iii. 22. (See Whitelaw’s How is the
Divinity of Jesus depicted? Part iii.,
Chap. I.)


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 12—14.
The Church in Jerusalem ; or, the Ten Days before Pentecost.


I. The Church’s meeting-place.—An upper room in Jerusalem.


1. Humble.


Not a splendid cathedral or ornate ecclesiastical edifice; but an apartment in a


private house, in the topmost story beneath the flat roof.


Compare the meeting-


place of the Christians at Troas (xx. 8) and Rome (xxviii. 13; Rom. xvi. 5).
2. Obscure. Not a chamber connected with the temple, as some suppose, but
most likely a room belonging to a follower of the Risen Christ, perhaps in the
house of the goodman mentioned in Luke xxii. 11, or in that of John Mark’s
mother (xii. 12). 3. Small. Large for a private house, but in comparison with
the buildings afterwards possessed by Christians, contracted and meagre. Yet
4. Sufficient. Capable of holding the entire company of Christ’s disciples in
Jerusalem before Pentecost. And 5. Consecrated. If the goodman’s upper
room, by the Last Supper there held; if Mary’s, by the last interview of Christ
with the Twelve before His Ascension (vers. 4, 13).

II. The Church’s Membership.—l. Jts nwmber. ‘“ About a hundred and
twenty.” (1) Representing the fruits of Christ’s ministry in Jerusalem, not
throughout the country (see 1 Cor. xv. 6), the five hundred Galilean brethren
having not yet come up to the metropolis. Christ’s ministry, externally judged,
had not been eminently successful. (2) Not a large or powerful band of
spiritual soldiers. Indeed, in comparison with Christ’s army of to-day, extremely
diminutive and feeble. Yet (3) Christ was about to employ them in the
magnificent task of reducing the world into subjection to Himself, the weakness
of the weapon being more than counterbalanced by the Almightiness of the Arm
that was to wield it (1 Cor. i. 27). 2. [ts composition. (1) Men and women.
A distinct advance upon the Church of the Old Testament, in which woman had
no place as an individual, but only in and through and as represented by the
male head of the family to which she belonged. The exceptional case of
Zelophehad’s daughters (Numb. xxvi. 6, 7) proved the rule. But now in Christ


31


CHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
—_—


Jesus there is neither male nor female (Gal. iii. 28). In the Church of the New
Testament woman finds a place in her individual capacity, and enjoys rights and
privileges equal with those of her male companion. Nothing more characteristic
of Christianity or more demonstrative of her hea:enly origin than the change
she has effected on the position of woman both in Church and State. (2) Persons
of distinction and people of no name. Individuals of repute, ability, and
_ influence like the Apostles who had been selected by Christ, and had companied
with Him from the beginning (ver. 21); like the Galilean women who had
followed Him with devotion and ministered to Him of their substance (Luke viii. 3);
like Mary, the mother of Jesus, and like the brethren of our Lord, of whom one
(James) was soon to take his place (if already he had vot secured it) as president
of the congregation. Happily, however, also men and women of no name or
fame, influence or ability, rank or wealth. Christian Churches should never be
of one class ; but “rich” and “ poor,” “wise” and “unwise,” “ patrician” and
“ plebeian,” should meet together in profession of a common faith, in acts of
common worship and in service of a common Lord. 3. Jts leaders. Leadership
not incompatible with equality. Never had the Church such a company of able
and trusted guides as when it started on its glorious career. (1) Males, the
Apostles. The first three: Peter, the man of rock (Matt. xvi. 18; Johni. 42)
and Apostle of action (Matt. xiv. 28 ; John. xviii. 10); John, the beloved disciple
(John xxi. 20)and Apostle of love (1 John iii. 18, iv. 7); and James, his elder brother,
who afterwards suffered martyrdom (xii. 2), perhaps distinguished by courageous
zeal (Luke ix. 54). The next five: Andrew, one of the first to follow Christ,
a man of decision (John i. 40); Philip, whom Christ found in the wilderness
(John i, 43), representing spiritual aspiration (John xiv. 8); Thomas, called
Didymus, doubtful and anxious (John xx. 25), touched with melancholy
John xi. 16), yet of ardent devotion (John xx. 28) ; Bartholomew or Nathanael
b5 ohn i. 45), the soul of guileless simplicity ; Matthew, who left all and followed
Christ (Matt. ix. 9; Luke v. 28), the man of whole-hearted consecration. The
last three: James, the son of Alpheus, sometimes called “James the Less”
(Mark xv. 40), though “James the Little” would be better, of whose character
nothing is reported; Simon Zelotes, otherwise named The Canaanite (Matt. x. 4;
Mark iii. 18), or the Zealot, perhaps noted for fervour ; and Judas, the brother
or son of James, styled Lebbzus (Matt. x. 2) and Thaddeus (Matt. iii. 18),
presumably from the warmth of his disposition, hence the man of heart. Along
with these James, the brother of our Lord, enjoyed the reputation and held the
position of a leader (xv. 13; Gal. i. 19). (2) Females, the women already
referred to, Mary Magdalene, Mary the Mother of James and Joses, Joanna,
the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, Salome, the mother of John and James,
and Susanna (Luke viii. 1; John xix. 25), and Mary the Mother of Jesus, here
mentioned for the last time in Scripture and not assigned that precedence given
her by the Church of Rome.

III. The Church’s disposition.—Unanimous. Her members were all of one
mind, The spirit of discord had not yet revealed itself among them. Their
ranks were unbroken -through either jealousy or rivalry. 2. Steadfast They
persevered in maintaining this becoming and excellent temper. Doubtless it
had not then been tried by either prosperity or adversity. Yet was it praiseworthy
that they did not themselves grow weary of the monotony of concord.

IV. The Church's occupation.— Waiting for the promise. 1. Praying. Always
becoming on the part of Christians (Phil. iv. 6; 1 Thess. v. 17), it was specially
suited to the circumstances of the Church during the ten days before Pentecost.
That the chief theme of their supplications was the heavenly baptism for which
they were looking need not be doubted. That, though sure of it, they still
prayed for its coming, accorded with a law of the kingdom (Ezek, xxxvi. 37;


32


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. f.





Matt. xxi. 22; James i. 5). That they prayed in a social as distinguished from
a private capacity, was grounded on Christ’s well-known assurance (Matt. xviii. 19).
2. Working. The duty lying to their hand they did. They proceeded to fill the
vacancy in the apostolic college. A hint to Christians to leave no known duty
unperformed while waiting for other tasks to be enjoined.
“Strong in His faithfulness, praise Him and sing,
Then as He beckons thee,—‘ Doe the next thing,’”

Learn.—1. Not to suppose a splendid, or indeed any, building necessary to
constitute a church, 2. Not to despise the day of small things. 3. Not to
foster the class spirit in connection with Christian Churches. 4. Not to resent
the leadership of those who by superior ability or influence are manifestly called
to that office. 5. Not to mar by discord or division the unity of fellowship
among believers. 6. Not to think praying can ever be out of place, 7. Not to
mistake idleness for waiting.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. The Upper Room.—The rooms inside, and was entirely inde-
upper chamber still forms the distinctive pendent of the rest of the building. It
feature of a Syrian house. It is the served for numberless uses. There the
guest chamber, where the guest is corpse was laid before burial (ix. 37). It
quartered outside the part of the house was inan upper chamber Jesus met with
used by the host and his family in His apostles to bid them farewell, to eat
private life. The poor were generally the Passover with them for the last
content to leave their terraces un- time, and to institute the Lord’s Supper.
covered, but the first luxury they The ordinary meals He no doubt took,
indulged in was an upper chamber. as they are still taken, in the court
The rich Shunamite made one for of the house and in public.—Stapfer,
Elisha (2 Kings iv. 8). This was the Palestine in the Time of Christ, p. 178.
most convenient part of the house,
because it was large compared to the The Four Lists of the A posiles.


MATTHEW. MARK. LUKE. ACTS.


Peter Peter Peter Peter

Andrew James Andrew John

James John James James

John Andrew John Andrew

Philip Philip Philip Philip
Bartholomew Bartholomew Bartholomew Thomas

Thomas Matthew Matthew Bartholomew
Matthew Thomas Thomas Matthew

James (of Alpheus) | James (of Alpheus) | James (of Alpheus) | James (of Alpheus)
Thaddeus Thaddeus Simon the Zealot Simon the Zealot
Simon the Cananean| Simon the Cananean| Judas son of James | Judas son of James
Judas Iscariot Judas Iscariot Judas Iscariot





From a comparison of these lists the fifth place. 4. That Bartholomew was
following conclusions may be drawn: another name for Nathanael. 5. That
1. That Peter was universally recog- Thomas and Matthew, like Peter and
nised as the leader of the apostolic John, Philip and Bartholomew, were
band. 2. That, following him, Andrew, probably companions. 6. That Thad-
James, and John enjoyed a precedence deus and Judas were the same indi-
over the remaining eight. 3. That, vidual. 7. That Judas Iscariot deserved
after these, the next in rank was _ the lowest place in the apostolic brother-
Philip, who in all the lists occupies the hood.


iv


33


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i


Ver, 14. The Brethren of Our Lord.

I. Their names.—James, Joses,
Simon, and Judah (Matt, xiii. 55).
With the exception of the first, all
ordinary men, who would probably
never have been heard of but for their
connection with Christ. The vast
majority of this world’s population are
names, and nothing more; and even
of those who emerge from obscurity it
is not always true that they shine in
their own lustre. Reflected radiance,
or renown at secondhand, is more
common than most suppose.

II. Their relation to Jesus. —1.
According to some His cousins—i.e.,
the children of Alpheus and Mary.
An opinion in support of which it is
usual to advert to: (1) the customary
practice among the Jews of employing
the term “brother” in a loose sense,
as equivalent to “near kinsman”;
(2) the circumstance that Christ, when
dying, commended His mother to John
(xix. 26), which, it is thought, He would
hardly have done had she possessed
other children besides Himself ; (3) the
Scripture statement that Alpheus or
Cleopas and Mary had two sons named
James and Joses (Mark xy. 40), if not
a third called Judas (i. 13) ; and (4) the
appearance of individuals bearing the
names of James, Simon, and Judas in
the circle of the apostles, who are not
the brethren of our Lord, but the sons
of Alpheus (Matt. x. 3; Mark iii. 8).
Against this opinion, however, it is
urged, and with force, (1) that they
are never styled Christ’s cousins, but
always his brethren—a fact remark-
able, but not decisive ; (2) that they
always appear associated with the
mother of Jesus, and not with the
wife of Cleopas; (3) that one cannot
be certain whether Mary, the mother
of James and Joses, was the sister of
our Lord’s mother (see John xix. 25) ;
and (4) that our Lord’s brethren were
not even among His disciples till
towards the close of His ministry
(John vii. 5), whereas the two sons of
Alpheus and Mary were among the
apostles from the first. 2. According
to others, His half brothers—i.e., the

34


[


sons of Joseph by a former marriage.
But this opinion, though not impro-
bable, rests solely on the authority of
the Gospel of James. 3. According to
a third class of interpreters, His whole
brothers—i.e., children of Mary by her
husband Joseph. In favour of this
the arguments run—(1) that it is the
simplest and most natural hypothesis ;
(2) that Our Lord’s brethren are
always spoken of as brothers, not as
cousins ; (3) that they are never said
to be sons of Joseph, but always repre-
sented as brethren of Jesus; and (4)
that they always appear to be under
Mary’s care. (See Whitelaw on The
Gospel of St. John, ii. 12.)

III. Their changed attitude towards
Jesus. 1. The nature of the change.
They had become believers, which they
were not prior to His crucifixion.
Then they refused to accept His Mes-
sianic pretensions, though they found
it impossible to deny His miracles
(John vii. 3). Now their doubt was
dispelled and their unbelief changed
into faith. 2. The cause of the change.
This was unquestionably the fact of
Our Lord’s Resurrection, and perhaps
in particular His manifestation of
Himself to James (1 Cor. xv. 7).


Vers. 1-14. The Ascending Lord and
His Witnesses.—The ascension of the
Lord Jesus is the one fact which
properly belongs both to the story of
the Gospels and to the history of the
Acts of the Apostles.

I. The preparation of the witnesses.
—For witnesses must be qualified.
You cannot lay hands on any man at
random, and ask him to bear testimony
even to undisputed facts. He must
have seen the things of which he
claims to be the witness. And then
he must be a man of truthful spirit.
These two qualifications for a faithful
witness Jesus supplies in the things
which He does and says in thislast inter-
view with His disciples. By what He
did that day before their eyes He gave
them knowledge of the final fact which
was to complete the circle of their
testimony. They had wept by the


= HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





cross and mourned beside the sepulchre.
They had seen Him, heard Him,
touched Him risen from the dead, and
had been glad when they saw the Lord
again. And now they are assembled
that the last needed link in the evi-
dence they are to give may be added to
make the chain complete. But what
He said was needful, too, that they
might discharge their office rightly.
Not merely must their eyes behold the
dying and the rising of the Son of man,
but it was quite as essential that their
spiritual vision should be illumined.
It was for this that the Holy Spirit
was needed. His coming is to com-
plete what their outward vision had
begun. He will teach all things, and
bring all Jesus’s sayings to remem-
brance. He will show things to come.
They are to have power; but it shall
be power, not to be warriors, but to be
witnesses. This is the work of His
disciples in every age. For this cause
the Master came into the world—to
bear witness to the truth. As the
Father sent Him into the world, so He
sends us. As He equipped the Twelve,
so He furnishes us for the work. In-
stead of the vision of His face we have
the fourfold Gospel.

II. The limitation of the witnesses.
—For, even “while they beheld, a
cloud received Him out of their sight.”
There was clear vision for a way, and
then an utter mystery. Between Him
and the eyes which gazed their love
into the heavens came the intercepting
cloud. So all our knowledge ends in
mystery. Even where a veil is not
hung to hide the divine realities from
us, the shortness of our vision is as
effective to conceal them. The strength
and power of the witnessing of the
early disciples was in this very thing:
that they testified with all boldness up
to the limits of their knowledge, and
then relapsed into utter silence. It
will be well for the later witnesses for
Christ to follow more nearly the
example of these earlier martyrs. We
may with all boldness declare the well-
attested facts, But do not let us try
to witness to the things which are


beyond the cloud, whether it may have
been spread by divine wisdom or by
human ignorance. Many an earnest
witness has lost his power in the world
because there was no clear line between
the things which he has seen and
known and the things which he has
only felt and fancied. Nor is it
necessary, because a cloud hides that
which we long to see, that it should
cast a shadow upon us, or darken onr
horizon. The cloud which underlies
the mysteries of heavenly truth is not
black with thunderbolts, not scarred
with seams of lightning, but edged at
least with the silver glory which it
hides, and only laden for us with
showers of peace and plenty. For it
is not the darkness which hides God
from us, but the light in which He
dwells, which no man can approach
unto, whom no man hath seen nor can
see. This was the cloud of the trans-
figuration—the cloud of brightness.
Paul, telling the story of his conversion,
says, “ I could not see for the glory of
that light.” Jesus is the brightness of
the Father’s glory and the Light of the
World, but it is a light softened and
screened for human eyes by the veil of
His flesh; so that we now can look
and see, and look and live. The cloud
is the condescension of divine love to
our weak sight. It testifies God’s
grace equally with the sunshine.

III. The attitude of the witnesses.
—They stand gazing after Him up
into heaven—how long we do not
know ; long enough, it is evident, to
lead to the rebuke and reassurance
which came to them from the lips of
the two angels. However full of love
or faith their motive may have been,
their posture was not approved. It is
when they cease their gazing and
begin their going that they assume
their true relation to the risen Christ.
For the return to Jerusalem was their
first act of obedience to Him. There
He had told them to go, and there
to wait, and there to witness first.
To testify of Him first where it is
hardest and most perilous to do
it; back where the people of all


39


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


a ad ee ee


tongues will gather soon—they are to
speak where their word will reach the
greatest number; back where He bids
them—that is, more than all beside,
that they obey His last command. It
is not by peering into the mysteries of
God’s unrevealed truth that any
disciple gains grace to be a faithful
witness. It is far rather by unques-
tioning obedience to His plain com-
mand that we shall come to such
further light as He may have to give
us. They who are actively engaged in
doing His will and work shall be led on
with surest step into the mysteries of
godliness. They shall have more to
witness who witness faithfully to what
they know, rather than they who wait
and watch for more to tell. Nor did
they separate when the Master, who
had at first drawn them together, had


common mission. There was to come
on them a common gift of power.
And so they stayed together during
the intcrval till it should come. Andas
it is in the way of obedience that we
learn the truth, it is in the way of
fellowship that we most often receive
the richest spiritual gifts. If we would
share the gifts which Jesus bestows
upon His own, we shall be wise to
keep with the other disciples. And
then, of course, they prayed; not of
necessity only for that which He had
promised, and which was to come to
them so soon, but quite as much, per-
haps, for patience to wait for it, and
then for grace to use it for His praise.
Obedience, fellowship, and prayer,
shall make you strong to be witnesses,
martyrs if needs be, unto Him.—
Monday Club Sermons.


left them, He had appointed them a


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 15—26.


Completing the Apostleship ; or, the Election of Matthias.

I. The vacancy in the apostolic college.—l. The honoured place of Judas.
(1) Numbered with the apostles (see Luke vi. 16). Peter explains not the
motives (he could not) which led Christ, who knew the traitor from the beginning
(John vi. 70), to select him for this signal favour, but dwells upon the fact that in
being so selected he received a mark of special confidence. Many besides Judas
have obtained high privileges, and been called to important trusts by Christ, who,
like him, have misapplied the one and abused the other. (2) Invested with minis-
terial office. Generally like his colleagues, but particularly also by being made
the treasurer of the company (John xiii. 29). The management of their finances
appears to have been “ his portion in this ministry,” or the duty assigned to him
in connection with the apostolate. If the Twelve required a treasurer, it can-
not be sinful for churches and congregations either to have secular affairs or to
depute persons to attend to them.” 2. The melancholy fall of Judas. (1) Ten-
derly referred to, not with vituperation, but in mildness. He was “ guide to
them that took Jesus.” Even the worst sins of the worst men should be under
rather than over stated. (2) Sufficiently indicated, What Peter says implies
the rest of the pathetic story of the betrayal for thirty pieces of silver. Hence
he dilates not on the sad theme, but leaves his hearers’ imaginations to call it up
to their own thoughts. A lesson for preachers, never to enlarge more than they
can help upon the backsliding, of individual believers. (3) Divinely foreseen.
By the Holy Ghost, who inspired David to pen words and thoughts exactly fitting
the traitor’s case, and depicting his ejection from office, ‘‘ Let his habitation be
made desolate, and let no man dwell therein ” (Psalm Ixix. 26), and ‘ His office let
another take” (Psalm cix. 8). 3. The appalling end of Judas. Slain—(1) In his
own field, which he, or the priests (Matt. xxvii. 7), purchased with the blood money
received for betraying Christ. (2) By his own hand, it being most likely that he
hanged himself on a tree in his field, and that the rope breaking he fell heavily
to the ground, with the consequence stated by Peter. (3) To his own shame, the


36


a HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. I.





name given to the field, ‘‘ Aceldama,” or “ The field of blood,” perpetuating the
memory at once of his wickedness and of his woe. (For the apparent discrepancy
between Matthew’s account and Juke’s, see “‘ Critical Remarks.”)

IJ. The proposal to fill the vacancy.—1. Made by Peter. ‘And in those days
Peter stood up,” etc. Peter’s forwardness on this occasion was completely in
harmony (1) with the place assigned him in the lists of the apostles, (2) with his
ardent and impulsive character, (3) with his practice in pre-crucifixion days. to
take the lead among his brethren and be their spokesman, (4) with the charge
given him by Christ, when once he had been converted, to strengthen his brethren
(Luke xxii. 32), and (5) with the foreshadowings that were beginning to appear
of that spiritual pre-eminence to which he was henceforth to attain in the New
Testament Church. 2. Defined by Peter. (1) As to the qualifications demanded
of those who should fill the office. They must have companied with the apostles
and been eyewitnesses of the Lord Jesus from His baptism by John to the day
of His taking up. (Compare 1 Cor. ix. 1.) (2) As to the business to be done by
_ the elected candidate, ‘‘To witness,” with his colleagues, ‘to Christ’s resur-
rection.” (Compare Acts iv. 33.) (3) As to the urgency for proceeding with the
election. “Of these must one become a witness.” Peter has been accused of ©
precipitation in filling up the ranks of the Twelve; but as Peter acted in this
under the Holy Spirit’s guidance, such an indictment is inadmissible.

III. The method of carrying out the proposal.—l. The nomination of candi-
dates. Joseph, called Barsabas, or son of Sabas, surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
Both, mentioned only here, probably belonged to the Seventy, and, it may be as-
sumed, possessed the requisite qualifications. Of neither does historical infor-
mation survive. Eusebius states, on the authority of Papias, that the former
drank a cup of poison without being hurt—a legend modelled upon Mark xvi. 18.
The latter, according to one tradition, suffered martyrdom in Ethiopia, according
to another in Colchis, according to a third in Judea, by being stoned. Justus
was a Roman cognomen, “ probably assumed according to prevalent custom”
(Alford). 2. The asking of divine direction. The prayer of the congregation,
presumably led by Peter, was (1) directed to the glorified Christ, in the context
styled “ Lord” (ver. 21), (2) on the ground that He knew the hearts of all men
(John i. 50, ii. 25, vi. 64, xxi. 17), (3) requesting Him to show of the two
candidates which He had chosen, since Christ's choice was indispensable to the
holding of apostleship (John vi. 70, xiii. 18, xv. 16). 3. The casting of lots.
“These were probably tablets with the names of the persons written on them, and
shaken in a vessel or in the lap of a robe (Prov. xvi. 33); he whose lot first
leaped out being the person designated” (Alford). This method of ascertaining
the divine decision, derived from the Old Testament Church, in which “ lot-
casting ” was common (Lev. xvi. 8—over the two goats on the great day of atone-
ment; Numb. xxxiv. 13; Josh. xiv. 2, xviii. 2—at the dividing of the land;
1 Chron. xxiv. 5, xxv. 8—in the appointment of temple singers), appears to have
never again been followed in the election of office-bearers in the New Testament
Church. Instead of lot-casting, vote-giving by show of hands seems to have been
substituted (Acts xiv. 23, which see). 4. The enrolling of the chosen. Matthias
the elected was numbered with the eleven apostles. That he was formally
‘voted ” in by the suffrages of the congregation, which thereby, as it were, con-
firmed the divine selection, may be suggested by the verb (Plumptre), but hardly
appears admissible in the circumstances. If the congregation added anything to
the decision of lot it was merely an intimation (unanimous doubtless) of its
acquiescence in the appointment.

essons.—1. The danger of falling. 2. The heinousness of betraying Christ.
3. The appalling doom of apostates. 4. The grand theme of apostolic preach-
ing. 5. The cessation of the apostolate in the New Testament Church.


37


CHAP. I.


s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. The first Christian Assembly.

I. The ornament of Jerusalem.—
Its members more distinguished in
Heaven’s eye than Caiaphas, Annas, or
any other Jerusalem dignitary.

II. The glory of Christ.—Having
been called into existence by Him.


III. The commencement of God’s:


kingdom.—The hundred and twenty
persons have since grown into an
innumerable company.—Oosterzee.


Ver. 16. Old Testament Scripture—
Its fourfold relation :

I. To the Holy Ghost.—Indicated
‘by the words “which the Holy Ghost
spake.” Though perhaps the express
authority of the Holy Ghost should not
be claimed—in this place, at least—for
more than the two citations from the
Book of Psalms which are given in
ver. 20; yet it cannot be doubted that
both Christ and His apostles regarded
the Holy Ghost as the Author of the
whole book in such a way and to such
an extent as to make Him responsible
forits contents. (See Matt. xxii. 31,43;
Luke i. 70; Acts xxviii. 25; 2 Tim.
fii. "16 ;-Heb; a.) 1 “Peter 1911;
2 Peter i. 21.)

II. To David.—As representing its
writers. This pointed to by the clause
“spake by the mouth of David.”
Although this appears to guarantee
that David had a hand in producing
the Psalter—an honour which modern
critics are extremely anxious to deny
him—it does not necessarily signify
that David (or the other holy prophets
and psalmists) were merely passive in-
struments in the hand of the Spirit,
who mechanically reproduced what the
Spirit inbreathed. All the facts go
to show that, while the writers of Old
Testament Scripture maintained their
personalities and individualities in what
they spoke or penned, they were
nevertheless in a mysterious (and pro-
bably incomprehensible) manner super-
intended and controlled by the Holy
Spirit.

III. To Jesus——A_ glimpse of this

38


looks out from the words, “It was
needful that the Scripture should be
fulfilled.” Besides being the sacred
books of His people, the Old Testament
Scripture was ifor Him, Jesus, the
Father’s and the Holy Ghost’s vade
mecum, which they had prepared for
Him to be used as a light unto His
feet and a lamp unto His path—a sort
of Messianic programme—when He
entered on His public career. What
Old Testament Scripture was to Jesus
the whole Bible should be to His people
—a directory for daily life.

IV. To Judas.—Referred to in the
words “concerning Judas.” That the
traitor’s person, character, and trans-
gression were outlined beforehand in
Old Testament Scripture neither com-
pelled him to act as He did nor relieved
him of responsibility for his deeds, any
more than in ordinary matters the
divine foreknowledge destroys the in-
dividual’s liberty of will.


Concerning Judas.

I. His early fame. — ‘‘ Numbered
among the apostles.”

II. His guilty fall. Guide to them
that took Jesus.”

III. His woful fate. — Committed
suicide, and went to his own place.


Ver. 19. Aceldama, the field of blood.

I. Purchased by the price of blood.—
Whether Judas or the chief priests were
the purchasers is immaterial. The
money payment was the thirty pieces
of silver delivered to the traitor in
reward for his iniquity. The field was
“the clay-yard of a potter of the town”
(Geikie), and to purchase this the blood
money was devoted, because to cast it
into the treasury would have been un-
lawful.

II. Defiled by the stain of blood.—
Somewhere in this clay-yard the traitor
put an end to his life by hanging.
“Nor was even this the end, for the
cord by which he had suspended him-
self gave way, and he fell beneath,
ruptured and revolting” (Geikie).


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. I.





Matthew agrees with Luke in reporting
the suicide ; Luke differs from Matthew
in describing the rupture.

III. Kept as a memorial of blood.—
The name could not fail to preserve a
recollection of both of Judas’s crimes—
his infamous treachery towards his
Master, .and his cowardly execution of
himself. “The righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance, but the name
of the wicked shall rot.”


Vers. 17-20. The Wages of Sin; or,
the Miserable End of Judas.

I. He ought to have been a disciple
of Christ, and he betrayed his Lord.

II. He ought to have performed the
duties of his bishopric, and he acquired
the field of blood.

Ill. He ought to have proclaimed
the Risen One, and he perished as a
suicide.

IV. He ought to have received the
Holy Ghost, and he went into con-
demnation.—Florey, in Lange.


Ver. 23. Justus and Matthias.

I. Justus the equal of Matthias, in
being: 1. A disciple of the Lord Jesus
Christ. 2. Esteemed by his fellow-
believers. 3. Proposed for the apostle-
ship. 4. Honoured with a place in
sacred history.

II. Matthias preferred to Justus.—
1. Elected to the apostleship. 2. Chosen
by Christ. 3. Numbered with the
Eleven.


Ver. 24. Prayer addressed to Christ.

I. As a personal divine Being.—
“Thou, Lord.” .

II. As a possessor of Omniscience.—
““Who knowest the hearts of all men.”

III. As the director of His people.
—“ Show us!”

IV. As the disposer of offices in the
Church.—“ Show of these two the one
whom ‘Thou hast chosen.”


Vers. 16-25. The Personal History of
Jesus.
I. His baptism by John.
II. His companionship with the
apostles.


III. His betrayal by Judas.
IV. His arrestment by the Romans.
V. His death upon the cross.
VI. His resurrection.
VII. His ascension.—In all these
points Peter agrees with the Gospel
writers.


Ver. 25. Individual Destiny.

I. Every man’s destiny is prepared
for him beforehand—As Daniel had
his lot (Dan. xii. 13), so had Judas his
own place. The Father’s kingdom is
prepared for Christ’s people from the
foundation of the world (Matt. xxv. 34).
Paul speaks of vessels of wrath fitted
unto destruction, and vessels of mercy
prepared unto glory (Rom. ix. 22, 23).

II. Every man’s destiny will cor-
respond with the character which he
possesses.— Like Judas, every man will
go to his own place—he who by patient
continuance in well doing has sought
for glory and honour and incorruption,
to eternal life; he that has obeyed not
the truth, but obeyed unrighteousness,
to tribulation and anguish (Rom. ii.
7-9). In every case the environment
will correspond with the life.

III. Every man’s destiny will be
the outcome of his own doings.—Each
individual on earth will ultimately be
what he makes himself. He may per-
mit himself to become the victim of his
surroundings, but the fault will be his
own. He may be helped by divine
grace, but even divine grace does not
enable him to dispense with personal
exertion. The solemnity which this
gives to life needs no remark.


Natural Selection in the Spiritual
World.—The subject of the text of
practical moment to us, is one of moral
adjustment, and involves fitness for the
sphere occupied. Every realm of crea-
tion—mind or matter, animate or in-
animate—has its order and label because
of its nature, its identity, its surround-
ings peculiar to itself, with relations
and dependencies—essential adjuncts
of the nature and surroundings of the
realm. That this principle may be
seen in its tangible actuality turn tu


39


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ne CEEEEEEIE ESSER EnIEEEEESISISESREIEIND


the pages of natural history, where we
find represented the families, tribes,
and species of the different continents,
each with its peculiar nature and the
environment contributing most to its
vigorous development. Also in logic
and psychology, in the sense of a
peculiar office or sphere, than “ place”
there is no more pregnant term nor
more requisite factor. It is the third
foot of a tripod—a sine gud non. But
interesting as it may be for us to con-
sider the import of “place” in the
spheres of natural and intellectual
science, still greater is its significance
amid the species and graduations of the
moral and spiritual world ; for here the
term is used not only in mechanical
arrangement and scientific analysis, but
it has also all the additional gravity of
the moral and eternal world, with its
attraction and repulsion, its reward and
retribution.


I. The preservation intact of the


families, species, and habitat of the
spiritual world requires that the mem-
bers of each great family, the redeemed
and the unredeemed, should be assigned
to their fittest place or habitat for
eternity. 1. This must be true out of
respect for the harmony, purity, and
order of heaven. There is no one in
the city of God of whom it could be
said: “ He is a disturber of the peace,
a shame and grief to his relatives, and
a disgrace to the avenue on which he
lives.” Such a character or species can-
not be permitted there. The order of
the celestial community may not be so
disturbed. The réle of eternal praise
and the spotaneity of the currents of
felicitous thought are inviolable rights
which inhere in the citizenship of
heaven. 2. Not only for order’s sake,
but from moral considerations must he
go to his “‘ own place.” All the oppor-
tunity which unfathomed depths of
compassion and the sweep of mercy’s
unbounded forecast could provide have
been extended. By all the inducements
which life’s opportune and sanguine
day of probation could proffer, he has
been overturned. The die is cast.
Before God and His government he


é°


stands unacquitted—a rebel. Through
all life’s paths he has afforded the
material for the record of a rebel—the
habits and the development of a rebel ;
the wishes, heart, and character of a
rebel—against his own soul’s require-
ments, the provisions for an eternity of
peace and the beneficent laws of God.
Probation is past ; and now to the place
of what grade or species of character
does he belong ?

II. Let us now consider the means
of reaching one’s moral grade, destina-
tion, or “place” in the spirit world.
We need not falter in the belief that
God, whose scrutiny none can evade, is
able by His word directly to appoint
each to his place. But in the apportion-
ment to the abodes of the righteous
and wicked—heaven and _ hell—the
respective habitat of each of the two
great families under the genus Spirit,
there are certain natural forces or laws
of moral adjustment which may well
claim our attention. 1. There are
characteristic functions of privilege or
duty in every position of honour ; and
this is intuitively true of the home of
the saints of God. 2. A second function
of the life in heaven is fellowship.
Now, if permitted, could the unre-
pentant soul endure such association ?
3. Another function of the heavenly
life is unveiled mental vision and un-
trammeled mental freedom. What
kind of freedom here could the im-
penitent soul enjoy—whose habits of
life have drilled him in wrong methods
and whose sources of pleasure have
blinded, deafened, and paralysed his
conscience and spiritual functions in
company with the redeemed whose
pinions never tire? But another
mighty agency in moral adjustment
and consequent assignment to “ place ”
to which sinners are subject and which
is a positive and not a negative factor
in the work of adjustment is natural
retribution, one of the forces of which
is the reason, which now sees the effect
of a wrong ideal, a practical idolatry,
selfish and gross, by which the soul
which might have been assimilated into
the likeness of Christ—the model of


43 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. I.





heaven—has been gradually metamor-
phosed into a type of moral degrada-
tion. The conscience also presents its
unmet claims, and sad regret causes
memory, as another factor in natural
retribution, to point backward to days
of opportunity, and a conscientious re-
flection iterates :


“ Of all sad words of tongue or pen,
The saddest are these ; it might have been.”


4, But still another force, which is
decisive in effecting God’s own procla-
mation of a separation between the
redeemed and unredeemed, may be
mentioned; it is the law of sustenta-
tion. Just because the ponderous iron
mass or the stone block should see the
balloon sustained in mid-air, ascending
to the clouds, shall they say, ‘Oh, we
shall fly too”? Never in their present
gross form. Never, until by fiercest
heat they become sublimated into
gaseous matter. Never as iron and
stone will they fly. So the fact that
the inhabitants of heaven can remain
there sustained and enjoy the fulness
of bliss is only by the support and pro-
tection of the laws of the kingdom of
God; and to thesinner in “‘ outer dark-
ness” there is no protection or support
from the laws of the kingdom of God,
therefore he cannot remain in heaven—
nor enter there. To illustrate: The
rigor of the frigid zone is so great that
only such animals as are provided to
endure its exposures can there sustain
life. The sloth and ant-eater are
animals which are not provided to
endure the exposures of the frigid zone ;
therefore they cannot there sustain
life. Let us now briefly notico—

III. The sense in which the hell of
the hereafter is the unrepentant sinner’s
“own place.” The adjective “own”
signifies a “‘ place” peculiar to himself,
But it is his own also as a member of
a class or grade. Students belong to
a class, and yet each holds his “ own
place” according to his standing. So
you, if you choose the way of death,
must take your place according to your
proficiency in the customs of that dark
abode, along with adulterers, the lust-


ful, the hypocrites, unbelievers, drunk-
ards, liars, and all that is profane and
abominable. It is peculiarly his ‘“ own
place,” then—1. By course of prepara-
tion, which course may be termed the
conservation of energy in the spiritual
realm—i.e., all the forces of the
sensibilities, intellect, and will are
differentiated into a unit of essential '
wickedness. In natural science, heat
and electricity are proved to be only
different phenomena of a single force ;
so in this course of preparation for his
“ own place,” the different faculties and
functions, conscience, moral account-
ability, etc., are by the voluntary
course in sin transmuted into the dis-
tinctive features of a unity and sub-
stance of wickedness. 2. It is peculiarly
his “ own place,” in that it is a greatly
curtailed sphere of activity. The fish
of Mammoth Cave are blind—not by
accident nor special creation, but being
so situated that the organs of vision
may not be exercised, the energies or
life force which would have utilised
these avenues of communication with
the outer world were applied elsewhere
and that apartment abandoned, and
the fish left blind in a dark cave as
a consequence of the disuse of its eyes.
So the moral and spiritual faculties are
atrophied and the privilege of their
healthful functions lost through disuse.
It is the sinners’ own place, then,
because it is the contracted and
degraded sphere in which he has en-
closed himself.

IV. The eternity of this doom.
1. This doom is eternal, because it is
the verdict of moral government. The
protection of the good demands it. The
jimale is pronounced, and tc no higher
court can you appeal. 2. It is a self-
imposed destiny, and never, until “the
Ethiopian can change his skin and the
leopard his spots” and transmute them-
selves into a different type or species,
will there be any commutation of the
sentence. 3. This matter is eternal
with the lost, who abide in their own
“place” not only because they have
cut themselves off from agencies and
appliances in the kingdom of grace, but


41


CHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





because all the conditions are now
complied with for growing worse and
worse.—C.. R. Hunt.


Vers. 12-26. The Waiting Time.—
What were its characteristics? It was:

I. A time of transition.—“ It stood
midway between Christ’s work on earth
now completed and the yet unopened
work of the Spirit from heaven. In
the history of redemption the first or
preparatory chapter closed on the day
of the Incarnation.” The _ second,
“though ending tragically, in a sense
unknown to human history, brought
life and immortality to light through
the darkness and death of the cross.”
The third and last chapter, the dispen-
sation of the Spirit, was about to open.

II. Atime of felt need.—As yet the
eleven had no clear conception of the
tale they were to tell, while they could
not but feel that they had neither the
position, culture, nor influence to move
the world, and not one ground to hope
for success save in their assurance of
the truth of their story and the help
they might receive from above in the
telling of it.

III. A time of expectancy.—How
often would they recall, and find it
indispensable to recall, such words as


these, “ Behold, I send the promise of
My Father upon you”; “Ye shall be
baptised with the Holy Ghost not many
days hence.”

IV. A time of prayer.—“ These all
continued with one accord steadfastly
in prayer.” And who can have any
doubt what would be the burden of their
prayers ?

V. A time of fraternal conference.
—It seems only reasonable to assume
that the intervals (between the prayers)
would be filled up by free interchange
of recollections and reflections on the
astonishing events and thrilling scenes
in the earthly life of their now glorified
Lord and the encouragements thence
arising.

VI. A time of action.—‘‘ On one of
these days Péter—now fully restored,
and, as originally designed, taking the
lead—rose and explained to the as-
sembly why the vacancy amongst the
Twelve which the fall of Judas had
created required to be filled up; and
having pointed out the qualifications
required, he left it to themselves to
select one of their number whom they
might lay before their enthroned Lord
for His approval.” This resulted in
the choice of Matthias.—David Brown,
D.D.


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. II.





CHAPTER II.


THE CHURCH OF CHRIST EQUIPPED FOR ITS WoRK—THE IMPLEMENTING OF THE
PROMISE.


§ 1. The Baptism of Fire ; or, the Descent of the Holy Ghost (vers. 1-4).

§ 2. Excitement in Jerusalem; or, what the Multitude thought of the Pheno-
menon (vers. 5-13).

§ 3. Peter’s Sermon.—l. The First Christian Apology; or, the Pentecostal
Mystery explained (vers. 14-21).

§ 4. Peter’s Sermon.—2. The Mystery of Pentecost traced up to Christ
(vers. 22-36).

§ 5. The First Converts ; or, the First Fruits of the Gospel Harvest (vers. 37-41).

§ 6. The Pentecostal Church; or, the Daily Life of Primitive Believers
(vers. 42-47).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Pentecost.—So called from.the date of its occurrence, the fiftieth from the second
day of the Passover. Fully come.—Lit. was being fulfilled, referring to the completion of
the interval between the two feasts. If the 16th Nisan was a Friday, the fiftieth day
forward would fall upon a Saturday, or the Jewish Sabbath. With one accord.—éuoduuaddv
= duo~ixws, with one mind. The Revised Text reads 6uod, together, which seems super-
fluous when followed by éml 76 atré, in one or the same place. (Compare i. 15.)

Ver. 2. A sound as of shows that the noise was not occasioned by the wind, but by a
mighty blowing which resembled the vehement rushing of air. In the Old Testament
(2 Sam. v. 24), Josephus (Anzt., VII. iv. 1), and Homer (0d., I. 98), the noise of wind was a
sign of the Divine Presence. According to Josephus ( Wars, VI. v. 3), earthquakes and super-
natural sounds were heard in the Temple at the feast of Pentecost before the destruction of
Jerusalem.

Ver. 3. Cloven tongues as of fire— These, which consisted not of, but merely resembled
material flame, and certainly were not electrical or light manifestations (Renan), real or
pretended, appeared to part themselves asunder, dcayepefduevar, which may signify either
that each tongue divided itself (Alford) or that the flame divided itself so that the tongues
were distributed amongst the company (Zockler, Hackett),

Ver. 4. Other tongues.—In this case foreign languages, not previously learnt by the
speakers, which required no interpreter (ver. 8), but were understood by the hearers.
Ver. 13 shows that they resembled the “tongues” of the later Corinthian church by being
accompanied in their possessors with an ecstatic condition of consciousness. (See Homily
on vers. 1-4.)

Ver. 5. Dwelling at Jerusalem.—Not “ permanently residing” only, a sense the word
usually has in Luke’s writings (Luke i. 19; iv. 16, xiii. 4), but also “temporarily sojourn-
ing,” a meaning not excluded by the term, and apparently demanded by the context,
which speaks of the multitude (ver. 6) as embracing “dwellers in Mesopotamia ”’—i.e.,
persons having their homes there, and “strangers of Rome”—i.e., Romans at the time
sojourning in the city. Devout men.—Lit. cautious, circwmspect, hence God-fearing persons,
“men of piety and weight” (Alford), like Simeon (Luke ii. 25), those who buried Stephen
(viii. 2), Cornelius and his servant (x. 2, 7).

Ver. 6. When this was noised abroad.—Better, when this sound occurred, or was heard
(R.V.). Not when this report arose (Calvin), or when these tongues were listened to
(Neander), but when this sound (of the mighty, rushing wind) was heard (Meyer, Alford,
Hackett, Holtzmann, Zockler, and others). If the house stood in one of the thoroughfares
leading to the Temple the sound may have been audible all over Jerusalem. Every man
... in his own language—i.e., one apostle spoke in one language and another in another.
By this time the apostles and their company had probably gone forth into the streets.

Ver. 7. Galileans.—This constituted the marvel, that the speakers were all recognised as
natives of the northern Palestinian province. This suggests that only the eleven addressed
the multitude, or—what is more probable—that the eleven being most prominent were


43


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i see


regarded as leaders of the rest, and their nationality taken as representative of the
nationality of their followers, the one hundred and twenty, who, however, were not all
Galileans.

Vers. 9-11. Parthians and Medes, etc.—The catalogue of peoples, fifteen in all, begins in
the north-east (three), passes round to the north (one) and north-west (five, or including
Judea, six), moves toward the south (two), and closes in the west (one), Cretes and
Arabians (two) being added as an afterthought. That Judea should come between
Mesopotamia and Cappadocia has led to the supposition that Jdwmea should be read. But
the MSS. forbid. The reason for the mention of Judea is obscure. It may have been
simply to serve as a connecting link between Mesopotamia and Cappadocia (Holtzmann), or
in order to complete the enumeration of languages (Bengel, Meyer), or for the sake of Roman
readers (Olshausen). Though the dialects may have been fifteen, Holtzmann thinks the
actual tongues spoken were only three, or at most four—the Zend (Medes and Elamites),
Semitic (Mesopotamia, Juda, Arabia), Greek (Asia and Egypt), Latin (Rome). Both Jews
and proselytes refers to persons from all the preceding places, and not exclusively to the
Romans sojourning at Jerusalem.

Ver. 11. The wonderful works of God.—Lit. the great things of God (magnalia dei, Vulgate)
done by Him through Christ for the salvation of men, (Compare Luke i. 49.)

Ver. 12. Amazed depicts the astonishment, in doubt the perplexity of the multitude,

Ver. 18. New wine.—Lit. sweet drink. A peculiarly intoxicating beverage made from dried
grapes by soaking them in old wine and pressing them a second time. “Furrer” (in
Schenkel’s Lewicon) reports that a Jew in Hebron prepared such sweet wine by pouring
water on dried grapes and distilling the infusion with an addition of spice ” (Riehm’s
Handwérterbuch des Biblischen Altertums, art. Wein).

Ver. 14. Men of Judwa,—Natives of Jerusalem. Ye that dwell at Jerusalem.—Foreign
Jews, sojourners in the city from other parts.

Ver. 15. These.—Not the eleven with Peter merely, but all who had been heard speaking
(ver. 7). The third hour.—Nine a.m. in our time; the hour of morning prayer (Schiirer
considers this doubtful), before which no respectable Jew allowed himself to become
intoxicated (Isa, v. 11).

Ver. 16. Through the prophet.—Joel ii. 28-32. d:2*s1ace he was not the author but the

medium of the message.
( Ver. 17. The last days.—The LXX. read werd ratra, after these things, The Hebrew
“afterwards,” expounded by Peter as referring to Messianic times. Saith God indicates the
source of the prophecy. Young men. .. old men.—The order of the clauses in Joel is
transposed.

Ver. 20. That great and notable day of the Lord.—Notable = clear, far shining. (Compare
Luke xvii. 21.) The Hebrew prophets used “the day of the Lord” to signify any remarkable
interposition of Jehovah for the punishment of His enemies (Isa, ii. 12; Jer. xlvi. 10;
Zeph. i. 7). Joel used it to describe the Messianic coming, both first and second.

Ver. 22. Mighty works, wonders, and signs,—Compare 2 Cor. xii. 12; 2 Thess, ii. 9;
Heb. ii. 4. Of these terms, the first, duvdmeis, refers to the powers by which Christ’s miracles
were performed ; the second, répara, to the astonishment they awakened; the third, o7uela,
to the significance they possessed.

Ver, 23. Counsel and foreknowledge are distinguished as antecedent and consequent.

Ver, 24. The pains of death.—rds wdivas roi Oaydrov. Quoted from the LXX. (Psalm
xviii. 5, exvi. 3)—the Hebrew having “ the cords of death.”

Ver. 25. David speaketh.—In Psalm xvi. 8-11, which is here ascribed to the sweet singer of
Israel as distinguished from the Hebrew Psalmist generally (xiii. 35). Concerning Him,—
Not merely words that might be applied to Him—+7.e., Christ—but words that typically and
prophetically referred to Him.

Ver, 26. My tongue as in the LXX. instead of “my glory’? as in the Hebrew. The LXX.
may have regarded man’s faculty of speech as his highest excellence ; and Peter, reflecting on
the miracle of Pentecost, may have agreed with them.

Ver. 27. Hell, d5ns, Hades, the unseen world, the realm of the dead, comprising two
regions, Paradise, the abode of the blessed (Luke xxiii. 43), and Gehenna, the prison of the
lost (Matt. v. 29, 30), is here represented as a rapacious destroyer.

Ver. 28. The ways of life were those which led from the realm of death to that of life—a
hint of the doctrine of the resurrection. With Thy countenance signified not “by ” but “in
Thy presence ”—1.¢., in heaven.

Ver. 29. Let me freely speak.—Better, it is lawful for me to speak with boldness. David is
here called patriarch as founder of the royal family. His sepulchre is with us.—On Mount
Zion (1 Kings ii. 10), where most of the kings of Judah were buried. Compare Neh. iii. 16;
Josephus, Ant., VII. xv. 3, XIII. viii. 4; Wars, I. ii. 5. “David’s tomb, on the south side of
Mount Zion, is still pointed out by the guides. The tomb is described by one who has seen
it as an immense sarcophagus in a room comparatively insignificant in its dimensions, but


44


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, If,





very gorgeously furnished by the Moslems, under one of whose mosques it stands” (Lawrence
Hutton, in Harper's Monthly Magazine, March 1895, p. 549).

Ver. 30. A prophet was a divinely inspired person, hence one who could predict future events.
The words, according to the flesh He would raise up Christ, are wanting in the best MSS.

Ver. 31. His soul is also omitted by the best authorities.

Ver. 32. Whereof, or of whom. In the former case the subject of witness is the resurrec-
tion ; in the latter, the person of Christ.

Ver, 33. By the right hand of God.—Ze., through His almighty power; compare v. 31
(Calvin, Meyer, Zockler, and others). The translation “at or to the right hand of God”
(Neander, De Wette, Bleek, Hackett, and others), though admissible, is not so good,

Ver. 34. For David is not ascended should be did not ascend; but he saith himself in
Psalm cx. (1) which Christ ascribes to David (Matt. xxii. 43; Mark xii. 36). The Lord said
unto my Lord, etc.—Thus distinguishing between himself and his Lord, who could be no
other than the Messiah.

Ver. 36. All the, or every house of Israel shows that Peter’s address was directed exclusively
to the Jews. Lord and Christ.—Compare Eph. i. 22: “Head over all” and “ Head of the
Cuurch.” In both passages the general expression precedes, the specific follows.

Ver. 37. What shall we do?—As in Luke iii. 10, 12, 14. The cry showed how deeply
Peter’s words had penetrated.

Ver. 38. Be baptised.—The rite known to the Jews as a means of admitting proselytes to
the Jewish Church had been practised by John (Matt. iii. 6) and commanded by Christ
(Matt. xxviii. 19). In or upon the name of Jesus Christ.—Z.e., Not for the sake of the sal.
vation accomplished by Jesus Christ (Hofmann), but upon the ground of the name of Jesus
Christ or with confession of that which this name signified (Zéckler, Holtzmann, Hackett,
and others). To the question, Why in the Acts (x. 48, xix. 5) baptism is never, as in Matt.
(xxviii. 19), performed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost 1
various answers have been given, 1. Baptism in the name of any one of the Persons of the
Trinity involves baptism in the names of the other two. 2. Luke, though employing the
shorter, really meant the longer formula. 3. The longer formula was designed for Gentiles
who had never known the Father, the shorter for converts from Jewish people or Jewish
proselytes. The Didache, or Teaching of the Twelve (x.), seems to favour the second
explanation by using as synonymous the two expressions, “ baptism into the name of the
Lord” (ix. 5) and “baptism into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost” (vii. 1). For, or in order to, eis, the remission of sins (compare Matt, xxvi. 28, and
Luke iii. 3), defines the negative aspect of the blessing which ensues upon a right reception of
baptism. The gift of the Holy Ghost (compare x. 45, xi. 17) represents the positive side of
the same blessing.

Ver. 39. Your children.— “ Little ones” rather than, though not exclusive of, posterity or
descendants. All that are afar off.—Not remotely dwelling Jews only (Bengel, Meyer,
Wendt, Holtzmann), but Gentiles as wz!) (Calvin, Neander, Lange, Zockler, Hackett), Shall
call, se. unto Him ; so preserving the force of the preposition zpés.

Ver. 41. Were baptised—How? By immersion? or by sprinkling or pouring? The
Didache, vii. 2, 3 seems to suggest that both methods may have been employed. See further
on this under “ Hints and Suggestions,”

Ver. 42. They continued steadfastly.—Lit. constantly applying themselves unto, or being
engaged in. A term characteristic of Luke (see ii. 46, vi. 4, viii. 13, x. 7). The apostles’
doctrine —J.e., listening to and applying to themselves the teaching of the Twelve. From
this expression, 77 divday7 Tv drocrédwy, the title of Didache seems to have been borrowed.
(Compare Wohlenberg, Die Lehre der Zwiilf Apostel, s. 49), And fellowship.—Rather, and in
fellowship, but whether: (1) unity of spirit and brotherly intercourse with one another
(Gal. ii. 9), or (2) in acts of sacramental communion, or (3) in communication—z.e,, dis-
tribution of money (Rom. xv. 26) is disputed. The second sense is excluded by the fact
that “fellowship” was not used to mean communion in the Lord’s Supper before the fourth
century. The third, though supported by eminent authorities (Olshausen, Bengel, Zockler,
Hackett, Spence, and others), does not appear so good as the first (Meyer, Holtzmann, Alford,
Lechler, and others). Breaking of bread meant the Lord’s Supper, as in Luke xxii, 12;
xx. 7-11; 1 Cor. xi. 23. Prayers were public and private devotions (iii. 1, iv. 24),

Ver. 44, All things common.—This pointed not merely to an exuberant and spontaneous
liberality (De Wette, Neander, Bengel), but to an actual community of goods-—which,
however, was not legally instituted, but voluntarily practised. See iv. 32 ff, v. 1. “A sort
of community of goods appears already to have existed in the lifetime of Christ. See
Luke viii. 3; John xii. 6, xiii. 29” (Holtzmann).

Ver. 46. From house to house, though not inadmissible (Titus i. 5; compare xa7’ olkovs
xx. 20, and «ard médw, Luke viii. 1), should perhaps be rendered ‘‘at home” (Phil. 2),
as distinguished from “ in the temple. Possibly both ideas should be included, as the
number of believers was already too large to find accommodat.on in one house.


45


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Ver. 47, Added to the Church should be added, the words “to the Church” being omitted
in the best MSS., and “together,” ém! 7d avrd, found in its stead. Such as should be saved.—
Rather, such as are being saved. The present participle denoting a process rather than a
completed fact. ‘The Greek should have been ols cecwopuévous, to signify that they had
already secured their salvation ; and rods cwOncouévous to signify that they were certain of its _
completion” (Hackett).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—4.


The Baptism of Fire ; or, the Descent of the Holy Ghost.

J. When it happened.—l. When the day of Pentecost was fully come.—
Literally, when it was being fulfilled; which has led to the idea that the time
referred to was the evening with which Pentecost closed, but the notion rather
is that the interval which lay between the Passover and the Pentecost was then
- filled up. Pentecost, as its name implied, was the feast of the fiftieth day, and
was celebrated seven weeks after the Passover. The suitability of this feast for
the implementing of the Father’s promise lay in three things: 1. Its nearness,
The next national festival after the Passover it fitted admirably to the words of
the promise—“ Ye shall be baptised . .. not many days hence.” Had the
fulfilment of the promise been deferred till Tabernacles in October, the interval
would have been long, and the Church’s faith and patience might have been
overstrained. But the sending of the Spirit at Pentecost, not more than ten
days after the Ascension, averted this danger, and, as it were, caught up the
hearts of Christ’s followers, when their enthusiasm stood at its height. The
Lord of the Church knows the best times for His movements, and can so order
the gifts of His grace as not to overstrain the patience, overtax the faith, or over
discourage the zeal of His people, but rather to reward their patience, increase
their faith, and fan their zeal into a flame. 2. Its popularity. At no other
religious celebration did such numbers flock to Jerusalem as at Pentecost, the
early spring (the time of the Passover) and the late autumn (the date of Taber-
nacles) being less suitable for travellers from distant parts. If, therefore, the
high endowment of the Holy Ghost or the miraculous phenomenon by which it
was heralded and symbolised were to efficiently impress the world it was needful
that the number of those witnessing it should be as large as possible. The
Gospel of Christ, doing nothing in a corner, has no need to shun the light. It
invites and will bear the closest observation and the keenest scrutiny. 3. Its
significance. (1) As the great harvest festival of the Hebrew Church (Exod.
xxiii. 16), it was a fitting time for the first ingathering of souls into the Chris-
tian Church. (2) As the feast of the firstfruits in which two wave loaves of fine
flour, baked with leaven, were presented to the Lord (Lev. xxiii. 17), it supplied
a proper season for the presentation to Jehovah of the firstfruits of redeemed
souls in the persons of the Jewish disciples and the Gentile converts which were
to be gathered in as the result of the Pentecostal effusion. (3) As a feast at
which sacrifices of all kinds were offered (Lev. xvii. 20), it formed a suitable
occasion for the dispensation of that Spirit which was to bring about the entire
consecration of believers to God. (4) As a feast in which remembrance was
made of the Egyptian bondage (Deut. xvi. 12) and of the Exodus from Egypt,
it served as a fit moment for endowing the Church with that spirit which
is pre-eminently styled the spirit of liberty (2 Cor. iii. 17). 2. When all the
disciples were together in one place. That this place was the upper room already
referred to in i. 3 (which see)—and not, as many excellent expositors prefer,
one of the chambers belonging to the temple—is upon the whole the likelier
hypothesis; and that on this occasion the entire body of the disciples, one
hundred and twenty in number, and not merely the twelve apostles, were con-
vened, is sufficiently apparent from the context. Nor is it without suggestiveness


46


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. OHAP. II.





that the Holy Ghost descended on them when all were present in their usual
place of assembly. Does this not afford some reason for believing that the
heavenly gift would have been withheld or at least delayed had any of the
company been absent? If so, how many blessings, it may be asked, what out-
pourings of the Spirit, what times of revival and refreshing, may Churches and
congregations not miss because of the irregularity with which their members come
together? It is a signal error to suppose that absence from Church on the part
of a professed Christian inflicts no injury or loss on his fellow-Christians who
repair thither. May not the absence of the one seriously diminish, if not effec-
tually hinder, the blessing of the many? Then quite as inaccurate is the
reasoning that one may derive as large benefit at home from private meditation
as in the Church from social devotion. The blessing of the Holy Ghost, it should
be observed, was dispensed in the public assembly and not in the private chamber
—was given to the disciples when together and not when isolated one from
another. 3. When all the brethren were of one mind. The words “with one
accord,” though omitted in the R.V., are better than the adverb “together,”
which is substituted in their stead, but which is almost synonymous with ‘in
one place,” and therefore superfluous. In any case “with one accord” ex-
presses the inward disposition of the disciples on that eventful morning when
the Holy Ghost for the first time fell upon them. Had they been otherwise—
disunited in heart and mind, torn with jealousies and rivalries, broken up into
hostile factions or unfriendly cliques—does any one believe the Spirit would
have fallen on them—that Spirit, who, if anything, is a Spirit of concord and
unity (Eph. iv. 3)? What a rebuke to the Church of to-day, which is not
only marred by divisions and separations, but too often also actuated by mutual
antipathies, cut up into sects and animated by a spirit of proselytism rather than
of co-operation, a spirit of reciprocal opposition rather than of mutual affection !
And what an explanation of the comparatively slow progress of the Church in
past ages, as well as of its spiritual deadness at the present time! If the Church
is to awake from her lcthargy and clothe herself with energy, if she is to shake
herself from the dust and put on her beautiful garments, she must receive a
fresh baptism of the Holy Ghost ; and before that can take place there must be
a laying aside of hostilities and a cessation of animosities on the part of rival
denominations and congregations, there must be a healing of breaches in the
walls of God’s Spiritual Zion, there must be a gathering into one of the tribes of
the New Testament Israel.

II. How it was accompanied.—1l. By a mysterious sound. (1) Sudden. Ata
moment when it was not expected there was heard from heaven a noise. Divine
movements are mostly of this character. It is not possible for us to discern
beforehand the noise of Jehovah’s footsteps (Psalm Ixxvii. 19), though it is by no
means impossible for Him to detect ours (Psalm exxxix. 1-5). God’s interpositions
in the original work of creation partook of this character (Gen. i. 3, 9, 11,
14, 20, 24), So did they in His providential judgments, as, e.g., the Deluge and the
destruction of Sodom (Matt. xxiv. 39; Luke xvii. 26, 28). So were they of this
sort when Christ came in the flesh (Luke ii. 3-14). So will they be when He
returns in glory (Mark xiii. 35, 36). (2) Violent. Strong and impetuous, like
a current of air rushing vehemently in upon and roaring through the chamber,
like the trumpet sound which was heard at Sinai (Exod. xix. 19; Heb. xii. 19),
or like the “great and strong wind” that rent the mountains of Horeb
(1 Kings xix. 11). (3) All pervading. Filling the chamber in which the
disciples sat, it left no part untouched by its mysterious breath. All within the
room could hear the strange, weird sound. (4) Supernatural. This must have
been apparent to all. The sound was not produced by ordinary physical causes.
All attempts to explain it as a natural phenomenon, whether as thunder or as


47


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





an earthquake, signally fail. It came from heaven, caused directly by the Holy
Ghost, whose breathing it was (John xx. 22). 2. By an wnusual sight. There
appeared unto the disciples “cloven tongues” or “tongues parted asunder like
as of fire.” Like the wind these tongues were also: (1) Supernatural. “ Elec-
trical phenomena, such as the gleaming lights sometimes seen on the highest
points of steeples or on the masts of vessels, and which have been known even
to alight on men, bear a very faint resemblance, if any, to those wondrous
tongues of fire” (Spence). Besides, ‘‘ this phenomenon took place not in the open
air, but in the inside of a house” (Lechler). Then, if possible, even less admissible
is the notion of a flash of lightning which sat simultaneously on one hundred and
twenty heads without doing injury to one of them, which would have been a
miracle as great as that for which it is proposed to be substituted. “‘ But indeed
the expression “ tongues as of fire” demands that the words be taken in their
4iteral signification ” (Zeller). Whether the tongues were also (2) cloven—z.e.,
divided, or parting asunder, as a flame occasionally does, is doubtful. Though
the word admit of this interpretation, it is better taken to mean dividing
themselves, so that the tongues were (3) distributed—+.e., parted amongst the
company, one resting upon the head of each. In this way they became (4) visible
to all within the chamber, each seeing the tongues resting on his neighbours’
heads, but not that sitting on own. A happy hint that each Christian should
be quick to discern the gifts of his fellow-Christians—which is charity, and slow
to recognise those belonging to himself—which is humility. Finally, the tongues,
again resembling the wind, were (5) symbolic. Of the effect which should result
from the baptism about to be experienced ; of the exalted and consecrated speech
which would thereby be set in motion ; and of the illumination which thereby
would come to others. 3. By a peculiar touch. The distributed fiery tongues
sat one upon each man’s head. As the tongues only resembled fire, so their
contact with the heads of the disciples differed from that of ordinary flame,
which would have scorched the disciples’ heads, whereas they were quite uncon-
scious of burning. The touch of the tongues was like the touch of Christ when
He healed men’s bodies; it was the touch by which He influenced souls.

» IIL By what it was followed.—l. The disciples were all filled with the Holy
Ghost. (1) The Holy Ghost now came upon them in the fulness of His saving
operations as He had not done before (John vii. 39). Prior to the Ascension
Christ had breathed on them, and said “ Receive ye the Holy Ghost” (John xx.
22); not until now had the Holy Ghost been imparted to them in the plenitude
of His gracious influences. (2) They were taken possession of by the new
endowment in all departments of their being, so that they were filled with it.
(3) This inhabitation of their hearts by the Holy Ghost was to be permanent. —
Under the Old Testament the Spirit had descended upon men at special times
and for special purposes, as upon Bezaleel (Exod. xxxi. 3) and Joshua (Deut.
xxxiv. 9), to impart to them wisdom. Now He entered the disciples’ hearts to
abide with them for ever (John xiv. 16). And this stupendous endowment was
not conferred on the apostles only but upon the brethren as well, and not upon
the leaders of the Church merely but upon the followers likewise ; nor upon the
eminent personages alone but also upon the humble and obscure individuals.
2. They all began to speak with tongues, That those tongues were something
higher than and beyond those conferred on the churches at Corinth (1 Cor.
xiv. 2-33), may be inferred from the circumstance mentioned in vers. 6 and 8,
that the multitude who lis ened to the inspired utterances of the apostles and
brethren “‘ were confow: del because that every man heard them speaking in his
own language.” The Corinthian tongues were unintelligible to those who heard
them, and to be of service for public edification required interpretation; at
Pentecost the tongues needed no exposition by a third party. The listeners


48


vs HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IL.





“heard every man in his own language wherein he was born.” Yet, like tha
tongues at Corinth, those of Pentecost were not required for edification, which
was principally secured by Peter’s sermon; and were accompanied by a kind of
ecstatic utterance which led some at least of the auditors to think and say the
speakers were intoxicated, as Paul afterwards suggested some hearing the
Corinthians talk with tongues might allege they were mad (1 Cor. xiv. 23). As
to what these Jerusalem “ tongues” were, the traditional opinion which sees in
them foreign languages which the apostles and their company were enabled to
speak, though not without difficulty, is probably correct. Nor does it militate
against this idea that such foreign languages were not necessary to qualify the
apostles for preaching to the .nultitudes at Pentecost, since the majority, if not
all, of these would be able to understand either Greek or Aramaic, or both, ana
that the apostles do not appear afterwards to have used these new dialects
(compare Paul at Lycaonia, xiv. 14) in addressing themselves to foreigners.
The answer to both objections is, that the Pentecostal tongues may not have been
intended to be permanent but only temporary, as a sign to arrest the attention
of the multitude and accredit the apostles as heaven-sent ambassadors. All
attempts to discover other explanations of the tongues than the natural one lie
open to as great, if not greater, difficulties than those they are devised to
surmount. The fancy that the apostles spoke an original elementary “ tongue
of the Spirit,” which every listener in the crowd heard as if it were his own
mother tongue (Erasmus, Meyer, Delitzsch, etc.), only adds a miracle of hearing to
the existing one of speaking. That the tongues were merely ecstatic utterances
which acted on the hearers in such a way as to make them think they were
being addressed in their native languages (Beyschlag) is to put a construction on
the narrative which it will not bear. The hearers did not think, but knew they
were listening to their mother tongues. Besides, the tongues were spoken before
the multitudes were present to hear. Then the notion that the assembly of
believers was composed of Jews of various nations who spoke as the Spirit
moved them, but in their ordinary speech (Paulus, Kuincel, etc.), is expressly
contradicted by the narrative which affirms that the one hundred and twenty were
all, or at least mostly, Galileans. The solution which detects in the narrative
only a legendary or mythical reproduction of the Rabbinical fable, that the law
was given from Sinai in a tongue which was intelligible to the seventy different
peoples of the Table of Nations (Overbeck, Hausrath, etc.) is completely to
destroy the credibility of the historian.

IV. What it signified —1. # attested the reality of Christ’s ascension (see ver.
33). Before His death Christ had promised on returning to His Father to send
forth the Spirit (John xvi. 7). Forty days after His resurrection they had seen
Him ascend through the opened heavens (i. 10). The descent of the Holy
Ghost after ten days’ waiting was the intimation to them that Christ had been
exalted to the Father’s right hand. 2. lé gave the signal for commencing the
work of witness bearing, for which they had been selected and appointed, while
it was natural for the apostles and their company to suppose that immediately
on Christ’s departure they should begin the glorious business of publishing the
good news of a crucified, risen and exalted Saviour. Christ Himself commanded
them not to start upon their mission until they got the signal from the Father,
who alone understood the times and seasons (i. 7). That signal they recog-
nised when the Holy Ghost descended on them. 3. Jt equipped the apostles
and first believers for their service. The task committed to them was one that
immeasurably transcended their native ability. Power from on high was abso-
lutely indispensable for its efficient discharge. That power was to be supplied by
a special baptism of the Holy Ghost (i. 8); and now that the Holy Ghost
had come they were prepared (1 Cor. ii. 4 ; 2 Cor. ili. 5).


EU 49


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Learn.—1. The faithfulness of the Father in implementing His promise


(Titus i. 2; Heb. vi. 18).


2. The blessedness of those who humbly and prayer-
fully wait on God (Isa. xl. 31; Heb. vi. 15).


3. The reality of superterrestrial


things (2 Cor. iv. 18). 4. The power of the Holy Ghost as shown in the gift of


tongues (2 Peter i. 21).
the Holy Ghost teaches (1 Cor. ii. 13).


5. The mission of the Christian Church—to utter what
6. The diversities of gift and service in


the Christian Church; all had not the same tongue, but each as the Spirit gave


him utterance (1 Cor. xii. 4).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The Feast of the Fulfilment.
—On this day (Pentecost) was ful-
filled :-—

I. The most beautiful anticipation
of antiquity——The hope that net only
an atonement would be made to
Jehovah for the sins of the people,
but also a new heart and a right spirit
should be given them.

II. The deepest want of humanity.
—Fellowship with God now for the
first time rendered possible by the recon-
ciliation effected through the sacrifice
of Christ, and the renovation accom-
plished by the baptism of the Spirit.

III. The highest manifestation of
Divinity. All that went before, even
the gift of the Son, being designed as
a preparation for the dispensation of
the Spirit.—Oosterzec.


Ver. 3. Tongues of Fire.

I. Whence they come.—From heaven,
from the Father, from the glorified
Christ—i.e., they are gifts of grace
bestowed in fulfilment of God’s promise,
and on account of the merit of Christ.

II. On whom they are bestowed.
—On praying, waiting, and united
believers ; on souls possessed of faith,
hope, love, and longing.

III. How they are fed—By the
Holy Ghost, whose creation they are,
for whose manifestation they serve,
and under whose control they perpetu-
ally remain.

IV. What they speak.—Not the
wisdom of this world, but words which
the Holy Ghost teacheth.

V. The Effects they produce.—
Always amazement, sometimes unbelief
and mockery, frequently conviction and
conversion.


50


Ver. 4. A Sermon on the Holy Ghost.

I. His personality. — Though not
here specially emphasised, yet involved
in the scriptural representations given
of Him generally (see v. 3, 32, vii. 51 ;
Eph. iv. 30).

II. His Divinity.—Implied in His
co-ordination with the Father and the
Son (Matt. xxviii. 19; 2 Cor. xiii. 14).

Ill. His agency.—Symbolised by
the Sound, the Fire, and the Tongues.


The Personality and Divinity of the
Holy Spirit. The customary objections
to this doctrine are thus summarised
by Bornemann (Unterricht im Christen-
tum, p. 151):

I The Trinitarian formula proves
nothing.—This, however, is only Borne-
mann’s opinion. Others hold it in-
conceivable that unless the Son and
the Holy Ghost had been co-equal
with the Father they would have been
thus associated with the Father by
either Christ or God.

II. The phrase “The Spirit Speaks”
(Acts xxi. 11; Rev. xiv. 13) no more
establishes the personality of the Holy
Ghost than the similar phrase “ The
Scripture speaks” (Gal. iv. 30) demon-
strates the personality of the Bible.
But other personal attributes aro
ascribed to the Holy Spirit which are
not and cannot be assigned to Scripture,
such as grieving (Eph. iv. 30), com-
forting (Acts ix. 31), interceding
(Rom. viii. 26), ete.

III. Nowhere in the New Testament
is the Holy Ghost represented as the
object of -worship.—Yet all true
worship is in the New Testament dis-
tinctly declared to be the inspiration of
the Spirit (John iv. 24; Rom. viii. 26;
Gal. iv. 6; Eph. ii. 18),


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





IV. The word person as applied to
the Holy Spirit is not the same thing
as Moderns mean by this term.—
Granted. Yet whatever the vocable
“person” signifies as applied to the
Father and the Son, that same it
imports as applied to the Holy Ghost.


Filled with the Holy Spirit.

‘I. A transcendent mystery.—That
the soul of a creature should be in-
habited by the Spirit of its Creator.

II. A demonstrable fact.—Proved
in Pentecostal and early Christian
times by the gift of tongues, evinced
now by the production of the fruits of
the Spirit.

Ili. A gracious privilege. — Be-
stowed upon believers not of merit on
their part, but of spontaneous kindness
on God’s part.

IV. A comforting experience. —
Being the seal of acceptance with the
Father, and an earnest of the heavenly
inheritance.

V. A valuable talent.—Such as are
its recipients are thereby endowed for
service, and will eventually be held
answerable for its employment.


Vers. 1-4. The Ideal of Christian
Unity.—Believers united.

J. In Worship.—“ Together in one
place.”

II. In Heart.—“ With one accord.”

IJ. In Privilege. —All witnessing
and sharing alike.

IV. In Endowment.—‘“ All filled
with the Holy Ghost.”

V. In Service.—All speaking with


tongues.


The Pentecostal Blessing.

I. The conditioning circumstances.
1. The Time. “When the day of
Pentecost was now come.” ‘“ Here
again, as in the fact of the Ascension
and the waiting of the Church, we
trace the outline of Christianity in
Judaism, and see in the typical cere-
monial of the Old Dispensation the out-
line and shadow of heavenly realities.”
2. The Place. An upper chamber.
“ Round this upper room at Jerusalem
has gathered many a story dating from


CHAP. Ii,





very early ages indeed. This upper
room has been identified with the
chamber in which the Last Supper
was celebrated.” 3. The Spirit. With
one accord. “There was unity of spirit
and unity in open manifestation to the
world at large. Christ’s disciples, when
they received the gifts of Heaven’s
choicest blessings, were not split up
into dozens of different organisations,
each of them hostile to the others, and
each striving to aggrandise itself at
the expense of kindred brotherhood.”

II. The external manifestations.—
Three. 1. A Sound as of a Rushing
Mighty Wind. “The marvels of the
story told in the first of Genesis find
a parallel in the marvels told in the
second of Acts. The one passage sets
forth the foundation of the material
universe, the other proclaims the nobler
foundations of the Spiritual universe.”
2. Tongues as of Fire, separate and dis-
tinct, sitting upon each of the Disciples.
“The sign of the Holy Spirit's
presence was a tongue of fire. It was
a most suitable emblem, pregnant with
meaning, and indicative of the large
place which the human voice was to
play in the work of the new dispensa-
tion, while its supernatural character
declared that the mere unaided human
voice would avail nothing.” The
separateness of the tongues also was
“significant of the individual character
of our holy religion.” 3. A Miraculous
Gift of Tongues. “That gift indicated
to the Apostles and to all ages the
tongue as the instrument by which the
gospel wa to be propagated.” The
gift itseu was “the power of speaking
in foreign languages, according to
Christ’s promise, ‘They shall speak
with new tongues’” (Mark xvi. 17),
G. T. Stokes, DD.


The Pentecostal Wonder.

J. The rushing sound.—‘“‘ The Divine
power which descended on the waiting
company of disciples revealed itself first
according to its new creative energy or
as heavenly life” (Leben, avon, Odem,
Windshauch, ver. 2).

Il, The fiery tongues. — “ The


5]


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a  —


Divine power revealed itself secondly
according to its critically separating
force as heavenly light or fire” (ver. 3).

III. The foreign tongues.—‘ The
Divine power revealed itself thirdly
according to its salvation-revealing
might as heavenly discourse and speech,
Aarelv yAdooas érépars” (ver. 4),.—Dr.
Otto Zockler.


The Phenomena at Pentecost.
I. The praying congregation.
II. The sound from heaven.
III. The holy flames.
IV. The new tongues.—Lisco.


Three Marvels.

I. In the realm of Nature.—The
sound, the tongues, the speech.

II. In the sphere of mind.—Men
speaking languages they never learnt.

IlI. In the domain of grace.—Sin-
ful men endowed with the Holy Ghost.


The Descending Spirit—Among the
thoughts and
connect themselves with the event of
our chapter are the following: 1. The
Christian Church was born at Pente-
cost. There is no Christian Church
history before that point. The
materials of the Church were already
present, but standing out of organic
relation with each other. It was the
brooding of the Spirit that, as we are
told in the first of Genesis, produced
the formless elements of things into
a shapely and prolific world. It was
the inbreathing of God into the being
of our first parent that developed him
into a living soul. It was the influx
similarly of the divine Spirit that
composed the disciples of Christ into
an organised and living Church. A
Church is Christianity organised.
2. This was the first Christian revival
of religion. The Church was born in
a revival, and the survival of the
Church has been along a continuous
line of revival. A revival is substanti-
ally a fresh appropriation of divine
power. The dynamic element enters
Christianity not at the cross, not at
the Easter sepulchre, but at Pentecost.
Pentecost is as much a fact of Chris-


52


lessons that readily’


tianity as is the crucifixion. The
Acts of the Apostles is the Gospel
of the Holy Ghost and the Gospel of
power. It is the scope of a revival to
work in men Christian sinew. There
is nothing in the whole New Testament
narrative more startling than the
transformation which the Twelve
suddenly underwent on the fiftieth
day after Calvary. An apostle is a
disciple plus the Holy Ghost. Ap-
pliances are valuable, but only as
vehicles for the conveyance of energy
that is from God. Christianity would
have stopped at Olivet had it not been
for the event of our chapter or its
equivalent. 3. The Spirit descended
upon the disciples when they were
together. The full meaning of Chris-
tianity is not exhausted in any re-
lation in which it sets us individually
to Christ. It comprises a relation
between men mutually as well as a
relation to God personally and sepa-
rately. There are blessings and en-
richments that accrue to Christians
only by their standing in fellowship
with each other. That first Sunday
evening, the evening of Resurrection-
day, Christ showed Himself unto His
disciples while they were together. The
week after, the second Sunday evening,
He again appeared to them while they
were together. And similarly, as we
learn from the first verse of our
chapter, the Holy Spirit descended
upon them while “they were all with
one accord in one place.” And this
gathering together of theirs was not
for the purpose of instruction, but in
order that they might remain together
in the fellowship of concerted prayer
and holy waiting. The Church was
born thus in a prayer-meeting. The
first Christian revival was inaugurated
in a prayer-meeting. In_ spiritual
matters two are considerably more
than twice as many as one. 4. This
first revival of religion began with the
spiritual replenishment of those al-
ready Christian. It is time wasted,
and runs counter to the divine order
of things, for a Church that is not
itself revived to attempt revivalistic


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. II.





operations among the unconverted.
Christianity, to the degree in which it
extends itself, does so as a kind of
contagion. 5. After the ascension of
their Lord the disciples simply waited
for Pentecost. They prayed together,
as it would seem, but exactly what was
the subject of their prayers it would be
very hard to tell. They probably did
not pray for a baptism of the Holy
Spirit. They had not been instructed
to pray for it, but to “tarry” till it
came. There was no further work
that needed to be wrought in them
before its bestowment. They were
ready to be blessed. The outpouring
of the Spirit was deferred till Pente-
cost, only because that day would give
to the event greater publicity. Our
prayers would often seem to imply
that the gift of the Holy Ghost is
something that has got to be wrestled
from God by hard struggling. His
Spirit is with us. He has already
entered into the world. He is among
us like a subtle atmosphere that
crowds itself with a gentle intrusion
into every space of our hearts and
lives that is left open to its occupancy.
He is like the sunshine, that fills with
brightness and touches with colour
every object of ground, sea, and sky
that is bared to its silent impact.
When we are not illumined, it is not
because we have neglected to pray for
the sun’s rise upon us, but because we
have neglected to stand out in the sun-
shine. 6. The Holy Spirit descended
upon all the disciples—not only upon
the Twelve, but upon the whole
hundred and twenty. So far as we
are, then, Holy Ghost Christians, all
substantial distinctions in this respect
between the laity and the clergy are
erased. 7. The Holy Spirit revealed
Himself outwardly in the shape of
tongues. This was prophetic of the
way in which revealed truth was to
be disseminated. It does not suffice
that men should simply live lives of
Christian consistency, and that they
should think that conduct fills to the
full their measure of obligation.
Christ not only lived, He preached,


, world.


“Tt pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe.”
And the word “preaching” must not
be construed too narrowly. “ Out of
the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh”; ‘‘We cannot but speak
the things which we have seen and
heard. ‘The first revival, then, opened
men’s mouths and set men talking.
It was a gift of tongues. There is no
place for silent Christians under the
administration of the Holy Ghost.
Inspiration and utterance are in-
separable.—C. H. Parkhurst, D.D.


I. Distinguish the permanent from
the transient manifestations of this
descending Spirit—The miraculous
displays were designed to attract at-
tention, and to teach by symbols His
nature and power. Air is necessary
to life. The Spirit, of whom no one
can tell whence He comes, or whither
He goes, is symbolised by the air we
breathe. Air in motion represents
power. Fire is purifying. In great
crises of the ancient Church God had
revealed Himself by fire. The tongues
of fire were tokens of the living, con-
quering, purifying energy by which
the Spirit spreads truth through the
They sat on each of the
disciples, showing that each Christian
has a special commission and a special
power given him from heaven. The
disciples, thus supernaturally excited,
spoke of the wonderful works of God
in dialects which men from all lands
heard and understood. Here was dis-
played the sign that the obstacles to
the spread of the gospel were removed.
The transient symbol has departed,
but the Word of God has leaped the
barriers of strange tongues and spread
through all the world. The miracle of
that hour, emphasised by the miracle
of centuries, says to us: “The gospel
from heaven has been committed to
you. The power of God is promised to
you. Go ye into all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature.”
We see, then, what abides in the
Church from the descending Spirit.
A great change had already, within a


53


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


NN


few days, taken place in the apostles.
But the task before them required
supernatural power im them. They
were to undertake a new kind of work.
When, then, the Spirit descended to
dwell in them, He changed their
thoughts. He gave them confidence
in the place of timidity. He led them
to perceive the grandeur and spiritu-
ality of their mission, and their own
position in it. _They not only recog-
nised that they were divinely com-
missioned, but they were divinely
illuminated. The effects of their
preaching were what we should expect
from such changes in themselves. The
Spirit gave them wtterance. Their
word was with power. Men were
moved to acknowledge the truths they
proclaimed. Paul the Apostle set
against the power of Rome, the greatest
nation on earth, the power of God
unto salvation. Rome yielded. The
gospel triumphed. It is the most
impressive truth which God has re-
vealed, that each of His disciples can,
by his daily thoughts and acts, bring
down upon the Church the power
which has achieved the mightiest
triumphs of history.

II. We see that the power imparted
by the Holy Spirit is unique and
supernatural.—He created the Chris-
tian Church, and now sustains and
extends it. Without Him, it is with-
out Christ; and apart from Christ it
can do nothing. This gift, then, is
not eloquence, nor logic, nor rhetoric,
nor any acquired power. ‘The Spirit
can employ all these things, all that
there is of a man, for His great ends.
But His presence is the breath of Him
who created all worlds. And His
presence distinguishes the Church from
all other institutions. Without that,
with all its splendid history, it would
be only a Samson shorn. There are
diversities of gifts; but it is the same
Spirit that divides them to every man
severally as He will.

II. We see the purposes for which
the Holy Spirit descended and abides
with Christians—to perpetuate the
presence of Christ with His disciples,


54


and to enable them to proclaim His
gospel. This gift was and is a fruit of
the continued operation of the earthly
life of Jesus. These truths realised
will help us to feel more deeply the
immense responsibility that rests on
each disciple of Christ. “There is
offered to you, as a gift, that which
wrought all these wonders. Take it,
and greater works than these shall
you do.” Then think of the misery
that sin is still working, of lives
blasted by passion, of homes ruined
and actions ruled by selfishness, of the
millions that sit in darkness, of im-
mortal souls disappearing from these
scenes to wake to shame and ever-
lasting contempt. Only one power
can change these things—the Holy
Spirit in the disciples of Christ. God
has placed this measure of opportunity
in our hands. Is it possible that
Christians will allow anything to
hinder the descent of this Spirit on
them in His fulness? But evidently
whatever wastes this power brings on
us fearful loss; and we know the
things that waste it. It is not merely
the open breaking of the Decalogue
which appears inexcusable in Chris-
tians, but that any of them can waste
in trifling pleasures and selfish pursuits
the abilities given from God to save
our fellow-men from eternal death,
and plead in excuse that they do not
transgress any definite command.
What do we need so much as the
baptism of fire for spiritual life, and
the tongue of fire to tell that life to
the world? One thing more. This
gift is offered to the unconverted. Do
any who have not received the Holy
Spirit wonder at and criticise the want
of power and zeal in Christians? You
may yourselves receive that which you
think wanting in them. “ Repent
ye,” said Peter to the wondering
audience, “and be baptised every one
of you for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the Holy Ghost.”
Yes, you whose ambitions are un-
satisfied, whose affections are unstirred
by heavenly things—this promise is to
you,—Monday Club Sermons,


ca HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IL.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS (Verses 5—13).


Excitement in Jerusalem ; or, what the Multitude thought of the Phenomenon.

I The subjects of this excitement.—l. 7he regular inhabitants of the city.
** Devout men dwelling at Jerusalem.” Besides the ordinary native population,
these would naturally include pious Jews from foreign countries who had become
domiciled in the city for a longer or a shorter period. 2. The feast pilgrims
temporarily sojourning in the city. ‘‘ Devout men from every nation under
heaven.” Of these fifteen different classes are mentioned. (1) Parthians, from
the north-east of Media—referred to nowhere else in Scripture. (2) Medes,
inhabiting the region between the Caspian Sea on the north, Armenia on the
west, Hyrcania on the east, and Persia on the south (2 Kings xvii. 6 ; Ezra vi. 2 ;
Dan. v. 28). (3) Hlamites, located east of the Tigris, north of Susiania, and
south of Media (Ezra iv. 9). (4) Mesopotamians, from the lands between the
Tigris and the Euphrates (Gen. xxiv. 10; Judges iii. 8; 1 Chron. xix. 6).
(5) Judzans, including Jerusalemites, from the Holy Land—i.e., from different
parts of Palestine. (6) Cappadocians, whose settlements lay in the east of Asia
Minor (1 Peter i. 1). (7) Pontians, who resided in the north-east (1 Peter i. 1),
and (8) Asians from: Proconsular Asia in the west of Asia Minor (vi. 9, xvi. 6,
xix. 10). (9) Phrygians, also from the east of Asia Minor, and north of
Pamphylia (xvi. 6, xviii. 23). (10) Pamphylians, whose territory stretched
along the Mediterranean coast, south of Phrygia (xiii. 13, xv. 38, xxvii. 5).
(11) Egyptians from the Nile valley (vii. 22). (12) Lybians from Cyrene on
the west of Egypt (Jer. xlvi. 9; Dan. xi. 43), the native place of Simon,
who bore Christ’s cross (Luke xxiii. 26), and of Lucius, the prophet in the
Church at Antioch (xiii. 1). (13) Romans, from the world’s capital on the
banks of the Tiber (John xi. 48; Rom. i. 7). (14) Cretans, islanders from the
Mediterranean (xxvii. 7; Titus i. 5). (15) Arabians from the desert regions
east of the Nile (1 Kings x. 15; 2 Chron. xvii. 11; Gal. i. 17). A motley
group, a veritable microcosmus, or little world in the heart of Judea.

II. The cause of this excitement.—1. A mysterious sound. The noise of the
rushing wind, or what resembled this, which pervaded the town arrested the
attention of those who were abroad, and led them to investigate its cause. It is
hardly to be supposed that thunder or even an earthquake would have produced
the same sort of commotion. 2.4 more mysterious experience. Every man in
Jerusalem, from whatsoever regions arrived, heard one at least in the apostolic
company preaching in his own tongue. Probably fifteen foreign languages, or
dialects, were that day spoken in the streets of the Jewish capital. (See “ Critical
Remarks” on vers. 9-11.) 3. A most mysterious circumstance. That none of the
speakers were themselves foreigners, but all (or most) of them were Galileans,
who had never been abroad and certainly had never been at school to acquire such
command of foreign tongues. It is obvious that the tongues of Pentecost were not
mere unintelligible gibberish, ecstatic or frenzied utterances, ‘“‘sound and fury
signifying nothing,” but distinct, articulate, and reasonable speech which could
we followed and understood. Nor is it at all likely that the miracle was one of
hearing rather than of speaking.

III. The manifestations of this excitement.—These were three. 1. Astonish-
ment. All, without exception, were confounded, amazed, and constrained to
marvel. And no wonder. What they saw-and heard was no every-day
occurrence, but something altogether out of, and beyond, their usual experience.
The universality of this astonishment guaranteed the reality of the phenomenon.
2. Perplexity. They could neither explain nor understand the phenomenon.
Yet they did not on this account deny it. They felt at a loss to fathom
its significance. Yet they did not conclude it had no significance. They


5D


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





realised that it must import something, and kept on asking one another
what each man thought about it. In this their conduct was praiseworthy
so far as it was serious; where it was insincere it was frivolous and deserving
_of blame. 3. Mockery. This was the attitude assumed by a portion of the
crowd, who, because they failed to comprehend the phenomenon, lost their judg-
ment, and began to scoff, accusing the Spirit-borne speakers of being under the
influence of strong drink: “ These men are filled with new wine”—a strongly
intoxicating beverage. Ridicule and calumny have always been common weapons
in the hands of unbelief since the days of Christ (Matt. xi. 19). But neithei
the one nor the other is a satisfactory way of dealing with religion. Neither can
disprove religion, scarcely even hinder its advancement ; frequently they hasten


its triumph, and often reveal the folly of those who resort to them.
Learn.—1. The wide court to which Christianity appeals—men out of every


nation under heaven.


2. The effect Christianity never fails to produce in every
community it visits—excitement, wonder, inquiry, faith, and unbelief.


3. The


adaptation of Christianity to every people under heaven a striking evidence


of its supernatural origin.


4, The mystery which sometimes accompanies


Christianity ; its phenomena are not always capable of being accounted for by


natural causes.


5. The unreasonable treatment Christianity often receives—_
ridicule instead of refutation or reception.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. Devout Men.

I. Are to be found in every nation
under heaven—a lesson of charity
(x. 35). Examples Job and Cornelius.

II. Are in the way of meeting
Heaven's revelations—a ground for
hopefulness as to men’s ultimate
destinies (Psalm xxv. 14; Isa. lxiv. 5).

III. Are often perplexed at the
divine dealings with themselves and
others—a cause for humility (Micah
iv. 12; Job xxxvii. 21; John xiii. 7).

IV. Are sometimes led into sin—a
warning against rashness in judgment
(Eccles. v. 2).


Ver. 11. The Wonderful Works of
God.

J. In nature.—1. The creation of
the material universe (Gen. i. 1).
2. The origination of life (Gen. i. 20).
3. The formation of man (Gen. i. 26).

II. In providence.—1. The preserva-
tion of created things—of the material
cosmos (Heb. i. 3) and of all animated
beings (Psalm xxxvi. 6, civ. 27). 2. The
selection and education of Israel (Isa.
xliii. 21), 3. The preparation, inspi-
ration, and preservation of the Bible
(L Cor, x) Tl ; 2 Tim, ti16).

III. In grace.—1. The redemption

56


of a lost world through the atoning
death of Christ (Gal. iv. 4). 2. The
regeneration and renewal of souls
through the Spirit and the word

(Eph, ii. 10; Titus iii. 5).


Vers. 7-11. How the World receives
the Spirit's Utterances.

I. It commonly undervalues the
Spirit’s witnesses. ‘Are not all these
Galileans?”

II. It is startled at the sound of the
truth in its own conscience. “ How
hear we each in our own language?”

III. It distrusts the issue of the ways
of God. ‘ What meaneth this?”

IV. It mistakes the source of the
Spirit’s operations. ‘These men are
full of sweet wine.”—Gerok.


Ver. 12. What meaneth this ?

I. The majesty of the Father, from
whom the whole family in heaven and
on earth is ramed.

IL. The glory of the Son, which now
appears in heightened splendour, as
the glory of the exalted sovereign of
God’s kingdom.

III. The power of the Holy Ghost,
which is here seen in signs and tokens
which, at the same time, presage a


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. II.


So


higher and more glorious future—
Oosterzee.


Vers. 12, 13. Man’s Reception of the
Great Things of God.

I. The great things of God.—These
great things are everywhere, for God is
everywhere ; and everywhere they pro-
duce much the same effects on man.
Truly great is our Jehovah, and of
great power! He has not forsaken
man nor man’s earth. He shows Him-
self more signally than by lightning, or
thunder, or earthquake, or tempest ;
even by the Holy Ghost.

_ II. The impression made by them
on man.—1. Wonder. With that their
religion begins and ends, They wonder,
but believe not. They wonder, but
love not. They wonder, but depart not


from iniquity. 2. Perplexity. They
know not what tothink. They see and
hear, and are puzzled. These “ great
things of God” were not meant to
breed perplexity, nor to end in per-


"plexity, yet how often do we find them


doing both, through man’s perversity,
or cowardice, or love of sin and dark-
ness, 3. Mockery. This is the worst,
yet not the least common treatment
which the great things of God receive
at the handsof men. Thus the natural
heart spcaks out. Let God's great
things produce their due, their natural
impression. He does not work them
for mere show. (1) Let them overawe
us. (2) Let them break us down. Our
hearts need breaking. (3) Let them
lead us to faith H. Bonar, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 14—21.


Peter's Sermon. 1. The First Christian Apology ; or, the Pentecostal Mystery
explained.

I. The attention of the people summoned.—1l. By a courageous attitude.

- Peter’s standing up with the eleven signified that they did not intend to shirk
investigation, be overborne by clamour, or hurried away with excitement. A
reasonable amount of fortitude is requisite for all who would bespeak the
attention of their fellows on any subject, but especially on religion, This
fortitude ought never to be wanting when the interests of- Christ’s kingdom are
at stake, or anything about the behaviour of Christ’s ambassadors requires to
be investigated. 2. By an earnest utterance. As Peter’s manner was unshrink-
ing, so were his words fervent. Like the multitude around, he, too, was under
strong excitement, only different from theirs. Besides, he perceived a crisis had
arisen in the history of His Master’s cause—the time had passed for keeping
silence, and the hour struck for speech (Eccl. iii. 7). 3. By a frank appeal.
Intending to hide nothing from his auditors, he invited the attention of all who
could understand him, the men of Judea, and of those who could only reach
his meaning through translation, the foreign dwellers at Jerusalem.

II. The charge of drunkenness repelled.—1. As mistaken. Founded on a
hasty generalisation, and grounded on appearance, which is seldom reliable as
a basis for judgment (John vii. 24), it was an altogether unwarranted inference.
2. As impossible. Not because wine was not obtainable before 9 a.m., the
third hour of the Jewish day, but because during festal seasons it was unlawful
to take food, and much more to drink wine earlier than the hour of morning
prayer, and because the characters of the accused rendered the charge absurd.
“These men,” said the Apostle, ‘“ whom ye all see and know, and who like your-
selves have come up to worship at the feast, are not likely to be drunk at 9 a.m.”
3. As ridiculous. Drunken men, he might have added, have commonly a difficulty
in speaking their own tongues, let alone making use of foreign languages.

III The mystery. of the tongues explained—aAs a fulfilment of prophecy.
1. Of the effusion of the Holy Spirit. (1) By God, whose the Spirit was, and
who had engaged to pour it forth in the last times, or in the closing dispensa-


57





CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.

Se Se Sy ee a ee eee ee
tion of the world. (2) Upon all flesh, without distinction of sex—' Upon
your sons and your daughters”; or age—upon “ young men and old”; or
condition—upon ‘“ bondmen” and “ bondmaidens,” as well as upon free persons.
(3) With inward illumination, so that they who received it should “ prophesy
or utter divine communications of religious truth, as the apostles and other
Christians who had the gift of prophecy did (see 1 Cor. xiv. 3), should “see
visions,” or possess insight into spiritual and unseen realities, as Stephen did
in the judgment hall (vu. 55), Peter on the housetop (x. 10), and Paul on the
Damascus road (ix. 3), and in the Temple (xxii. 17), and should “dream
dreams,” as perhaps John did in Patmos on the Lord’s day (Rev. i. 10). 2. Of
the Second Coming of Christ. Characterised as a ‘great and notable” day.
(1) In comparison with His first advent, which was lowly and obscure, whereas
this was to be conspicuous and glorious (Matt. xxv. 31). (2) Because of the
portents which should attend it, ‘“‘the wonders in heaven above and signs on
the earth beneath,” etc.—language descriptive of the woes and horrors that
should overtake such as refused to acknowledge Christ—which received its first
and partial fulfilment in the Destruction of Jerusalem, and will attain its
complete realisation at the Last Day, when those who decline to believe and
obey Christ will be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence
of God, and from the glory of His power (2 Thess. i. 9). 3. Of the free publi-
cation of the Gospel. This also, according to the prophet, should distinguish
Messianic times. Under the dispensation of the Spirit, whosoever should call
upon the name of the Lord, not merely evoking but accepting Him and trusting
in Him for all that His name should imply, should be saved. (Compare Rom.
x. 13.)

Learn.—1. It is no disparagement to a Christian to be found fault with by
the world. 2. It is better to be drunk with the Spirit than to be intoxicated
with wine. 3. The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. 4. The
gospel has two outlooks—one of mercy for the believer, another of wrath for the
unbeliever.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Drunkenness and Spiritual
Influence.

I. Compared.—1. Both accompanied
by bodily manifestations. 2. Both
frequently attended by mental excite-
ment. 3. Both, as a rule, followed by
corresponding prostration.

II. Contrasted—1. The one is a
carnal excitement; the other is a
spiritual ravishment. 2. The one, a
degrading sin ; the other, an elevating
grace. 2. The one leads to moral and
spiritual ruin, the other terminates in
salvation and eternal life.


Vers. 17-18. The Dispensation of the
Sprit.

I. The age to which it belongs.—The
last days—.e., all the days of the New
Testament era.

II. The author from whom it pro-


58


ceeds.—J ehovah, the God of the ancient
Church and the founder of the new,
the God and Father of Our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ.

III. The persons on whom it de-
scends.—‘ All flesh,” without distine-
tion of sex or age, provided they be
“servants and handmaidens” of the
Lord.

IV. The measure in which it is
given.—Not in drops but in streams.
“T will pour out.”

V. The effects by which it is followed.
—The highest forms of spiritual illu-
mination—prophesying, seeing visions,
and having dreams.


Ver. 17. Visions for Young Men.

I. The vision of the Saviour Christ.
—Such as Saul of Tarsus received in
the hour of his conversion (xxii, 14)—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. II.





a vision of Christ as the Righteous
One, “as the greatest, the wisest, the
dearest, and the best—all one’s salva-
tion and all one’s desire.”

II. The vision of a better self.—
Such as every young man obtains when
he gets his vision of Christ. In this
vision of a better self are included two
spiritual experiences: 1. An immediate
and an intense self-depreciation, as if the
first outcome of the vision of the divine
ideal of goodness were “to send down
into the dust and break all to pieces” ;
as with Simon Peter (Luke v. 8) and
the Publican (Luke xviii. 13). 2. The
springing up of an intense aspiration.
“There is a gradual emptying of self,
and a gradual abandonment to the
ideal in Christ, so much so that the
motto of Paul becomes that of every
Christian, ‘'T'o me to live is Christ.’ ”

III. The vision of a better society.
—‘ A common vision with the saints of
God is to see the kingdom of God
‘established on the earth.” “A modern
preacher of righteousness—the Rev.
Hugh Price Hughes—specifies no less
‘than a round dozen of devils which
must be cast out of modern society—
drunkenness, lust, slavery, ignorance,
gambling, pauperism, disease, crime,
war, the opium trade, the torture of
dumb animals +he sale of spirits and
gunpowder to savages.”

IV. The vision of a better Church.
—‘‘ Of a Church free, united, and ener-
getic”—~.e., free to recognise the Lord
Jesus Christ alone as its head, and
neither pope nor prelate, Queen nor
State; united, in the sense that all
unnecessary separations shall have
ceased ; and energetic in doing its God-
appointed work amongst men.

V. The vision of a heavenly in-
heritance —“ On the wall of the house
in Hamburgh, where tke poet Klop-
stock lived and died, was a board with
this inscription—‘ Immortality is a
great thought’; but the thought of
Eternal Life in an eternal Home is
greater still.” A vision of this will


defy all the negations of science, and
lift the soul higher than all the guesses
of philosophers and all the dreams of
poets.” ‘“ Hopeful saw the gates of
the city, and that was enough. He
looked, and from that happy peace
(the Delectable Mountains) God’s glory
smote him on the face. ‘ Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see
God.’”—P. Wilson, M.A.


Ver. 20. The Day of the Lord.—Great
and notable.

I. As regards the splendour of
Christ’s manifestation.—On that day
the Son of man will appear in the
glory of His Father and with His
holy angels.

II. As regards the blessedness of
Christ’s people.—Then this will reach
its highest point. They will appear
with Him in glory.

III. As regards the destruction of
Christ’s foes.—This will then be sudden,
complete, and final.


Ver. 21. The Messianic Salvation.

I. Itsimport.— Deliverance from the
guilt and power of sin—victory over
death and the grave—Resurrection and
Eternal Life.

II. Its foundation.—The Name of
the Lord. The merciful and gracious
character of God in Christ, the only
plea of a sinner’s justification.

III. Its condition.—Calling on that
Name, which implies faith and earnest-
ness on the part of the caller, as well
as an acknowledgment of his need of
salvation and utter helplessness to pro-
cure it for himself.

IV. Its universality.—It is offered
to every one who chooses to comply
with the aforesaid condition. ‘* Who-
soever shall call shall be saved.”

V. Its certainty.—“ It shall be,” of
a verity, without any peradventure.
The believer’s salvation is guaranteed
by the oath and promise of God,
both of which are Yea and Amen
in Christ.


CHAP. If. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 22-36.


Peter’s Sermon. 2. The Mystery of Pentecost traced up to Christ.

I, The earthly life of Jesus Christ (ver. 22).—l. His human nature. “A
man ”—7.e., no mythical creation or docetical simulacrum, but a bond fide flesh
and blood personality ; a genuine member of the race, possessed of a true body
and a reasonable soul like the ordinary descendants of Adam. The certainty of
this was attested by the fact that He lived among men, performed actions which
they saw and uttered words which they heard, sorrowed and suffered like the
rest of His contemporaries, and was eventually put to death at their hands.
That Peter in connecting the Pentecostal effusion of the Holy Ghost with Him
takes as a starting point His humanity does not signify that Peter was in doubt
of His divinity (Matt. xvi, 16; John xxi. 17), or regarded that only as a
consequence of His exaltation, but merely that in attempting to gain a hearing
from his countrymen he commenced with a proposition which he and they held
in common—viz., that Christ had been amongst them asa man. That He had
been even from the first more than this Peter believed and proceeded to show
(vers. 34-36). 2. His divine attestation. ‘ Approved,” shown forth, accredited
as a special messenger to His countrymen—(1) by God, so that, like the prophets
of old, He could at least claim to be an ambassador of Heaven, a plenipotentiary
and representative of Jehovah (Luke iv. 18; John vi. 39, xvi. 28). (2) Through
‘mighty works and wonders and signs ”—i.e., deeds of power, of mystery, and
of significance, which God did, by Him, so that men, reasoning like Nicodemus
(John ii. 2), ought to have had no hesitation in recognising Him as “a teacher
come from God.” 3. In the most public manner—not at all in secret, as His
unbelieving brethren insinuated (John vii. 4)—so that the fullest evidence was
furnished of who and what He was and claimed to be (John xiv. 11). Though
Peter represents God as working by and through Jesus, he does not thereby
deny that Christ performed His miracles by His own inherent power; simply in
addressing his countrymen, he asserts the least that could be affirmed about
Christ—viz., that the divine power manifested itself through Him.

Il. The atoning death of Jesus Christ (ver. 23).—This Peter represents as
having been brought about by a concurrence of human and divine will and
action. 1. Jn accordance with the divine purpose. Reverting to the original
and eternal decrees of God, who worketh all things according to the counsel of
His own will (Eph. i. 11), Peter finds a place among them for the crucifixion
of Jesus, The death of Christ was in his view no accident which had surprised
either Christ Himself or God. As the story of the arrest in Gethsemane shows
that Christ freely surrendered Himself into the hands of His captors (John xviii.
1-11), so does Peter here affirm that God delivered Him into their toils. not
because He was unable to rescue His darling from the power of the dog (Psalm
xxil, 20), but in pursuance of a deliberate and determinate counsel, formed
in eternity, to thus save man from sin and death (1 Peter i. 2, 20),
infamous act of betrayal. Though the person of the traitor is not named clear]
Judas is thought of asthe perpetrator of thiswicked deed. (Compare Matt. xvi 1B.
John xix. 11.) As the counsel of God did not compel the man of Kerioth to sell
Christ to His foes, so neither did it absolve him from guilt for so doing. While
the predestination and foreknowledge of God are incontrovertible facts bein
involved in the very conception of God, yet must they ever be conceived by a
in such a way as neither to make God the Author of sin nor to destroy the
efficiency of second causes. 3. By a cruel deed of crucifixion. The tragic event
was too recent for any call on Peter’s part to reproduce the spectacle. Doubtless
the strangers from foreign parts had been made acquainted with the deed of
blond. Peter restricts himself to two points: (1) That while the instruments


2. By an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. II.


of the crucifixion were “lawless men,” meaning, most likely, the Roman soldiers,
(2) The real authors of it were the people “ ye,” who cried ‘“‘ Away with Him !”
or their leaders who instigated them to demand His death. Both acted in
ignorance, comparatively at least, of the personal dignity of Christ and of the
heinous character of their crime (iii. 17 ; 1 Cor. ii. 8), yet were neither thereby
excused.

III. The triumphant resurrection of Christ (vers. 24-32), Peter presents this
in a fourfold light. 1. As effected by God. “ Whom God raised up” (ver. 24;
compare iii. 15, iv. 10, x. 40, xiii. 30, xvii. 31; 1 Peter i. 21), “‘ having loosed the
pangs of death.” Quoted from the LXX. version of Psalm xviii. 5, which in the
Hebrew reads “ cords of death” ; the imagery lying in “ the pangs of death” may
be different, but the sense is the same. The Hebrew poet represents death as
a strong man, who binds his victim with cords, which must be untied to admit
of resurrection ; the Christian apostle compares death’s agonies to the pains
of parturition—doubtless because in both cases life follows—with this difference,
that he depicts these as not ending with the expiry of physical life, but as
pursuing the body into the grave in the form of corruption, and requiring to be
loosed-or made to cease in order that their victim might be raised, In Christ’s
case both conceptions were realised. His body saw no corruption, and the cords
of death were unloosed. 2. As necessitated by Christ Himself. “It was not
possible that He should be holden of death” (ver. 24). Inasmuch as the like
averment could not be made of any ordinary son of man, the use of it concerning
Christ marked Him off as standing in a distinct category by Himself. Fhe
impossibility of death’s dominion over Christ remaining unbroken lay in this,
either that He, Christ, was the Resurrection and the Life (John v. 26; xi. 25),
and had power in Himself to resume as well as to lay down His life when He
pleased (John x. 17, 18), or that, having satisfied the claims of justice in behalf
of man by dying and lying in a sinner’s grave, the conditions of His covenant
with the Father demanded His restoration to life (Isa. lili. 10-12). 3. As foretold
by David. ‘“ David saith concerning Him.” (1) That Peter referred to David
the sweet singer of Israel as the author of this psalm, and did not merely use
the term David as a convenient synonym for the Hebrew poet, or for the
collection of hymns and spiritual songs that passed current under his name, is
obvious from even a cursory glance at the passage, and must be held as confirmed
by the fact that Paul also, indirectly at least, ascribed it to the son of Jesse
(xiii. 35), notwithstanding that the higher critics of to-day pretty generally
assert that both Peter and Paul were mistaken (?). (2) That the psalm was
p-ophetically written with an outlook to Christ must be maintained on the
same twofold apostolic authority. That the passage cited literally from the
1.XX. version of the psalm (vers. 8-11) could not have been meant by David to
apply to himself was apparent, first, from the language (e.g., Thy Holy One),
which befitted not a sinful mortal; and secondly, from the circumstance that
David saw corruption and never rose again—his tomb being amongst them on
Mount Zion at the very moment when the Apostle spoke (ver. 29, compare xiii. 36).
That it was designed to fore-announce the resurrection of Christ, Peter contended,
was the unambiguous testimony of the Holy Ghost (ver. 31). 4. As attested by
the apostles and primitive disciples. ‘‘ Whereof” or “ of whom ”—~.e., of the fact
or the person ; “we all,” the one hundred and twenty of i. 15, “ are witnesses ”
(ver. 32). If none of them had been present at the opening of the sepulchre,
it is probable that all of them had looked on their risen Lord after His emergence
from the tomb. Nor can it be doubtful that what these first witnesses understood
by Christ’s resurrection was not the exaltation of His spirit to celestial life after
His death (Ritschl), but the actual return of His body, though in a glorified
form, from the tomb.


61


CHAP. It. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


OE ee ne


IV. The glorious exaltation of Jesus Christ (vers. 33-36).—That Peter, as
well as Luke and Paul, distinguished between the resurrection and the exaltation
of Christ is too manifest to be successfully challenged. Having treated of the
former occurrence, he naturaily advances to speak of the latter, replying in
succession to the following unspoken inquiries: 1. Whither 2—‘ Into the
heavens ” (compare i. 11; Luke xxiv. 51; 1 Peter iii. 22; Heb. ix. 24) and up to
the right hand of God” (see vil. 55; Mark xiv. 62, xvi. 19; Rom. viii. 34 ;
Col. iii. 1). This also had been a subject of prophecy by David in Psalm cx. 1, 2,
who could not have referred to himself for the simple reason that he “had
not ascended into the heavens,” and therefore must have spoken of Christ.
N.B.—The Davidie authorship of Psalm ex. is guaranteed by Christ (Matt.
xxii. 43-45). 2. By whom ?2—‘ By the right hand of God.” Though not the
better of the possible renderings of this clause, it contains a thought in full
accord with the teaching of Scripture, that Christ’s exaltation was the work of
the Father (see Eph. i. 20; Phil. ii. 9), who so rewarded Him for His redeeming
work. 3. For what ?—To be “ both Lord and Christ” (ver. 36). (1) Lord, or
possessor of divine dominion, an idea already expressed in His sitting at the right
hand of God as partner of His throne, which dominion, though originally and
from eternity belonging to Him as the preincarnate Word (John i. 1, xvii. 5),
was now conferred on His divine manhood in reward for His obedience unto
death (Phil. ii. 9; Heb. i. 3; Rev. iii, 21). (2) Christ or Messiah, which
signified not that Christ had not been Messiah in the days of His flesh
(John iv. 26), but that His Messiahship was, by His exaltation, incontestably
proved, and that the purposes for which His Messiahship had been constituted
could not begin to realise themselves in all their fulness until after His Ascension.
That is to say, He was not to be a temporal deliverer rescuing Israel from
political thraldom and erecting a world-empire upon earth, but a spiritual
Saviour, wielding authority from heaven. 4. How long ?—“ Till His enemies
should be made the footstool of His feet” (ver. 35). Till the er ds contemplated
by His mediatorial sovereignty should be accomplished (1 Cor. xv. 23-28). Till
all His believing people should be fully, perfectly, and finally saved (John xvii. 24).
Till all His unbelieving adversaries should be reduced into absolute, if still
unwilling subjection (Phil. i. 10, 11),

V. The Mediatorial Activity of Jesus Christ (ver. 33).—This, according to
Peter, was—1. Authorised by Christ’s exaltation to tl.e right hand of the Father.
Manifestly, only one possessed of divine authority could act as the glorified
Redeemer is here represented as doing. More, only one who was the equal and
fellow of the Most High. A Moses might serve as mediator for a nation: a
mere man would be insufficient to officiate as mediator for the race. 2. Prepared
for by the promise of the Father that He would pour out the Spirit upon all
flesh in Christ’s days—a promise given to Christ beforehand in the words of Old
Testament prophecy which referred to Him, and renewed to Him on His
exaltation. 3. Manifested by the Pentecostal effusion of the Holy Spirit, which
Peter now ascribes to Him. “ He hath poured forth this,” an indirect proof of
Christ's exaltation and divinity. 4. Verified by the unusual phenomena whicu
the house of Israel saw and heard.

Lessons.—1. The close and intimate connection with one another of all
evangelical doctrines. This a powerful argument in favour of their truth
2. The reality of distinct Messianic prophecy. A point contested by modern


criticism. 3. The inspiration of the sacred Scriptures and, in parti
Psalms of David. ‘ Rime ae ag lh





62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP. Ii.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 22. Did Jesus of Nazareth really
Work Mirucles ?—1. “It is incontest-
able that Christ” (in asking the faith
of his contemporaries) ‘“‘ appealed very
emphatically to His miracles, to His
‘works,’ which He was able to perform
in virtue of the divine power which
stood at His command, to His ‘signs’
in which His Godlike character, and
specially the energy and grace per-
taining thereto, showed themselves.”
2. “In all the wonderful works which
the Evangelists report of Him, the
question concerns occurrences in which,
if they really happened so (ie, as
reported), we cannot at all find merely
specially striking arrangements of a
common divine providence ruling in the
world and nature, but must recognise
a direct intrusion of superterrestrial
divine power into the regularly ordered
connection of finite natural things and
the forces deposited in them by God.”
3. ‘It is, and remains, incontestable,
that Jesus intended to perform such
works and referred (His contemporaries)
to theni—aud that such works were not
first assigned to Him by a late, fabulous
tradition, which, at the same time, put
into His mouth the (above-mentioned)
appeal to them.” 4. “Apart from
every other thing, it is unthinkable
that His first disciples and apostles
would have ascribed to themselves
miraculous powers, as they unquestion-
ably did, had not such miraculous
powers been known of Him.” 5.
Hence “ to a historical critic, who will
deny to Jesus all real miraculous
activity, remains only the supposition
possible—at least, if he is clear and
honest-—that Jesus and His disciples,
with respect to this matter of miracles,
practised deliberate and constant de-
ception” (Késtlin, Der G'lawbe, p. 28).


Ver. 23. Divine Afterknowledge and
Foreknowledge.

I. The divine afterknowledge. —
Does Ged know all persons, other
ercatures, or things that have existed,
as well as all ogcurrences that have


taken place in the past? 1. This
question must be answered in the affirma-
tive. God’s eye never closes. It never
droops. He has never slumbered or
slept. He is never unobservant (Psalm
exxxix. 1-16, exlvii.4; John xxi. 17;
Heb. iv. 13). 2. The effect of this know-
ledge on persons, creatures, things,
events past, is nothing. It does not in
the least degree modify their nature.
It does not make them either good or
bad. It does not alter their relations
to one another or to God.

II. The divine foreknowledge.—
Does God foreknow all the persons,
other creatures, events, and things that
shall be in the future? 1. Some theo-
logians have maintained that God can
and does foreknow things necessary, but
not things contingent—i.e., such things
as owe their existence to free will.
But this idea is not tenable, inasmuch
as—(1) It ascribes ignorance to God,
and (2) is at variance with the ex-
istence of prophecy in the Bible, and
(3) traverses the statements of both
Peter (1 Peter i. 2) and Paul (Rom.
viii, 28-30). 2. Other theologians hold
that it is neither logical nor scriptural
to maintain the universal foreknowledge
of God. “ Whatever is actually fore-
known must, they think, be actually
fixed by being foreknown.” But
“knowledge, whether simple (i.e.,
present) or after or fore, never fixes
the object which it knows.” “ Things
forekuown, whether necessary or con-
tingent, will come to pass, but cach
according to iis own nature ”—things
necessary as necessary, things con-
tingent as contingent. 3. The true
theology is that while all things are
Soreknown nothing is thereby bound to
be. “There is no certainty impartd
to the essence of the things that are
foreknown.”—James Morison, DD.


Vers. 25 and 34.—The Two Right
Hands.

I. God upon the right hand of
Christ (ver. 25).—This was equivalent
to a promise from God to Christ of

63


+


CHAP. Ii


four things. 1. Of support and pro-
tection in the execution of His redemptive
work. Compare Isa. xlii. 1; Matt.
xii, 18. 2. Of joy and satisfaction in
the inception and progress of His work.
Compare Prov. viii. 31; Isa. xli. 4;
John xv. 11, xvii. 13. 3. Of hope wm
death.—Not merely of inward peace,
but of prospective recovery from death’s
dominion. Compare Isa. liii. 10, 11.
4. Of a glorious resurrection to em-
bodied existence beyond the grave.—
Isa. liii. 11, 12.

II. Christ upon the right hand of
God (ver. 34).—This could only mean
the enjoyment on Christ’s part of three
things additional. 1. Co-ordination (in
the sense of equality) with God—z.e.,
essential divinity. Compare Zech.
xiii. 7. 2. Communion (in the sense
of fellowship) with God—i.e., such con-
verse as alone could be held by equals.
Compare John i. 1, v. 19, 20. 3. Co-
partnership (in the sense of dominion)
with God—1.e., the possession of absolute
power. Compare Dan. vii. 13; Matt.
xxvii. 18s) Eph; i5-2b; (Phil ay 93
1 Peter iii. 22; Rev. xvii. 14.


Vers. 25-28. The Lord upon the Right
Hand.—What that signifies to the
follower of Christ.

I. Confidence.—He shall not be
moved, With such a Companion and
Protector, why should we either be
troubled or afraid? (Prov. xxix. 28;
Isa. xxvi. 3).

Il. Joy.—Arising from a sense of
the divine presence and fellowship.
All the nobler faculties of that man
who has God for a defence begin to
exult (Psalm v. 11; Rom. v. 11).

III. Hope.—When the good man’s
flesh lies down to tabernacle in the
grave, it does not do so in despair, but
rather with the joyous expectation of
a future coming forth (Prov. xiv. 32;
Acts xxiv. 15; Rom. viii. 19).

IV. Resurrection.—His soul will not
be left in Hades, neither will his body
be abandoned as a prey to corruption.
It may be allowed to see corruption, but
that which is sown in corruption will be
raised in incorruption (1 Cor. xv. 42).


64


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


MN le a is me ee I es Baal a EA Ya Ne En Ce ot me 2,


V. Immortality.—The good man
will not be raised to judgment and
condemnation, but to justification and
eternal life (John v. 29).

VI. Glory.—He will be filled
with gladness with Jehovah’s counte-
nance; he will behold Christ’s glory
and experience, the highest felicity in
Christ’s presence (1 John ili. 2; Rev.
vii. 13-17 ; John xvii. 24).


Ver. 31. The Resurrection of Christ.
—Was—

I. The necessary counterpart of His
death.

II. His final victory over all hostile
powers.

III. The divine attestation of His
Messiahship.

IV. The presupposition of His ex-
altation as “the Son of God in
power.”

V. The pledge of His supremacy
over the living and the dead.

VI. The seal of 211 blessings, rights,
and privileges given through Christ,
especially of the forgiveness of sins and
the future resurrection.

VII. The constraining argument for
a new life in the spirit on the part of
Christians.

VIII. The decisive proof for the
reality, supernaturalness, and eternity
of the kingdom of God.

IX. The starting point of all Apos-
tolic missions and evangelical preaching.
—Bornemann, Unterricht im Christen-
tum, p. 102).


Ver. 34. The Mediatorial Throne.

I. Its divine appointment.—< The
Lord said unto My Lord.” Jehovah
its Author. By His decree was it
constituted.

IT. Its glorious occupant.—“ My
Lord.” 1, David’s divine Sovereign.
2. Jehovah’s personal fellow.

III. Its specific object.—Heie re-
presented to be the subjugation of all
the enemies of that throne—i.e., all the
foes of Jesus Christ and His kingdom.

IV. Its long duration. —Till that
subjugation is effected. But not for
ever. (See 1 Cor, xv, 28.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. II.





Vers. 22-36. Four Remarkable Things
in Peter's Sermon.

I. The courage that could venture
to charge upon an immense miscel-
laneous street audience the death of
God’s Messiah, and this in the most
naked terms, and by a man who had
himself but a short while before,
quailing before a servant maid in
the high priest’s palace, denied Him
thrice.

II. The tenderness which tempered


that very death, so paving the way for
holding forth this crucified One as their
own now exalted Lord and Christ.

III. The dread harmony with which
one and the same event is here pre-
sented as on men’s part a crime of
unparalleled atrocity, and on the part
of God the result of an eternal decree
of saving mercy.

IV. The description given of that
death itself—by a word signifying
travail pangs, as the throes of a death


this awful charge with the announce-


which was to give birth to a new life,—
ment of an eternal purpose of God in


David Brown, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 37—41.


The First Converts ; or, the Firstfruits of the Gospel Harvest.

I. The anxious inquiry.—By whom it was preferred. The men and women
who had listened to Peter’s sermon; who had manifestly kept awake when the
Apostle preached, attended to his words, taken in and reflected on their signifi-
cance, as well as applied them to their own circumstances and condition; in all
which they offered an example to hearers of the Gospel in general. 2. Zo whom
it was addressed. ‘To Peter and the rest of the Apostles.” From this
conjunction of the eleven with Peter (see ver. 14) it should perhaps be inferred
that they also as well as Peter solicited a hearing from the crowd. Nor need
it be doubted that, enjoying the same inspired assistance as Peter, they treated
their themes in much the same way as he did his. In any case they were
believed by the multitude to be able, as well as Peter, to direct those who asked
from them guidance. It is good when preachers have the confidence of their
hearers, in respect of both intelligence and willingness to place that intelligence
at their service; it is better when hearers in their anxiety appeal for spiritual
counsel to such preachers ; it is best when they repair to Him who is the Lord
both of hearers and preachers. 3. By what it was prompted.—A heartfelt
conviction of guilt. Realising the terrible mistake they had been under both as to
who Jesus of Nazareth had been and as to their behaviour in sending Him to
a cross, they understood the heinous criminality of their lawless deed; and
discerning clearly that if Christ were now exalted to the right hand of God they
were in danger indeed, they became forthwith filled with alarm. Besides, by
their exclamation they practically owned their sin, and openly confessed their
belief that the Christ they had crucified was Lord of all. Once more furnishing
a pattern to hearers of the Gospel, who should allow it when addressed to them
to carry conviction of its truth to their understandings and of their guilt to their
hearts and consciences. 4. Yor what tt was directed. Guidance in their distressful
perplexity: ‘What shall we do?” Pierced through with the arrows of
conviction, rent with spiritual anguish under a sense of guilt, enlightened as to
their wickedness, and alarmed for their safety, they felt that to remain indifferent
or do nothing was impossible. They must escape from the peril in which they
stood, know how to act in the crisis that had come upon them, find out where to
turn and what to do i order to obtain remission of their guilt, peace for their
consciences, and eternal life for their souls. A fourth time their behaviour was
a splendid illustration of how convicted, anxious, and distressed Gospel hearers
should act in. time of soul concern.

II. The comforting reply.—1. Zhe direction. Two things were needful for


F. ‘65


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
Reena aie ee Aint pa WE Rely See as Eee ek


all, without exception and without delay. (1) Repentance. “ Repent ye.”
Without a change of mind, heart, and behaviour, salvation was impossible.
Repentance for them meant an alteration in their way of thinking about Christ,
who must no more be looked upon as a man, and far less as a malefactor, but
regarded as Lord and Christ ; in their way of feeling towards Christ, who must
no more be treated with indifference and unbelief, far less with hate and
persecution, but honoured with earnest faith and cordial love; in their way of
acting before Christ, who must no more be pained by seeing them walking after
their own ways, and far less in ways-of sin, but must behold them following
holiness and keeping His commandments. (2) Baptism. ‘ Be baptised in the
name of Jesus Christ.” The repentance, faith, and cbedience already demanded,
if existing in the heart, must be outwardly expressed by submission to baptism,
in which it was designed that all should be symbolised. Rightly viewed, this
religious ordinance was intended for a material and visible representation not of
the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but of the answer of a good conscience
or the laying aside of the works of the flesh in repentance (1 Peter ili. 21), of
the faith which looked for cleansing from guilt and sin to the sprinkling of a
Saviour’s blood (Heb. xii. 24), and of that spirit of submission to Christ which
acknowledged Him as Lord (Gal. iii. 27). That baptism was connected with
repentance as necessary for the remission of sins did not signify that any
saving eflicacy resided in the water, or in the ceremony, but merely that without
compliance with this ritual there could be no guarantee of that repentance which
was required for salvation. Where, however, baptism was sincerely submitted to,
it became a visible pledge to the repenting and believing recipient that the
covenant of salvation, of which it was a seal, would be kept in his experience, and
that the blessings of the covenant, of which it was a sign (washing from guilt or
pardon, and washing from pollution or regeneration), would be bestowed upon
him. 2. The promise. ‘Ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” Their
cry indicated that already they had been visited by the gracious operations of
that Spirit who Christ said (John xvi. 8) should convict the world of sin; what
Peter’s statement imported was that the Holy Ghost should descend upon them
as He had upon the Apostles themselves and their fellow-believers, and should
remain with them as a permanent endowment (John xiv. 16), enlightening their
minds (1 Cor. ii. 12), purifying their hearts (2 Thess. ii. 13), sanctifying their
whole natures (1 Cor. vi. 11), witnessing with their spirits (Rom. viii. 16), and
conferring upon them sundry gifts for the edification of themselves aud the
Church (1 Cor. xii. 7). The permanent inhabitation of the believer by the Holy
Ghost is a recognised doctrine of the New Testament (v. 32, x. 44, xili, 52,
xv. 8; Rom. v. 5; 1 Cor. iii. 16; 2 Cor. i. 22, ete.). 3. The encowrayement.
“The promise of the Holy Ghost,” which was virtually a promise of salvation
had been freely extended unto them, the Jews, domestic and foreign, then
present in the city and listening to the Apostle, along with their children
descendants, or offspring (a warrant for infant baptism), and unto all that were
afar off, not merely Jews of the dispersion, but Gentiles as well; an unambiguous
hint that from the first the Gospel, as preached by Peter, contemplated the
admission of the Gentiles into the Church, though Peter from the first did not
understand the exact terms and conditions upon which their reception should
take place. The only limitation to that universality which sounds in the
Gospel offer arises from the appended clause, “ as many as the Lord our God
shall call unto Him,” which may signify either that the promise would realise itself
only in the case of those whom God inwardly called to Himself by His grace, or that
it was extended only to those who were invited by the Gospel. Both propositions
are correct. All who hear the Gospel call are invited freely to lay hold of the
promise ; but the promise is fulfilled to them alone who by faith embrace it, and


66


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. Ii





ese) acl ©


so prove themselves to have been inwardly drawn by the Father (John vi. 44),
4. The appeal. Besides encouragirg his hearers Peter endeavours to arouse
them to instant action, by exhorting them to save themselves from the then
existing crooked generation (compare Phil. ii. 15), for which the Hebrew Scriptures
threatened ultimate destruction (Psalm exxv. 5); and this he tells them they could
do only by repenting and being baptised. In no other way yet can men rescue
themselves from the doom which overhangs this present evil world (1 Cor. xi. 32:
Gal. i. 4).

Ill. The happy result.—About three thousand souls (persons) responded to
this appeal. 1. They received the Apostle’s word. With faith. A customary
New Testament phrase for believing acceptance of the Gospel (xi. 1, xvii. 7;
1 Thess. i. 6, 1. 13). 2. They submitted to baptism. Whether this rite was
administered on the spot, or at a subsequent hour of the same day, or still later.
to suit the convenience of the recipients, is not certain from the text (see “ Critical
Remarks”), though the second alternative is the more probable. (On the subjects
of baptism, see ‘“‘ Hints on ver. 39.”) 4. They were added to the Church. The word
Church, though not expressed, is understood. The new converts were reckoned.
to the number of professed disciples, and professed disciples form the visible
Church.

Learn.—1. The genesis of true religion in the soul. Conviction of sin,
repentance, faith (implied in baptism), pardon, the Holy Ghost. 2. The
defectiveness of those (so-called) evangelical systems that have no place in their
teaching for conviction of sin or repentance. 3. The certain test of religion’s
reality in the soul of an individual—his having received the Holy Spirit.
4, The universality of the Gospel promise of salvation, not inconsistent with
Divine Sovereignty in respect of the Gospel call. 5. The urgency of seeking
after personal salvation, by separation from the sinful world. 6. The necessity
of confessing Christ before men by submitting to baptism. 7. The duty of
believers connecting themselves with the visible fellowship of the saints.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 37. Conviction of Sin.

I. By whom required ?—All, seeing
that all have sinned.

II Wherein lies its seat?—In the
heart, as distinguished from the head.

III. By what produced ?—l. The
instrument—the word of God, either
preached or read. 2. The agent—the
Holy Ghost applying the word to the
conscien’e.

IV. To what it leads?—A sense of
danger and feeling of alarm, prompting
the cry, ‘What shall we do?”

V. How removed ?—By : 1. Repent-
ance. 2. Remission of sin. 3. Recep-
tion of the Holy Ghost.


The Ory of awakened Souls, ‘ What
shall we do?” The cry of:
I. Acknowledged guilt.
IT. Realised danger.
III, Conscious helplessness,


IV. Earnest desire.
V. Eager hope.
VI. Humble docility.
VII. Arising faith.


The Spirit and the New Sense of
Sin.—Confucius is said to have once
exclaimed, in an outburst of despond-
ency, “It is all over! I have not yet
seen one who could perceive his fault
and inwardly accuse himself.” Con-
fucius is not alone in that verdict upon
human nature. The lament is sugges-
tive. It implies the enormous diffi-
culty of bringing an average man to
admit his fault. It is all but impossible
to argue the world into a frank and
unreserved acknowledgment of its
follies and misdemeanours. ‘The most
horrible offences which have ever
blotted and befouled the history of
mankind find ingenious apologists. At


67


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee a ee Sen


this very hour men will write to the
newspapers to defend with sociological
sophistries every vice that saps and
smirches our national life. Where the
Spirit of God does not work in the
fulness of His power true moral dis-
cernment is wanting. You might as
well make a colour-blind man judge at
a flower-show, as accept from one who
has not the Spirit of God a verdict
upon questions of morals not already
determined by statute law or public
opinion. To convince of sin is a work
of supreme difficulty worthy of the
Spirit’s matchless light and wisdom and
resource. So many forces militate
against the work of the Spirit in con-
vincing the world of sin, that the
wonder is we should come to see any
dawning humility, reproach, and self-
accusation in human nature at all.

I. The instinctive pride of human
nature is arrayed against this first
task of the Comforter.—The man who,
born to wealth, lands himself in an un-
happy bankruptcy is rarely able to
adapt himself to a life of straitened
circumstance. He will think he has
the right to ride behind horses, to be
waited on, and to drink the best wines,
to the end of his days, although he
may never redeem his fortunes. His
habits cling to him, and he goes upon
the assumption that once a merchant
prince, always a prince. A fallen
king can rarely reconcile himself to the
position of a mere subject. Poor play-
thing of chance though he is, he looks
upon his hereditary rights as inter-
minable, and claims from his followers
on the tossing sea, or in the mountain
cave or island prison, to which his
conquerors have banished him, the
deference he had claimed when the
head of a brilliant court. And so with
human nature. It seems to possess
some faint hereditary consciousness of
its own high birth. It has some
pathetic and indefinable reminiscence
of the position to which it was desig-
nated in the beginning. The rever-
ence of children and the honour of
neighbours are demanded as_ rights.
The Bible, too, seems to give its sanc-


68


tion to this code of etiquette; for, in
spite of all it has to say about the de-
pravity of human nature, it enforces
the universal honour of man as man,
Can we be content to honour ourselves
less than it is claimed others must
honour us? We are built up in pride
by that habit of expecting honour at
the hands of others, the germ of which
is perhaps hereditary, and we repel and
resent that self-humiliation to which
the Spirit must needs bring the best
of us.

II. The work of the sin-convincing
Spirit is further hindered by the fact
that we judge ourselves in the light of
an imaginary future, as well as by the
ideals of an outfading past. We draw
the material for our own portraiture
from the flattering hopes we have been
wont to cherish, rather than from the
practical record we have left behind us.
We had meant to be holy and noMe
and without reproach, and have not yet
relinquished our great intentions, and
it is from that standpoint we form the
estimate of ourselves. It is not the
spendthrift youth only, with a small
income and extravagant conceptions of
life, who makes audacious drafts upon
the future. We are all prone to live
in a fool’s paradise, in the ethical sense.
We are not yet at the end of our career,
and of course we are going some day
to be faultless from every point of view.
And the glamour of that dream is
always before our eyes when we are
called to the task of knowing ourselves.
The future, as we intend to shape it,
will more than outbalance the past.

III. Another difficulty encountered
by the Spirit in this preparatory work
is that we find ourselves with person-
alities whose natural perceptions are
more active than their moral. Two
diseases work within us, our physical
senses are in a condition of hyperas-
thesia and morbid sleeplessness, and
our spiritual senses are blunted by an
ominous coma and a fast-developing in-
duration. The perceptions of pleasure
and pain are so much keener than the
consciousness of right and wrong, that
we never forget the wrongs done to us


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. II.





by others, and spend our lives in count-
ing up the pitiful sum, whilst our heart
grows stone-dead to the trespasses we
have committed against both God and
our fellows. We are occupied with an
arithmetic that is entirely false, vicious,
and misleading, and can never give us
an equation of justice and of truth.
Whilst our natural sensibilities are so
keen, that we can give a most minute
and detailed account of all the wrongs
inflicted upon us by others, our moral
sensibilities seem to be represented by
a single attenuated nerve-thread only,
which is so obtuse that it fails to
register a tithe of the wrongs we do to
others ; and it is hard to bring us to
that state of soul described by the
expression ‘ pricked in ‘the heart.”
And we come to look upon these soli-
tary delinquencies as more than out-
weighed by the losses of which we are
the victims through the multitudinous
delinquencies of others. And by think-
ing of these possible offsets in judgment,
we shut out the operation of the Spirit
as He seeks to convince of sin.

IV. We are sometimes trained to
self-justification by the exigencies of
our daily life, and a tenacious habit is
formed within us adverse to the sin-
convincing work of the Spirit. The
current conditions of society are such
that certain cardinal moralities, and a
reputation for them, are necessary to
worldly success. We must vindicate
our name at every turn if we are to
live. The competition that prevails in
all sections of the world, grave and gay
alike, isin the last analysis the com-
petition of reputations, and we must
keep up our reputations, unless we are
to go to the wall. It has become
a second nature to us to overlook
our own faults entirely, and to be
ever dressing out our virtues for the
eye of the world; and we carry the
habit of self-vindication into God’s
presence, and exercise it before His bar,
perhaps at the very time we are join-
ing in the General Confession of the
Liturgy. When trees have been bent
by the prevailing winds that have been
beating upon them for half a century,


it is not easy to make them lean in the
other direction. A passing hurricane
will not effect the reversion.

V. Our passionate  self-interests
league themselves against the work
of the Spirit as He comes to convince
us of sin.—We live in a world sadly
lacking in charity and tenderness, and
to plead guilty of a trespass in the
common affairs of life would often be
to invite punishment more.or less
severe. The world gives us the full
benefit of all the confessions we pour
into its ear, and we soon learn the art
of keeping confessions to ourselves. In
very few communities indeed is the
admission of error a highway to ad-
vancement. Wherever Governments
are cruel and public opinion is harsh
and pitiless, you will find a proportion-
ate reluctance to admit error and short-
coming. The most immaculate people
in the world, according to their own
estimate at least, are to be found in
the lands where rule is despotic and
public opinion pitiless. And some
traces of this fact are present in our
own midst. For the servant to con-
fess error would be in many instances
to challenge dismissal, especially if his
position is one of trust and responsi-
bility ; for a master to confess error
would be to invite strikes and to risk
the break up of his authority ; for a
tradesman to confess grave error would
in some cases lead to a discontinuance
of the business that has been given
him. I have heard some men plead
that authority must be upheld when
it is wrong, because to allow that
it had made mistakes might pave the
way to anarchic conditions of feeling.
And this repugnance to the acknow-
ledgment of error, ingrained into us
through our worldly training and ex-
perience, influences us when the Spirit
begins to deal with us and to convince
us of our sin. Confession is almost
inseparably associated with the idea of
drastic punishment. What is the
method of the Spirit’s logic? By what
process does He introduce into the
human mind and implant there these
stern, unflattering convictions of sin?


69


CHAP, II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS,


Sn nnn nee TIE nr EIEInDEnIEE SSUES


His work is creative, and we cannot
pcnetrate its many secrets ; and answers
to these questions are necessarily frag-
mentary and inadequate. 1. The Holy
Spirit for the fulfilment of His appomted
work puts an environment of new ideals
before the mind. He testifies of Christ,
and in so doing makes us see how in
His humanity all divine excellencies
have come down into the midst of men
and made themselves a new law to the
conscience. Some little time ago I was
passing through a country lane, and
saw a flock of sheep feeding on the
hillside. They seemed to be milk-white,
justifying the scriptural metaphor,
*« He scattereth hoar-frost like wool,”
and fit to be welcomed as pets into a
drawing-room. In comparison with
the green pastures in which they were
feeding, their fleeces seemed bleached
into spotlessness. Not long after, a
snowstorm came, and J had occasion to
pass by the same field. But the sheep
did not seem to be the same creatures
at all. The background had changed
as if by magic, and they were in a new
world, the conditions of which served
to bring out their griminess. The
collier, rising out of the pit into the
sunshine after a night of toil, scarcely
looked grimier than those spotless sheep
of yesterday. So when the Spirit
brings down from the presence of God
on high into these human souls new
ideals of truth and righteousness, love,
purity, faithfulness, the soul sees it-
self against a new ethical background.
The philanthropist puts himself by the
side of churl and niggard, and says,
How open-handed Iam! A man poses
before the background of ethical
mediocrity current in his town, or city,
or nation, and is quite content with his
past record. And for the time his
self-satisfaction seems to be warranted.
But by-and-by the new background
comes in. He awakes to the fact that
he is in God’s presence, and sees him-
self standing by the side of the spotless
Son of man in whom the Father has
revealed Himself, and before the great
white throne of all-searching judgment,
and he is filled with shame and self-


70


condemnation. 2. The Spirit enwraps
the man to whom He comes with a
new atmosphere of sympathy and gracious-
mess, unlike that which exists in the
world and provokes to ingenuous self-
justification. He who comes under
this ministry feels almost instinctively
His right to search the heart and bring
every delinquency before a divine
tribunal. It is useless to attempt
concealment, for the Spirit knows us
more thoroughly than we know our-
selves, and can constrain the most
reluctant natures into a consciousness
of their own evil. He acts upon us,
not like the angry storm which leads
men to bar their doors and close their
shutters, but like the soft south wind,
which opens every labyrinth of the
heart and life to the light. It is no
treachery or ill-will or unrelenting
antagonism which is bringing right
home to us the unwelcome facts of the
past, but helping and healing benefi-
cence. 3. But over and above these
things, a new power of moral discern-
ment needs to be aroused in those who
are to be re-created by the ministry of
the Spirit. The Pharisee met Jesus,
and had no sense of guilt. The idea
of spiritual sin seemed to be entirely
foreign to the genius of his thought.
He looked upon the surpassing excel-
lence of this man of Nazareth as mere
eccentricity, a freak of fanaticism, a
spasm of madness. Men needed new
senses, an enlargement of the conscience
that would enable them to feel the
guilt of unchastened desire, evil imagi-
nation, soulless worship. And where
the Spirit comes, whilst He deadens
to the illusions of the world and its
vain shows, He makes men conscious
of the paramount significance of the
faintest things which touch their re-
lation to the invisible. By awakening
these new perceptions the Spirit brings
into view the countless spiritual sins of
the former days, and shuts men up for
hope to the one common law of mercy.
The fact that the sins of the spirit as
well as the sins of the body are rebuked
by this inward Teacher is indicated by
that expansion of the words immediately


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. Il.





added—indeed, sins of the spirit are the
roots of all outward transgression—
“of sin, because they believe not on
Me.” In the view of the Spirit this is
the core of all heinousness in either
the ancient or the modern world, and
the Spirit will demonstrate it to those
with whom He deals. 4. The convic-
tion of sin is the groundwork of all
religious belief, and there can be no
genuine consciousness of divine things
which does not begin here. Remember
in what an awful state the man is who
lacks this new sense of sin. If the
natuial senses were blotted out, a man
would walk into some deuth-trap or
other in less than twenty-four hours.
And when a man lacks these spiritual
senses, is the peril less tragic, think
you? The highest thing that the love
of God or man can seek for you is that
you may have this sense of sin. Has
it been bern within you? Do you
possess this sign of a dawning spiritual
life 1—7’. G. Selby.


Ver. 38. The Gift of the Holy Ghost.

J. Supernatural as to its origin.
II. Mysterious as to its enjoyment.

III. Free as to its bestowment.

IV. Conditioned as to its reception.
V. Permanent as to its duration.

VI. Saving as to its effect.


Vers. 36-38. The Cross, the Cruct-
fiers, and the Crucified.

I. The crucified One.—Let us note
concerning this. 1. Who He was.
“That same Jesus”; yes, Jesus of
Nazareth. 2. What was done to Him.
He was betrayed, tricd, condemned,
crucified, slain. 3. By whom was this
done? By “His own”;:by “ Israel,”
the house of Israel. 4. What God has
made Him. “ Both Lord and Christ.”
The stone which the builders rejected
has been made the head of the corner.

II The crucifiers.—They were, as
we have seen, “the house of Israel.”
They had deliberately united to crucify.
—l. An innocent man. 2. A good
man, 3. A prophet. 4. The Lord of
Glory. 5. Their own Messiah. They
were thus not merely murderers, but


no ordinary ones; criminals in the
highest and darkest sense.

Ill. The connection between the
crucified and the crucifiers for eviland
for good. 1. Yor evil. For condem-
nation, It was this that they felt so
awfully when the Apostle had stated
the simple facts. (1) They were
pricked in their hearts. (2) They cried
out, What shall we do? A full sense
of their awful criminality flashed
through them. 2. For good. This
connection forevil might be disannulled,
and a new one formed.—H. Bonar,
DD,


- Ver. 39. The Promise of the Gospel.
I. As to its giver, divine.
II. As to its contents, saving.
III. As to its terms, free.
IV. As to its recipients, universal.
V As to its continuance, irre-
vocable.


To you and to your Children, or, the
Church Membership of Children.

I. The import of this statement.—
Not that all children indiscriminately
and prowiscuously should be regarded
as within the pale of the Church
visible, but only those of such parents
or parent as accepted and relicd upon
the promise.

Il. The ground of this statement.—
That children were considered as within
the pale of the Old Testament Church,
and that under the New the promise
of salvation (remission of sins and recep-
tion of the Holy Ghost), and therefore
of Church membership, is distinctly
offered to men and women not by
themselves, but along with their
offspring.

ItI. The consequence of this state-
ment.—l. The sulvation of children
dying in infancy. This seems, in the
case at least of the children of believing
parents, involved in their relation to the
promise. The promise belongs to them
in virtue of their connection with be-
lieving parents, and is given to them
the moment they accept it by an act of
personal repentance and faith. Hence,
in the case of such as die before this


1)


CHAP. IT.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





repéntance and faith can be exercised,
it seems reasonable to conclude that
they are saved. Nor is it an unnatural
supposition with regard to infants gener-
ally who die before attaining to years of
responsibility that they also, for Christ’s
sake, share in the blessing of the promise.
2. The reasonableness of infant bap-
tism.
of salvation, why should they not
receive its sign and seal? If it be
answered that faith must precede bap-
tism, the answer is that faith must also
precede salvation. If, then, a child
cannot be baptised without faith, the
conclusion is that neither can he be
saved without faith. In other words,
a child dying in infancy must be lost.
We prefer to believe Christ: “ Of such
is the kingdom of heaven.”


Vers. 37-40. Words for Anaious In-
quirers.

I. Their duty pointed out.—1. Re-
pent. 2. Believe. 3. Be baptised.


If to them belongs the promise |


II. Their salvation assured.—1. The
Holy Ghost is for them who perform
these duties. 2. Asa free gift. 3. In
undoubted certainty.

III. Their warrant set ferth.—
1. The promise of salvation is for them.
2. They are called to believe the promise
and accept the gift.


Ver. 41. The Miraculous Draught of
Souls.

I. The deep sea.—The
multitude.

II. The gospel net.—The sermon of
Peter.

III. The great catch.—Three thou-
sand converts in one day.


Vers. 38-41. Scala Salutis; or, the
Ladder of Salvation.
I. Repentance cherished.

IT. Faith expressed.
ITI. Sin forgiven.

IV. The Holy Ghost received.

V. Baptism submitted to.

VI. The Church entered.


listening


HOMILETIOAL ANALYSIS—Verses 42-47,


The Pentecostal Church ; or, the Daily Life of Primitive Believers.
I. The leaders of the Church—tThe apostles, who were employed in two ways:


1. Teaching. Instructing the


newly baptised converts in the elements of


Christian truth. Baptising and teaching the order prescribed by Christ


(Matt. xxviii. 19, 20).


This traverses the idea that baptism should not be admini-


stered to infants because these cannot understand the gospel before being baptised.


2. Working miracles.
The curing of the lame man (iii.
direction.


Doing signs and wonders ; most likely healing sick persons.
1-10) an example of their activity in this
Their ‘‘ works ” secured a hearing for their “ words.”
should always accompany “ good words.”


“ Good works ”


II. The members of the Church. Zhe New Converts. Devoted to four


things: (1) Waiting on the teaching of the apostles.


An example for young


Christians, who should desire the sincere milk of the world that they might grow


thereby (1 Peter ii. 2),


(2) Cultivating religious fellowship with one another.


Joining, doubtless, in common acts of worship and mutual deeds of kindness.
So should Christ’s disciples not forsake the assembling of themselves together


(feb. x. 25), or forget to be kindly affectioned one to another
speaking to one another in psalms and h
and endeavouring to preserve the unit
(3) Celebrating the Lo
evening of every day, at the close of a


(Eph. iv. 3).


(Eph. iv. 32),


ymns and spiritual songs (Eph. v. 19),
y of the Spirit in the bond of peace
rd's Supper.
common meal or lovefeast (Agape), it


At first observed on the


gradually came to be dissociated from the lovefeast, and to be celebrated at wider


intervals,
temple” and privately “at home.”


(4) Engaging in acts of devotion.


Praying both in public “in the


Perhaps using the prayers of the Jewish


sanctuary ; more likely employing the prayer which Christ had taught His
disciples (Matt. vi. 9); and outpouring besides, in speech of their own, their


72


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP .If.





hearts’ desires for themselves and for one another. 2. Zhe whole body of
believers. Of these, who also continued daily in the temple praising God
and celebrating the Lord’s Supper in their homes, three things additional
are recorded: (1) They maintained visible unity among themselves. Not only
being of ‘one accord,” but meeting “in one place.” Not necessarily in one
building all at once, since a commodious enough chamber might be difficult to
find in Jerusalem, but in separate groups in different rooms, the essential thing
about their meetings being that they were characterised by a spirit of concord
and unity. (2) They supported themselves by a common purse. Those who had
‘lands ” or “ estates ”—7.e., real property—and those who had “ goods ” or personal
property, sold what belonged to them and cast the proceeds into a common fund,
out of which each man received what was needful for his daily sustenance. ‘This,
the first effort after Christian socialism, was probably dictated by two things—
a desire to live as nearly as possible like Christ and His apostles (John xiii. 29),
and the necessity of finding a livelihood for those who, by becoming Christians,
had been thrown out of their customary employments, and so reduced to want.
How far this experiment of the Jerusalem Church was binding on the Churches
that afterwards arose, or how far it should be followed by Churches to-day, are
questions on which the “ Hints on iv. 34, 35” may be consulted. (3) They
grew in popularity with the outside public. Owing doubtless to the “signs and
wonders of the apostles,” by which the populace were impressed ; to the increasing
number of believers, which caused the new movement to be respected; to the
peaceful character of the Christians, who, not being turbulent fellows, gradually
disarmed the people’s fears and suspicions; and to the kindness they exhibited
towards each other, which naturally drew the people to regard them with
sympathy.

III. The Head of the Church.—The Lord—.e., Jesus Christ. Occupied in two
ways. 1. Impressing the people. (1) With fear towards Himself. Religious awe
(Luke i. 65) fell on every soul who witnessed what was going on. They said “ This
is the doing of the Lord!” (Psalm cxviii. 23). (2) With favour towards the
disciples. These came to be looked upon with approbation (Luke ii. 52), on
account doubtless of their serious characters and peaceful lives. 2. Increasing
the Church. Adding to it daily through the preaching of the apostles —not those
who should be, or those who were, but those who were being saved.

Learn.—1. The secret of spiritual growth—continuing in the apostles’ doctrine,
ete. (ver. 42). 2. The secret of Church stability—walking in love and bearing
one another’s burdens (ver. 44). 3. The secret of happiness—the cultivation of
piety at home and the exhibition of it abroad (ver. 46). 4. The secret of ecclesi-
astical prosperity—God adding to the Church those who are being saved.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 42. Christian Steadfastness.

I. In the Apostle’s doctrine. (Com-
pare xiv. 22; 1 Thess. v. 21; 2 Thess,
ii. 15; 2 Tim. iii. 14; Heb. x. 23.)

II. In mutual fellowship. Compare
Rom. xii. 10, xv. 2; Gal. v. 13; Eph.
iv. 2, v. 2.)

III. In the breaking of bread. Com-
pareexx. 1; 2 Oorsy:'7, 8;:x. 16,17,
xi. 17-34.)


IV. In prayers. (Compare Eph.


vi. 18; Phil. iv. 6; Col. iv. 2; 1 Thess.
v. 17.)


Vers. 44, 45. Primitive Christian
Socialism and Modern Unchristian
Communism compared and contrasted.

J. Points of resemblance.—1. The
sale (or surrender) of lands and goods.
2. The creation of a common sustenta-
tion fund. 3. The distribution to each
man according to his need, ,


73


CHAP. II.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


we EE eee


TI. Points of difference.—1. Chris-
tian socialism (as practised in Pente-
costal days) said—‘ What is mine is
thine”; modern communism, as fre-
quently advocated, says, ‘ What is
thine is mine.” 2. Christian socialism
said, “Take what I have”; modern
communism says, “Give what thou
hast.” 3. Christian
prompted by love to the poor ; modern
communism is too often actuated by
hatred to the rich. 4. Christian
socialism drew men together in love
and sympathy; modern communism
rather tends to separate men by anger
and hostility.

III. Points of suggestion.—]. That
if Christian socialism were more prac-
tised modern communism would be
less rampant. 2. That the existence
of modern communism shows some-
thing to be wrong in the social body.
3. That the equality of classes and
individuals should rather be brought
about by Christian socialism than by
modern communism.


Ver. 46. Model Christians.

I. In their duty towards God.—
Worshipping daily with one accord in
the temple.

II. In their love towards each other.
—Cultivating friendly relationships in
private life. Breaking bread at home.

III. In their happiness by them-
selves.— Hating their meat with glad-
ness and singleness of heart.


Ver. 47. A Prosperous Church.
I. Increasing in numbers,
II. Increasing in numbers daily.
III. Increasing through the addition
of saved souls.


IV. Increasing through additions
made by the Lord.


Vers. 37-47. The Believing People.

I. We are shown, first, the elements
of genuine conversion.—Two words
may express these—‘ repentance,”
“faith.” Conversion is turning round
and coming back to God. Sin is the
only thing which can keep men from
God. But for that, we should fly to


74


socialism was .


him, as a raindrop hastes to the ocean.
The beginning of salvation with this
multitude was in honest conviction of
guilt. Peter charged them with the
greatest crime—crucifying their Mes-
siah. They admitted the charge with-
out excuse or resentment. If such a
sinner ever gets to heaven, something
more than repentance and consecration
must bring him there. The sinner has
violated the eternal law of righteous-
ness, compared with which the law of
gravitation is weak and transient. He
may repent, he may yield to God; but
something harder to be managed than
a cold heart and a stubborn will is a
broken law. Deep conviction cannot
rest short of expiation. It demands
not only forgiveness, but cleansing.
This it finds by an absolute trust in
the sacrifice of Christ. Just as soon
as the people learned what to do they
joined the company of disciples; so we
are to notice—

II. The qualifications for Church-
membership.—Plainly, conversion at
the outset. The Church was to be
made up of regenerate souls. This was
a new thing. In the Jewish Church,
one came into membership by being
born of the flesh. To enter Christ’s
Church he must be born of the Spirit.
At the birth of the Christian Church,
the apostles, filled with the Holy Ghost,
set, as conditions of membership, true
conversion and public confession of a
sound faith.

III. The characteristic life of the
Church is also described here,—1.
Worship. 2. Fellowship. 3. Thus
strengthened within, it had a Zeal
which reached out to bless the world.
Born in a revival, it breathed a revival
spirit into all its work.—Monday Club
Sermons.


1. Observe the effect of Peter’s ser-
mon, which was instrumental in win-
ning the first converts. His hearers were
“pricked in their hearts.” 2. Next we
have the cry of the wounded conscience;
and there are no wounds which prompt
to so earnest a cry as those which an
awakened conscience suffers, “Men


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. Il.





and brethren, what shall we do?” 3,
We are taught the means of cure—re-
pentance and baptism into the name of
' Jesus. Of course faith in Jesus is here
clearly implied. 4. Next consider how
this large company of believers grew in
grace and acquired strength in their
spiritual life. The means employed were
four—every one essential to Christian
progress. (1) ‘Steadfast continuance
in the apostles’ doctrine.” Christianity
is a religion based on facts, all of which
embody vital and eternal truths. And
this is ever one of the indispensable
methods of nourishing the soul in piety
and holiness. We must study the
truth as it is in Jesus, and be built up
into Him in all things. Moreover,
there must be “ steadfast continuance”
in this work. Never will the time
come for even the most studious to
say, ‘I have learned it all.” If a Paul
could say, “I count not myself to have
apprehended,” there is no chance for a
reasonable boast with any of us that
we have attained all and are perfect
in knowledge. The more we know
truly, the better shall we become. (2)
The second means of edification is
“fellowship.” By this I understand
friendly intercourse of believers with
each other as brethren and sisters in
Jesus Christ. Their faith had united
them in a new and holier sympathy.
One divine Spirit pervaded their hearts.
Fellowship is one of the essential condi-
tions of a healthful, happy, and vigorous
existence. The Church that does not
take pains to cultivate it is untrue to
itself. Disintegration by reason of
class-distinctions or mutual jealousies
and rivalries or personal alienations is
weakness, is destruction. Let it be
avoided by all means. The “com-
munion of saints” should be no dead
article of our creed, but a living fact.
(3) “The breaking of bread” is the
third specific. This expression may be
taken in a broader sense to denote the
lovefeasts of the earlier time, or it may
be restricted to denote simply the
sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, with
which the lovefeast was always con-
cluded. Now, since lovefeasts are no


longer held, it will not be out of
place to take the words in their moie
restricted application. And how in-
portant the observance of the Lord’s
Supper is to the development of the
Christian life need not be largely in-
sisted upon. It brings us, we all know,
into special communion with our Lord
in the mystery of His great sacrifice in
our behalf. Sacramental seasons are
therefore the Church’s festal seasons.
They should be so celebrated, and mark
as they come the stages of its enlarge-
ment. (4) “In prayers.” Whether
there are intended here public or
private supplications, the essential thing
is “the offering up of the heart’s desires
for things agreeable to God’s will in the
name of Christ.” Such prayer is the
breath of the Christian life. No soul
that has been quickened to feel its own
ignorance and weakness and perverse-
ness, that has been awakened to discern
the beauty of holiness, and see what
it ought to become, that has learned
something of the glory of God’s king-
dom, and what a renovation it was
designed to effect on earth, can live
without prayer. If Christians would
grow in grace they must pray for

ace. 5. A Church thus alive and
edified will be likely to exhibit some
fruits of its new life. What fruit
the early Church bore the text
tells us. First, there was the largest
liberality. The time was one which
called for special sacrifices on the part
of believers resident at Jerusalem. A
large number of people had come from
a distance to attend the feast of Pente-
cost, and, expecting soon to return to
their homes, they had not provided for
along stay. And the need was heartily
supplied. In the first fervours of their
love and joy all selfishness seems to
have melted away. No one called
aught he had his own, but they had
all things common. Generosity is one
mark of a true Church. Let no person
deem himself a Christian who does not
exhibit something of it. Other fruits
were gladness, singleness of heart,
praise. Indeed, to such an extent did
these fruits abound that one would


75


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eee 6 0 00S


infer that the early days of the Church
were one continuous festal season. The
new life burst forth at once in full
beauty and fragrance as a spring-time,
and all hearts blossomed with joys and
gushed out in song. How could it be
otherwise? This is the natural effect
of that religion the object of whose


worship is a God of love, and whose


spirit breathes love into every believing
soul. Love is gladsome, love is musical.
6. Finally, we see the influence which
this exhibition of this Christian spirit
had upon the multitude. The new
converts “found favour with all the
people.” And this, too, was a legitimate
result. The gospel, truly acted out,
commends itself to every man’s con-
science, It creates a blessedness which
wins admiration. “The Lord added
to the Church daily.” This is the way
every Church must grow and spread.
It must aim to make itself attractive
by catching and reflecting the beauty


and the glory of its risen Lord. There
is no community on earth that has in
itself the possibility of exercising such
an all-conquering power over mankind
as the Church possesses.—D. W. Poor,
DD.


Vers. 1-47 (on the whole chapter.)
—The Day of Pentecost.

I. The descent of the Spirit (vers.
1-4). 1. The time. 2, The signs.
3. The tongues.

II. The effect (vers. 5-13). 1. As-
tonishment. 2. Perplexity. 3. Mockery.

III. The explanation (vers. 14-36),
1. The fulfilment of prophecy. 2. The
realisation of the same in Christ.

IV. The fruit (vers. 37-41). 1. Con-
version of multitudes. 2. Their re-
ception into the Church by baptism.

V. The Beginnings of Church life
(vers. 42-47).—1. Instruction. 2.
Fellowship. 3. The breaking of bread.
4. Prayers.—David Brown, D.D.


CHAPTER III.


THE CHURCH OF CHRIST ENTERING ON ITs Miss1on—TuE First
AposTouic MIRACLE.


§ 1. The Beautiful Gate of the Temple; or, the healing of a Lame Man


(vers. 1-10).


§ 2. Solomon’s Porch; or, Peter’s Second Sermon (vers. 11-26),
1. The Secret of the Miracle explained (vers. 11-16).
2. The People comforted and counselled (vers. 17-26).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1, Peter and John.—The old companionship which had exist
disciples before the crucifixion (John 90 9 Matt, xvii. 1), and as pislihert es? ue
resurrection (John xx. 2), is here continued. <A peculiar affinity of nature as well as of
grace appears to have bound these together. Went up.—Ratier, were (in the act of)
going up—up because the Temple stood on Mount Moriah. Together.—Lit.. into the same
place, as in i, 15, hence together or in company. The ninth hour.—Ze about 3 m t
which time the evening sacrifice was offered. For the hours of prayer see ii, 15, x $1 30. ts

Ver. 2. Was carried.— Was being carried along just when the apostles arrived. : Compare


Luke v. 18,19. They laid.—Or, i¢ was their cus
carrying him back between times (Alford). Th
—HKither, 1. The gate Shushan of the Talmud
into the court of the Gentiles (Bengel, Alfor
opened from the court of the Gentiles in


Olshausen, Schiirer, etc.; or 3. The Vicanor


76


tom to lay, taking at the hours of prayer and


e gate of the temple which is called Beautiful.
on the east side of the outer wall which led
d, Zockler); or 2. The Corinthian gate, which
to that of the women (Lightfoot, Delitzsch,
gate (Ewald, Holtzmann, Lechler, and Gerok),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. III,





between the women’s court and that of the men. Other gates have been selected, as, 4.
That from the 7yrophean bridge in the south-west to the beautiful southern cloister built
by Herod (Conder); and 5. The gate of the Cotton Merchants, in the west wall of the
Haram (Wilson). ‘he choice lies between the first and second, the third being too far
within the sacred enclosure, and the fourth and fifth too distant from Solomon’s porch. The
jerst lay in close proximity to this colonnade, and may have been styled dpata, Beautiful,
bevause, in cominemoration of Cyrus the Liberator, a picture of Shushan, the City of Lilies,
(whence its name), the royal residence of the Persian kings, was painted or carved upon its
panels, or because of the lily-shaped capitals with which it was crowned. Whether this
gate should be identified with the golden door in the east Haram wall is doubtful. Yet
ground exists for thinking the Golden Door has supplanted the gate Shushan of the ,
Mischna. The second derives countenance from this, that if it, the Corinthian gate, was the
door described by Josephus (Waz's, V. v. 3; VI. v. 3)—which is not certain—the epithet,
wpata, “beautiful,” must in its case have been exceedingly appropriate (see “ Homily”). To
ask alms.—‘ The approaches of the Temple, like those of modern mosques, were commonly
thronged with the blind, lame, and other mendicants, Compare John ix. 8 (Plumptre).

Ver. 4. Fastening his eyes.—Or, having gazed intently (compare i. 10, xiii. 9), so as to
read the man’s character and (perhaps) discern that he had faith to be healed.

Ver. 5. Gave heed unto them.—The apostles. Rather, fied his mind (voiv being implied)
upon them (compare Luke xiv. 7), expecting to receive something, 7, somewhat from them.

Ver. 6. In the name of Jesus Christ.—Ze., speaking and acting with His authority.
Christ always wrought miracles in His own name and with His own authority (Luke v. 24).
Rise up and are omitted in the best MSS., as an imitation of Luke v. 23, 24. Post-apostolic
writers report marvellous deeds as having been wrought in the name of Jesus (Origen,
e. Celsum, I.; Justin, Dial. e Tryp., 85; Lact., Inst., iv. 6).

Ver. 7. Feet and ankle bones.—These words, like ‘came from his motber’s womb” (ver. 2),
show traces of Luke’s professional knowledge. Proprie locutus est medicus, Lucas (Bengel).

Ver. 8, And he leaping up, stood.—A proof of the reality of the miracle, though, of course,
rationalistic interpreters see in this only a proof of the unhistorical character of the whole
narrative.

Ver. 9. All the people saw him.—Another evidence that the healing was no deception.

Ver. 10, Wonder.—édéyuBos, belongs more to the domain of the feelings. Amazement.—
éxoracis, more to that of the intellect.

Ver. 11. For the lame man which was healed the best codices read he. The porch (or
portico) that is called Solomon’s ran along the eastern wall of the temple on both sides of
the gate of Susa, and overlooked the Valley of Jehoshaphat. It had three rows of columns
fifty feet high, and two walks thirty feet wide. ‘The columns were each of one stone (white
marble), the walks were paved with stones of various colours, and the roofs adorned with
sculptures in wood, ‘The porch, which was a survival from the Solomonic temple, was
frequently resorted to, especially in winter, as a promenade or public walk (John x. 23;
Jos., Ant., XV. xi. 5).

Ver, 12. At this.—Sc. man rather than thing. Look earnestly.—Fasten your eyes, as in
ver. 4, For this man read him.

Ver, 13. Hath glorified.—Better, glorified not by this particular miracle (Meyer, Spence),
or by all the mighty works which attested His mission (Hackett), but by His exaltation
through death, as in John xii. £3, xvii. 10 (Alford). His son.—Should be His servant, this
being an Old Testament title of Messiah (Isa. xli. 8, xlii. 1-7, xlix. 3-6); and applied as
such to Christ by Matthew (xii. 18), and outside of canonical scripture by Clem., I. ad Cor.
lix. 83; Barnabas, vi. 1; Didache, ix. 2, Had determined,—Or decided that it was just (see
Luke xxiii. 16, 20-23 ; John xix, 4).

Ver. 15, Prince.—Author, in the fullest sense (see Heb. ii. 10, xii. 2). Whereof.—Or of
whom (compare ii. 32, xiii. 31).

Ver. 16. Through, or on the ground of, faith—Not the man’s or the people’s (Olshausen)
but the apostles’ (Alford, Spence, Holtzmann, Hackett) faith in His Christ’s name,

Ver. 18. All His holy prophets.—Best taken as a collective phrase for the prophets as a
whole. Most of the Books of the Old Testament foretell distinctly the sufferings and death
of the Messiah (Hackett),

Ver. 19. That your sins may be blotted out.—According to Isa. liii. 12, Christ’s death was
to be the meritorious cause of forgiveness. When the times of refreshing shall come, should
be in order that times or seasons of refreshing may come. These ‘seasons of refreshing” have
been interpreted as equivalent to “the times of the restitution of all things” of ver. 21.
Both seasons considered as identical have been explained differently : 1. as referring to the
Second Coming of Christ (according to this view spoken of in ver. 20), which will be
(subjectively considered) a season of refreshment, peace, and repose, after the toils and
tribulations of life, but objectively regarded a season of the restoration of all things
(Alford, Hackett, Spence, Gloag, Holtzmann); 2, as alluding to the inward refreshment of


17


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.











soul which follows after the blotting out of sins consequent on conversion, which refreshment
is also a fulfilment of all those gracious promises God had before spoken by the mouth
of His holy prophets since the world began (Stier, Zéckler). A third, and in our judgment,
a better interpretation distinguishes the “ seasons of refreshing ” and “‘ times of restitution,”
making the former the inward quickening which should follow on sincere repentance and
experience of forgiveness, and the latter the restoration of all things which should accom-
pany the Second Coming of the Saviour (Plumptre).

Ver. 21. Whom the heaven must receive.—Decidedly preferable to who must possess the
heaven (Bengel, Luther, Olshausen, Stier).

Ver. 22. For and unto the fathers should be omitted asa gloss. A prophet, etc.—Partly
cited from the LXX. (Deut. xviii. 18, 19), and partly new. Stephen (vii. 37) as well as Peter
ascribes this prophecy to Moses, and interprets it of Christ, Raise up.—Not “from the
dead,” but in the sense of causing to appear. Like unto me.—Or as He raised up Me.

Ver, 23. Shall be destroyed from among the people, should be, shall be utterly destroyed.
Peter here interprets the Deuteronomic purase, “I will require it of him,”’ which meant that
he would be excluded from the congregation.

Ver, 24, Samuel._Though nothing remains from him which can be construed into a
prediction of the latter times, he may nevertleless have uttered such; or his name may be
introduced simply because he was the “ father of the prophets.”

Ver. 25. Children of the prophets and of the covenant.—Not “sons” in the sense of
“ descendants,” which would be incongruous with the clause “of the covenant,” but sons in
the sense of participants of what the prophets and the covenant held out (compare Matt.
viii. 12; John iv. 22; Rom. ix. 4, etc.).

Ver. 26. Raised up, as in ver. 22. From your iniquities.—A conclusion similar to ii. 40.
‘“‘ Aculeus in fine orationis” (Bengel)—A sting in the tail of his address.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—10.


The Beautiful Gate of the Temple; or, the Healing of a Lame Man.

I. The scene of the miracle.—1. The temple. Herod’s, which, when Christ
entered on His public ministry, had been building for six-and-forty years
(John ii. 20). It stood upon the threshing floor of Araunah, on the summit of
Mount Moriah, the site formerly occupied by the temples of Solomon and
Zerubbabel, and presently covered by the “ noble sanctuary” of the Mahomme-
dans. In Herod’s time the area was surrounded by a wall which Josephus
(Ant., XV. xi. 3) thought “the most prodigious work that had ever been heard
of by man,” while the sacred edifice, in his estimation, “ wanted nothing that was
likely to surprise men’s minds or eyes.” Built of immense blocks of beautiful
white limestone, from the royal quarries under Bezetha, a hill in the north cf
Jerusalem, and gleaming with gold and marble, viewed from a distance it must
have been a gorgeous spectacle (compare Psalm xiviii. 2). 2. The beautiful gate
Hither (1) the gate Shushan, whose site is now occupied by the golden door in
the eastern wall of the great quadrangle on Mount Moriah, and which led from
the outer world into the court of the Gentiles ; or (2) the Corinthian gate, which
opened from the court of the Gentiles into the court of the women, The prefer-
ence should perhaps be given to the former in consequence of its proximity to the
roe Boca (See ‘ Critical Remarks.”

. the time of the miracle.—Probably a few weeks, or, it mi
after Pentecost. At the ninth hour, or See in the aie mioaa a ee
three things were taking place in connection with the temple. ie The Jerusalem
populace were Jlocking towards it. ‘The Jews were a religious people, fond of their
temple, and given to devotion, and this was the hour of evening sacrifice, the
favourite season for devotion in J erusalem, as then the business of the da was
over, and the time for the evening meal had now arrived. 2. Peter gad
were bending their steps towards it. The disciples of Christ had not yet broker
with the outward forms of Jewish worship (ii. 46), and Peter and John 16
possibly since their early days had been companions (Matt. iv. 18 21;
Luke v. 10), and who certainly since they had cast in their lot wath Christ
78


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. III,





(John i. 40, 41) had frequently acted in concert (Luke xxii. 8; John xviii. 16;
John xx. 6, xxi. 7), were, in accordance with wont, as pious Jews repairing to the
house of prayer. An example worthy of imitation by all, and much needed in
days when men are so engrossed with business that only with difficulty can they
find leisure for devotion. 3. A cripple was being borne along to be laid at tts gate.
Like the gates of heathen mosques, that of the temple was a frequent resort for
mendicants. This particular mendicant had probably been deposited at his usual
station when the two apostles arrived upon the scene. Worth observing how all
the above-mentioned three groups of persons, which were necessary for the
miracle, converged towards the temple at this moment—the multitude to witness
it, the apostles to work it, and the lame man to be the subject of it. Nothing
wonderful when it is remembered who the Prime Mover was.

III. The subject of the miracle.—The malady from which the patient suffered
was—l. Hatremely severe. Lame in both feet, he required to be carried. Difficult
to say which form of affliction is easiest to be borne—blindness, deafness,
or want of power to walk or stand. All fitted to excite pity for such as suffer
from them. 2. Of long standing. Forty years. Indeed his lameness was con-
genital. He had never known the luxury of leaping, walking, or even standing.
Compare the cripples at the pool of Bethesda (John v. 5), and at Lystra
(xiv. 8), and the man blind from birth (John ix. 1). 3. Greatly aggravated.
Poor, he had no means of supporting himself, except by soliciting alms. A man
who could not stand would not quickly learn a trade. Clearly a sad case,
deserving commiseration, anda fit subject for miraculous assistance. A case also
impressively symbolising the natural estate of man.

IV. The performance of the miracle.—1. A voice of invitation. ‘ Look on us.”
Intended to enlist the man’s attention, and spoken by Peter in John’s name as
well as his own. The man’s response indicated that he expected to receive some-
thing from them ; as yet his faith rose not to the height of anticipating a cure.
Even Christians little dream of the great things God is preparing for them
(1 Cor. ii. 9). 2. A note of exposition. “ Silver and gold have Inone.” Designed
to repress the carnal and material hopes of the beggar, to explain that Christi-
anity was not merely a philanthropic mission to relieve man’s bodily wants, and
to kindle anticipations of something higher. 3. A word of command. “In the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth walk.” On the face of it, an order impossible
to be obeyed; yet an order issued in the name of One who had all power in
heaven and on earth, and was both able and willing to give what He com-
manded. 4. An act of assistance. As if to proffer the divine aid, without
which the injunction could not be carried through, Peter took him by the right
hand and raised him up (compare Mark ix. 27). Suggesting two thoughts—
that God never enjoins orders He is not willing to extend help to perform, and
that in seeking to succour others more is demanded than simply to say “do
this”; there is needed also sympathy and assistance.

V. The proof of the miracle—1l. The behaviour of the man. In the con-
sciousness of new power he leaped up, stood, began to walk, entered with the
apostles into the temple, and gave thanks to God, all of which actions were
inconsistent with the idea that the man had not been healed but only deceived,
perhaps through a species of hypnotism energised for a season but not perma-
nently restored to health. So, when a soul has been cured, the spiritual health
it has received manifests itself in an analogous way. It leaps up out of its old
sinful condition ; it stands, realising its new-found power, it walks in the way of
God’s commandments; it exults or dances inwardly for joy; it praises God for
His grace and mercy. 2. The testimony of the people. They saw Him walking,
and heard him praising God. They knew he was not what he had once been, a
cripple and a beggar. They could not account by natural means for what had


79


CHAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





happened. So is it a strong argument that one has been spiritually healed
when those who knew one formerly can perceive and are obliged to confess the
change. 3. The admission of the Sanhedrim. When the case was brought before
the highest tribunal of the day it could not be gainsaid (see iv. 14). So is it
the crowning evidence of one’s conversion when his enemies are constrained to
acknowledge its reality.

Learn.—1. That Christ’s people should love to pray in Christ’s house. 2. That
intending worshippers may be lawfully detained from Church by works of
necessity and mercy. 3. That the cries of the poor should not fall unheeded on


the ears of Christ’s people.
point men to Jesus Christ.
reformed life.


HINTS AND


Ver. 1. Peter and John.

I. In early days partners in trade
(Matt. iv. 18, 21; Luke v. 10).

II. In the time of the Baptist
seekers after God (John i. 37, 42).

III. After their conversion col-
leagues in the apostleship (Matt. x. 2;
Acts i. 18).

IV. During the days of the Son of
man fellow intimates of Christ (Luke
viii. 51, ix. 28; Matt. xxvi. 37).

V. In the passion week companions
in action (Luke xxii. 8 ; John xviii. 16).

VI. After the resurrection, com-
rades in witness bearing (viii. 14).


The Hour of Prayer.

I. Divinely appointed.
II. Devoutly hallowed.

III. Sweetly refreshing.
IV. Always profitable.
V. Frequently forgotten.


Ver.
giving.

I. Alms-asking.—1. Should never
be practised unless absolutely neces-
sary. 2. Should always be practised
with respectful courtesy.

II. Alms-giving.—1. Should always
be performed with discretion and kind-
ness (Rom. xii. 8). 2. Should never be
performed with ostentation or vanity
(Matt. vi. 3, 4).


2. Alms-asking and Alms-


The Beautiful Gate of the Temple.—


That gate is entitled to be so called,
which—
I. Admits sincere worshippers.


80


4, That the best help Christ’s people can give is to
5. That the clearest evidence of conversion is a


SUGGESTIONS.


IJ. Echoes with the sound of the
gospel.

III. Witnesses deeds of love and
mercy.


Ver. 6. The Church's Poverty and the
Church’s Wealth.

I. Destitute of silver and gold.—
No great calamity since: 1. Material
wealth is not indispensable to her
progress. 2. Material wealth might
corrupt her sincerity. 3. Whatever
material wealth she needs can be ob-
tained from her exalted Head, to whom
the gold and silver belong.

IJ. Abounding in the treasures of
salvation Which are: 1, Laid up
in Christ her living Lord (John i. 16;
Col. i. 19, ii. 39). 2. For distribution
through her hands (Matt. v. 16;
Phil. ii. 16). 3. Without money and
without price (Matt. x. 8).


Peter’s Pence; or, the Wealth of the
Apostles.—A study for persons in the
Christian ministry.

I. Not material.—“ Silver and gold
have I none.” 1. Jt had not been their
practice to levy contributions from the
faithful. Although the faithful may
have ministered, and doubtless did
minister, to their support (Luke x, 7).
N.B.—It cannot be argued from this
practice of the Twelve or of Paul
(xx. 34; 2 Cor. xi. 7) that a paid
ministry is unscriptural (1 Cor. ix. 14).
2. They had not applied their talents to
the acquisition of money (Matt. vi. 19),
but had consecrated. their lives to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. Iit,





work of preaching the gospel, having
left all—Peter and John with Andrew
and James, their boats and nets (Matt.
iv. 18-22), Matthew his customs’ booth
(Matt. ix. 9), and the others their
respective occupations, to follow Christ
(Mark x. 28; Matt. xix. 27). The
work of the ministry is too important,
and, where faithfully executed, too
laborious to admit of the sacred
calling being combined with secular
avocations. 3. Whatever goods they
may have had they had doubtless
cast into the common fund (ii. 44).—
This fact alone would account for
Peter’s being without pence on his way
to the temple. Here, again, it cannot
be inferred that a Christian minister
should devote all his goods to feed the
poor (1 Cor. xiii. 3), though undoubt-
edly he ought to practise charity (Gal.
vi. 10).

II. But spiritual.—“ Such as I have.”
Peter and John, with their colleagues,
were possessed of unseen and imperish-
able treasure. 1. Of personal grace.—
The beauty of holiness by which their
characters were adorned (iv. 33 ; com-
pare Psalm xc. 17). Such wealth im-
measurably superior to materiai riches.
2. Of spiritual power. Which enabled
them (not at discretion, but when di-
rected by the Holy Spirit) to work
miracles, a power which has ceased in
the Church, though the power of work-
ing (instrumentally) spiritual miracles
(such as conversion) remains. 3. Of
posthumous influence. The apostles
still sit upon twelve thrones in the
Christian Church (Matt. xix. 28), their
writings and example constituting a
standard for the regulation of duty
and the determination of controversies.
Similar influence, though in a lesser
degree, is exerted by all true disciples.
4. Of heavenly glory. Of such treasure
in the heavens as awaits all who on
earth are rich in faith and abound in
good works (Matt. vi. 20).


Changed Times, ete—Cornelius A.
Lapide relates that on one occasion
Thomas Aquinas paid a visit to Inno-
cent II., arriving at a moment when


that Pontiff was engaged in counting a
large sum of money, ‘“ See, Thomas,”
said the Pope, “the Church can no
longer say, ‘Silver and gold have I
none,” to which Aquinas answered,
“True, Holy Father, but neither can
she now say, ‘ Arise and walk.’”


Apostolical Generosity.

I. A believing man is a man of large
possessions.—Silver and gold he may
have none; but not the less on that
account are his possessions great.
There is no end, no measure of his pos-
sessions, for they are summed up in the
fulness of Him that filleth all in all.
He is rich beyond measure in all things
whereby he can benefit his fellows,

II. A believing man is a man of
large liberalities—He cannot keep
anything he has got to himself. His
joy is in pouring out, not in hoarding
up. But, indeed, the heavenly gifts
which constitute his possessions cannot
be hoarded. They must be used, or
they will vanish away.

Ill. A believing man is a man of
large sympathies.—He pities the world
in the midst of whose miseries and sins
he lives, and would fain contribute to |
its relief.

IV. A believing man is a man of
large powers.—He has power from
God, and power with God. He is
strong in weakness, and resistless in
dependence.

V. A believing man has large op-
portunities.— He both has and he makes
opportunities every hour.

VI. A believing man has large
returns for his gifts.—‘‘Give and it
shall be given ; good measure, pressed
down, and running over.” Some of this
now, most hereafter.—H. Bonar, D.D.


Vers. 1-6. Zhe First Apostolic
Miracle. — Typical of the Church’s
future work.

I. It was a beggar that was healed,
and the beggar typified humanity at
large.

II. The beggar received blessing
when the Church roused itself to the
discharge of its great mission.


81


CHAP. III,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





III. The beggar’s conversion was
effected through his healing. Spiritual
work went hand in hand with healing
power.—G. 7’. Stokes, D.D.


A Miracle of Healing.—Look at this
miracle in the light of what has already
taken place. There is great enthu-
siasm in the Church. The divine life
is, so to speak, at its highest point.
The Church, though on earth, has been
brought very nearly to the gate of
heaven. We are now invited to go
beyond the Church line, and at our
very first step we find a man who
appeals to our sympathy in his pain
and helplessness. See how world lies
within world, and how misleading are
all the inferences drawn from a limited
set of facts: 1. The man who has
access to every means of mental and
spiritual cultwre may think all the
world as highly privileged as himself.
2. The healthy and prosperous family
may forget that other households
are afflicted and depressed. Look
beyond your own sphere. You have
not far to look; there is but a step
between thee and the world which
is either higher or lower than thine
own.

I. The social side——1. We may be
able to carry the cripple when we are
unable to heal him. Do what you can.
Human helplessness is a continual
appeal to human power. There are
secondary services in life. We cannot
always do the great deed. 2. The
commonest minds, as well as the
highest, have always associated the
idea of charity with the idea of religion.
This is right. This is a high compli-
ment to any form of religion. The
theology that has no philanthropy
is its own vain god. 3. Look
at the compensations of the poorest life.
The man was carried daily by friendly
hands. The man had the temple as his
daily hope. The sun shines even on
the poorest lot.

II. The apostolic side. —1. The
apostles never attempted to do without
public worship. Such worship has dis-
tinct advantages—(1) Provocation of


82


thought ; (2) Development of sympathy.
2. The apostles never neglected human
want in their anxiety to render divine
worship. Some people are one-sidedly
religious. 3. The apostles never at-
tended even to physical necessities in
their own name. ‘The incident as
thus regarded suggests two questions:
(1) Are we too pious to be philan-
thropic? (2) Has the name of Jesus
lost its power !—J. Parker, D.D.


Vers. 1-7. Christian Work.

I. The need for it. To heal the
bodies and save the souls of men.

II. The power for it. That which
comes from Jesus Christ, through His
Spirit.

III. The method for it. Faith in
Christ, sympathy for the sufferers, and
personal service. .

IV. The encouragement for it. The
certain hope of success,


Vers. 6-8. A State of Sin, a State of
Impotence.

I. The case of this sufferer as illus-
trating the state of fallen man.—1. His
infirmity was natural. Congenital.
Birth-sin. 2. It caused total inability
to walk. Moral inability is as total as
natural inability. 3. It was Jong con-
tinued. Forty years and more. 4. It
was accompanied with poverty. The
sinner a beggar.

II. The nature of his cure as illus-
trating the plan of salvation.—1. It
was miraculous. 2. It was unsolicited.
3. It was instantaneous. 4. It was
real and permanent.

IIT. The effects of the cure as illus-
trating the effects of faith in Christ.—
1. Joy. 2. Devotion. 3. Gratitude
to the instruments of the cure.—@.
Brooks.


Ver. 10. The Miracle at the Temple
Gate.

I. As a manifestation of power.—
duvdjus. 1. Not the power of nature.
The healing of the lame man could not
be explained by what is called the vis
medicatria nature. The long-stand-
ing character of the man’s trouble


om HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





was against this (iv. 22), 2. Wot the
power of man. Hither of superior will
(animal magnetism) or of moral good-
ness, or even of exalted faith. 3. But
the power of God, or of Jesus Christ,
the risen and glorified servant and Son
of God.

II. As a phenomenon of wonder.—
tépas. Three things removed this act
of healing outside the category of ordi-
nary occurrences. 1. The instantaneous-
ness of the cure, which was effected, not
by any slow and laborious process of
pharmacy, but suddenly, in a moment,
and ata word. 2. The completeness of
the cure, which was patent to all, and
could not be denied (iv. 16), nay,
which was permanent, and showed no
symptom of tending to a_ relapse.
3. The means of the cure, which was
faith in the name of Jesus Christ, ex-


CHAP, III.


ercised, if not by the man, at least by
the apostles—an instrumentality that
seemed altogether inadequate to the
effect produced.

III. As the exhibition of a sign.—
onpetov. 1. Of the reality of Christ's
resurrection and ascension, since it was
manifestly impossible that any such
work of power could be performed by
a dead Christ. 2. Of the certain de-
scent of the Holy Spirit, since it is
clear that something must have hap-
pened to make two men like Peter and
John, to all appearance, depositaries
of a supernatural influence. 3. Of the
wonders that might be expected from
faith in the name of Jesus, wonders


‘not alone of a physical kind, but of


a moral and spiritual sort, the healing
of the cripple being typical of the sal-
vation of a soul.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 11—16.


Solomon’s Porch; or, Peter's Second Sermon. 1. The Secret of the Miracle


explained.

I. The people's excitement calmed.—The effect produced upon the healed man
was scarcely greater than that wrought upon the multitude who saw him in the
Temple. Filled with wonder and amazement at what had taken place, the crowd
swarmed round the two apostles, to whom the cured cripple was eagerly clinging
in Solomon’s porch as if unwilling to permit them to depart. Taking speech in
hand, Peter, with his customary readiness, proceeded to address them with a view
to quieting their agitation. Their wonder and amazement he—1l. Admitted
as not unnatural. It would have been surprising if they had not marvelled on
secing a forty years’ old cripple restored to perfect health. When in Capernaum
a similar miracle had been wrought by Christ (Luke v. 18-26), “amazement
took hold on all ....and they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen
strange things to-day.” So wherever Christ’s religion operates it performs moral
miracles, at which men gaze sometimes with incredulity and even with hostility,
but always with astonishment (see xvii. 6). 2. Rebuked as wrongly directed.
The multitude imagined that Peter and John had healed the cripple by their
own power and in virtue of their own goodness. Hence their wonder and
admiration were turned rather upon the instruments than towards the agent.
The sole connection John and Peter had with the miracle was that a higher
power had used them as a means of effecting His gracious will. It does not
appear that the apostles ever had the power of working miracles at their own
discretion, but only at a signal given by the Holy Spirit. Significant as proof
of this is the circumstance that Paul, though he wrought miracles, could not
cure Epaphroditus when he was sick nigh unto death (Phil. ii. 27), or Trophimus,
whom he left at Miletus sick (2 Tim. iv. 20). So the moral miracles performed
by the Gospel in changing men’s hearts and lives are due to neither the ability
nor the piety of those who preach the Gospel but solely to Him of whom the
Gospel speaks. The right to say ‘I am He who healeth thee” belongs to God
alone (Exod. xv, 26; Psalm ciii, 3, exlvii. 3). 3. Instructed as ill informed, The


83


CHAP. ITI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





miracle had been done (1) instrumentally by the apostles, which they did not
deny : they had made the lame man to walk (ver. 12); and (2) mediately by the
man’s own faith, or at least by the aposiles’ faith—a point which is duly em-
phasised (ver. 16; compare xiv. 9); but nevertheless (3) causally, or efficiently
by the name of Jesus of Nazareth, or by the power which that name repre-
sented, and which accompanied the utterance of and belief in that name. So
the healings of a spiritual sort which are effected by the Gospel of Jesus Christ
are to be ascribed neither to the human agents by whom it is preached nor to
the words in which it is set forth, but to the spirit and power alone of the exalted
Christ (1 Cor. iii. 6, 7; 2 Cor. iv. 6; Eph. ii. 1; Phil. i, 6).

II. The people’s guilt rehearsed.—This is done indirectly and, as it were,
by way of parenthesis, while introducing to their notice the real author of the
miracle. The extent of their guilt lay in four things: 1. Treachery. By
acquiescing in the wickedness of Caiaphas and Judas they had been practically
guilty of delivering up Jesus into the hands of His enemies—they had, in fact,
endorsed the crimes of their leaders and rulers. The solidarity of nations which
renders the individual members thereof responsible, in a certain measure at least,
for the deeds of their representatives, is apt to be forgotten. 2. Denial.. When
He stood before Pilate, and was by that Roman Governor pronounced “ innocent,”
and offered to be released as a compliment to their nation, they had cried ‘‘ Away
with Him! Crucify Him!” (Matt. xxvii. 22; John xix. 4, 15.) In the most
deliberate manner possible they had disowned Him who was really God’s holy
and righteous One. 3. Rejection. Nor was that the worst that could be charged
against them, but when Pilate gave them an opportunity of choosing between
Jehovah’s Servant, the Prince of Life, and Barabbas, who for a certain sedition
had been cast into prison, they actually chose the murderer to be granted to
them (John xviii. 39, 40). To such a depth of moral depravity had they sunk in
their hostility to Jesus of Nazareth. 4. Crucifiaion. 'They paused not in their
hate till they had killed the Prince of Life, who not only had life in Himself but
on more occasions than one had given life to others (Matt. ix. 25; Luke vii. 15;
John xi. 44)—killed Him by adjudging Him to the shameful and painful death
of the cross (John xix. 17, 18). Here it should be noted that, heinous as these
sins were, as great may still be committed against Christ (Heb. vi. 6).

Learn.—1. The mistakes men make in judging of Christianity and its preachers.
2. The humility that ought to characterise every true servant of Christ. 3. The
covenant-keeping character of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. The
possibility of repeating the crimes of the Jews who crucified the Prince of Life.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. The God of our Fathers. Christ, in His incarnation, death,


I. Our fathers had a God.—They
were not atheists or agnostics. Descent
from a pious ancestry a great privilege,
entailing Jarge responsibilities.

II. The God of our Fathers cove-
nanted with them to bless their
children—The promise was made to
them and to their children (ii. 39).
And He is faithful who hath promised
(Heb. x. 23, xi. 11).

III. For this purpose the God of our
fathers raised up Jesus and sent Him
to bless us.—The whole mission of


84


resurrection, exaltation, and coming
again in the spirit, a carrying out of
the divine idea and purpose of salva-
tion to which in a manner God had
pledged Himself by His gracious pro-
mises to the fathers of Israel and the
father of the faithful.

IV. Have we, the children of those
fathers and the heirs of these promises,
risen to the height of our privileges ?
—Have we taken our fathers’ God as
our God? And the Saviour promised
to the fathers as our Redeemer ?


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. III.


a


The Glory of Christ.

I. Essential—1. That which He
had with the Father before the world
was (John xvii. 5). 2. That which
belonged to His own person when on
earth—the glory of an only begotten
from a Father full of grace and truth
(John i. 14).

II. Delegated.—1. When appointed
by His Father to be the High Priest
of humanity (Heb. v. 5). 2. When in
answer to prayer His Father showed
Him to be the conqueror of death
(John xi. 4). 3. When by His own
death upon the cross He triumphed over
the principalities of evil (John xii. 23,
xvii. 1). 4. When raised from the
dead by the glory of His father (ver. 15 ;
Rom. vi. 4). 5. When the Spirit re-
veals Him to the soul of man (John
xvi. 14).

III. Acquired.—l. The glory of
sitting on the mediatorial throne
(1 Cor. xv. 25). 2. The glory of being
worshipped by the Church universal
(Rev. v. 8-14). 3. The glory of being
the heir of all things (Heb. i. 2).
4. The glory of being the final judge of
mankind (John v. 27; Acts xvii. 31).


Vers. 11-16. A Model for the Christian
Preacher.—Found in Peter and _ his
sermon, which reveal—

I. The spirit which should animate
the preacher.—A spirit of self-abnega-
tion and humility, which turns away
the attention of his hearers from him-
self, as did John the Baptist (John i.
23, ill. 30).

II. The object at which the preacher
should aim..—To exalt Christ and bring
His glory and claims before the minds
of his hearers, as again did the Baptist
and Paul (1 Cor. ii. 2).

III. The manner in which the
preacher should address his hearers.
‘With much plainness of speech, and





even with personal directness, but yet


with tenderness and sympathy, as once
more did Paul (Phil. iii. 18; 2 Cor.
iii. 12).

IV. The theme on which the
preacher should descant.— Not on
himself, his own virtues and achieve-
ments, but on the name of Jesus, its
glorious excellence and its power to
heal and save, with the terms and con-
ditions on which alone it can operate,
as again did Paul (1 Cor. ii. 2).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17—26.


Solomon’s Porch ; Peter's Second Sermon. 2. The People comforted and counselled:

I. The people’s alarm soothed.—That such an appalling charge, pressed home
upon the consciences of the auditors, awakened in their bosoms guilty fears is
what one would naturally suppose. Possibly this is why Peter so dexterously
wove into his discourse words that were fitted to administer comfort to those
among them who might be troubled. 1. The disastrous results of their wicked-
ness had been undone. The God of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob, the God
of their fathers, had glorified His servant Jesus, whom they had delivered up
(ver. 13). Observe the tenderness with which he leads back their thoughts to
their glorious ancestry and up to their covenant God, as if he meant to suggest
to their troubled hearts that the merciful Jehovah had not yet cast them off.
Then note the kindness with which he places in the foreground the fact that
their appalling crimes had been, as it were, rendered harmless before he mentions
the crimes themselves. It was not without a purpose of love that, both before
and after the recital of these, Peter speaks of the resurrection of the Crucified
One. 2. Their wickedness had been the result of ignorance. If not total, yet
partial; which, though not an excuse, was still an extenuation of their fault
(ver. 21). Peter’s verdict as to the knowledge concerning Christ which was
possessed by the rulers and the people is confirmed by the opinion of Paul
(1 Cor. ii. 8). Both apostles seem to imply that neither the people nor their
rulers had an adequate idea of the divinity of the Saviour when they demanded
His crucifixion, Nor need this be wondered at, when it is remembered that


CHAP. III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





the crowning demonstration of Christ’s Godhead was only furnished by the
Resurrection, and that before this event occurred the conceptions of the apostles
themselves as to Christ’s true personality were but dim. 3. Their wickedness had
been the means of fulfilling the Divine predictions concerning Christ recorded in
Scripture. ‘The things which God foreshowed by the mouth of all the prophets,
that His Christ should suffer, He thus fulfilled” (ver. 18). Though this did not
relieve them from blame, it nevertheless tended to mitigate their grief, by
showing that Christ suffered in accordance with the Eternal purpose of God
Himself (ii. 23). The like comforts belong to sinners of to-day who, through
their connection with the first Adam, are more or less responsible for the death
of Jesus; and yet because of their ignorance and want of actual participation
in the crime of Christ’s death are not left in a condition of despair (1 Thess. v. 9).

II. The people’s duty set forth. In two particulars. 1. Zo repent and be
converted (or turn again). Always insisted on in Scripture as a condition of
forgiveness and salvation (Isa. lv. 7; Jer. iii. 12-14; Ezek. xiv. 6; Joel 1. 12;
Zech. xii. 10; Matt. iv. 17; Mark vi. 12; Luke xiii. 3, xxiv. 47), repentance
signifies a change of mind, heart, and conduct (see on ii. 38). For this four
reasons are assigned by the Apostle: (1) That their sins might be blotted out
and their guilt removed; since without heartfelt repentance, meaning sincere
godly sorrow on account of sin, acknowledgment of guilt and desire as well
as resolution after new obedience, pardon is impossible. (2) That times of
refreshing might come from the presence of the Lord, seasons of gracious
quickening for them, Israel, and through them for the world at large—eras
of spiritual awakening, epochs of revival, when men’s souls being refreshed
and stirred would manifest an interest in heavenly things, as parched
ground, when moistened with showers of rain, puts forth herbs and flowers.
Moreover, every such season of refreshing would prove a prelude of, and
preparation for, the grand culmination of the future, “the times of the
restitution of all things.” (3) That Jesus Christ (or the Christ) might be
sent unto them, that same Christ who had been appointed for (R.V.), and in
the days of His flesh preached unto (A,V.) them, but whom they had rejected
and the heavens had received, no more to be manifested till the close of time
(1 Tim. vi. 14,15). It is clear that Peter meant by this that in answer to every
such “season of refreshing” in which longings after heavenly gifts would be
awakened in renewed hearts, there would be a sending forth of the Christ, the
Risen and Ascended Lord, not visibly, but spiritually, in the plenitude of His
power and grace to bless men’s souls by deepening in them the feeling of
repentance and turning them away from their iniquities (ver. 26; compare
Heb. vi. 7). (4) That finaily the times of the restitution of all things might
come. This should be the goal of that stupendous restoration movement which
was heralded by John the Baptist (Matt. xvii. 11), and initiated by Jesus in the
days of His flesh. Of which so far as they were concerned their repentance
would be the first step (2 Cor. v. 17), and the revelation of the new heavens and
the new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness (2 Peter iii. 13) the last—the
summing up of all things in one under Christ (Eph, i. 10), the subjection of all
powers and things to His authority and rule (1 Cor. xv. 27, 28)—not necessarily
the salvation of all intelligent beings, but the subordination of the universe, each
part in its place, beneath His sway. 2. To hearken in all things to Christ.
And that for a variety of reasons. (1) That Christ was a prophet whom the
Lord God, their own covenant Jehovah, had raised up, and was therefore as
much entitled to their obedience as had been Moses himself or any of the
prophets from Samuel downwards. (2) That Christ was a prophet raised up
from among themselves, again as Moses and Samuel had been—one of their own
flesh and blood (Heb. ii. 14, 17), and therefore one who might be supposed to


-
¢ ¢
a


3 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. II.





have their best interests at heart—their emancipation from the guilt and power
of sm—and therefore as much entitled as Moses had been to receive their
confidence. (3) That Christ was a prophet like unto Moses, their renowned law-
giver, in respect of the authority He bore ; yea, better than he in respect of the
announcements He made (John i. 17), and on this account more entitled than
even he to their respectful attention. (4) That the soul which would not
hearken to Christ would be cut off from amongst the people, exactly as
the disobedient Israelite who refused to obey Moses was excluded from the
ecngregation. (5) That Christ had been fore-announced as their Messiah by
the whole race of prophets from Samuel downwards, so that in refusing to
hear Christ they were rejecting the voices of the prophets (compare vii. 51,
xili. 27, 40). (6) That Christ had a claim on their submission because of their
covenant relation to Jehovah, the God of Abraham their father, to whom He,
Christ, had been promised (ver. 25). If Christ was the seed of Abraham
(compare Gal. iii. 16), they could not reject Him without sin. (7) That Christ
had been offered to them first, so that their responsibility for accepting Him was
greater than it would otherwise have been, while their guilt would be more
heinous if they declined to receive Him (ver. 26).

Learn.—1. That it is dangerous to sin against the light. 2. That all true
preaching aims at convicting of sin. 3. That the prime blessing of the gospel
is the blotting out of sin. 4. That unforgiven sin blocks the way to higher gifts
of grace. 5. That disobedience to Christ is pre-eminently inexcusable. 6. That
Christ’s supreme desire is to turn men away from their iniquities. 7. That
Christ’s triumph, though long delayed, is absolutely sure.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


xvii. 1). 2. To save sinners (Isa. liii. 5 ;
John iii, 16).


Ver. 17. Sins of Ignorance.
J. A man may sin through ignor-


ance,
IJ. Ignorance is not a valid plea in I. Foreordained by the Father.
extenuation of sin. II. Foretold by prophets.


Inflicted by men.
Endured with patience.
Rewarded with glory.
Recorded in Scripture.


III. Sins of ignorance require an III.
atonement quite as much as sins of IV.
knowledge. Ae
. IV. Sins of ignorance require to be VI.


repented of as sincerely as sins of VII. Proclaimed by evangelists.
presumption. VIII. Believed on by sinful men.
IX. Studied by angels (1 Peter
Ver. 18. The Sufferings of Christ. Leal)


J. The character and dignity of the


Sufferer.—1. The Son of God (ver. 13).
2. The Holy and Righteous one (ver.
14). 3. The Prince of Life (ver. 15).

II. The form and severity of His
sufferings.—1. Astoform. Hesuffered
(1) in His reputation (ver. 14), (2) in
His soul (Matt. xxvi. 37, 38), and (3)
in His body (John xvii. 12). 2. As to
severity. They were aggravated by
the fact that they were all foretold and
so known to Him beforehand.

III. The reason and purpose of His
sufferings.—1. To glorify God (John


Ver. 19. The Blotting out of Sin.

I. What it implies.—1. The liability
of men to condemnation on account of
sin. 2. The exercise of grace on God’s
part towards the condemned. 3. The
complete release from condemnation of
all who experience such grace.

II. What it presupposes.—1l. On
God’s part that no obstacle exists to
the outflow of grace and exercise of for-
giveness; in other words, the removal
of antecedent obstacles by the work of
Christ. 2. On man’s part the frank


87


CHAP. IT.


acknowledgment of guilt conjoined with
repentance of sin.

III. What it secures.—1. Times of
refreshing, or the joy of forgiveness.
2. Times of restoration, or the ultimate
attainment of perfect holiness, felicity,
and glory.


Times of Refreshing.

I. What they mean.—Seasons of soul
quickening, when, the inward life re-
viving, the soul begins to manifest
desires after heavenly things.

II. Whence they come.—From the
Presence of the Lord. Such seasons
can never be got up, but must always
be fetched down.

III. What must precede.—1. Par~
don. Spiritual quickening can belong
only to those whose sins have been
forgiven; though all may enjoy this
heavenly gift who will comply with
the second condition. 2. Repentance.
Change of mind, heart, will, concerning
Jesus Christ and the things of salvation.

IV. What will follow.—Christ with
the fulness of His joy and salvation
will be sent into the soul that repents
and is forgiven.


Ver. 21. Times of Restoration.

I. When they shall arrive.—1l. At
the end of Time. 2. With the glorious
appearing of Jesus Christ. 3. On the
completion of the present world plan.

II. What they shall introduce.—1.
Not the re-erection of the monarchy of
Israel, and far less the bringing about
of universal salvation. But 2. The
delivering up of all things, now in the
Mediator’s hand, to God that He may
be all and in all (1 Cor. xv. 28).
Which will imply—3. The glorification
of the Church. And 4, The subjection
also of the wicked to the rule of God.

IIT. How they should be waited
for.—l. By the children of God, with
faith, patience, holy living, and eager
expectation. 2. By the unbelieving
world, with assurance of their certain
coming, with apprehension of the peril
they will bring with repentance and
turning to God and Jesus Christ.


88


’ eeived this.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


pa ee


Vers. 12-21. The Prince of Life.

I. Jesus presented.—Jesus did not
need to be brought forward. There
was no necessity of going up to heaven
to bring Christ down. He was there
—there in their midst, there in all the
perfection of the God-man, in all the
majesty of the Godhead, in all the
plenitude of His Messiahship, and in all
the kindness and helpfulness of the
Friend. He was there, but wnseen by
the multitude. Two obstacles stand in
the way of His being seen. First, the
disciples, Peter and John. They per-
The miracle was being
ascribed tothem. How promptly they
remove this obstacle! how promptly
and emphatically they step aside! “Ye
men of Israel, why marvel ye at this?
or why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though by our own power and holiness
we had made thisman to walk?” Thus
they stand aside that Jesus may be
seen. But blind men cannot see the
most conspicuous object. Those whose
eyes are thickly veiled are the same as
blind. This was the condition of these
Jews. Hence the second thing neces-
sary that Jesus might be seen was to
remove the veil, to snatch the thick
covering of moral and _ intellectual
ignorance and prejudice from their
eyes. This the disciples proceed to do
with characteristic promptness and
energy, ‘“‘ The God of Abraham, and of
Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our
fathers ”——thus they seize the veil at its
farthest extremes ; there the lift must
begin if the uncovering would be suc-
cessful and complete—“ You believe in
God, the God of our fathers; this mir-
acle was wrought by His power ; it was
performed in honour of His Servant,
His Messiah. That Messiah, that Ser-
vant, is Jesus. He is the Prince of
life. He is the Messiah of prophecy.
He was crucified in exact fulfilment of
the writings of all the holy prophets.
He is exalted, has passed into the
heavens, has there His dwelling-place
—there for a purpose, a purpose sub-
lime and eternal, to bring in the final, ©
complete, and glorious restoration of all
things. Behold, then, in the miracle


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, III.





that fills you all with amazement so
profound, behold, not the power of
men, but of God. Ascribe the glory of
this miracle not to us, but to Jesus,
your Messiah.” Thus Peter presented
Jesus to the multitude. This is preach-
ing Christ, and Him crucified.

II. Sinners condemned.—The Spirit
by which the disciples witnessed made
no mistakes ; a different spirit, I fear,
guides not a little of the witness-bear-
ing of the present. That Spirit did not
allow the disciples to make the miser-
able mistake of preaching Christ to
those who could get along very well
without him. And what a condemna-
tion! How the astonished thousands
must have shuddered as Peter passed
from one count to another of his fear-
ful indictment! Note these terrible
counts: First, he charges upon them
the infamy of betrayal: “Whom ye
delivered up.” But, second, betrayal,
infamous as it is, was not the extent—
nay, it was but the first act—of your
wickedness, for after ye had betrayed
Him, when natural justice demanded
His release, when Pilate, the Roman
governor, who was neither scrupulous
nor tender-hearted, was about to let
Him go, ye denied the Holy One and
the Just. Third, but betrayal, denial,
and rejection, damning as these charges
are when in the rejection ye must take
a murderer to your bosoms, are not the
weightiest counts of this indictment
nor the extent of your infamy and
wickedness, Ye are guilty of the
awful crime of killing the Prince of
life. There is no shifting the guilt and
responsibility of that death. Thus
with firm and steady hand does Peter
thrust the iron of a terrible accusation
into their guilty breasts.

III. Pardon proclaimed.—Peter was
severe in his indictment, but he was
wounding to heal. He thrust the keen
lance of conviction into their souls,
that he might open the way to pour
into their hearts the grace of pardon
and peace. Hence, the moment he saw
that the truth had done its work of
conviction, he hastened to apply the
balm of Gilead. 1. He softens the in-


dictment by referring their murderous
deed partly to their ignorance: “T
know that through ignorance ye did it.”
Ignorance is no excuse for wrongdoing,
especially such criminal ignorance as
theirs; still, there is a distinction
between a crime committed by one
fully informed and the same crime by
one largely ignorant of the real cha-
racter of the act. ,“ Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do,”
said Jesus. ‘“ But I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief,”
wrote Paul. 2. He urges upon them
the consideration that God had over-
ruled their murderous work to the ac-
complishment of His eternal purpose.
All the suffering which, through their
cruelty, Jesus had endured was, in the
wise ordering of God, endured on their
behalf. While this did not lessen their
guilt, it did hold out to them a good
hope of mercy and pardon. 3. He
calls them to repentance and a different
life: ‘Ye are guilty of the blackest
crime, but it is mitigated by your
ignorance of what ye were doing, and
it has been overruled to the fulfilment
of God’s purposes ; and the very suffer-
ings that ye caused Messiah prepared
the way, in the eternal purpose of God,
for the pardon of your sin in crucifying
Him. Now, if ye are truly sorry for
your sin, and will but turn from it
unto God with all your heart, God will
blot out your transgressions.” He
urges all this upon them by a glorious
consideration. This consideration was
the fact that the times spoken of by
all the holy prophets, the glorious
times of deliverance, rest, refreshment,
and joy which Messiah was to intro-
duce, had come. Let us now attend to
a few of the important lessons sug-
gested. 1. We are reminded that it is
strong faith, on the part of the disciples,
in the name of Jesus, that works won-
ders. No one engaged in any way in
the Master’s service can afford to be
unmindful of this fact. To be faithless
is to be helpless and useless, so far as
spiritual matters are concerned. You
can do nothing for your own or
another’s welfare without faith. The


89


CHAP. III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Nene ee eee ee eee ee


faith of the humblest disciple may yet
work wonders that will startle and
amaze the world. Let this be the first
inquiry in every work we undertake,
“In whose name?” 2. The wise and
true teacher always puts Jesus forward
and hides self. How easy would it have
been for these disciples to have secured
for themselves the fame of that miracle !
Ts there not a profound lesson here for
us all? Are we always careful to
bring Jesus forward when our works
of kindness and acts of faith turn the
eyes of unbelievers towardus? 3. The
true gi spel-teacher tells men the truth,
however severe or distasteful it may be.
What a contrast between Peter’s
method and that of not a few so-called
teachers in our day !—men standing
before the godless and guilty with
cringing, shuffling, apologetic words and
manuer, aiming to excuse Moses and
David and Isaiah, and all the inspired
teachers, and prophets, and apostles, for
their haid sayings against sin and
sinners, “ Oh, you know the race was
not enlightened in the time of David” ;
or ‘“ Paul, being a Jew, could not, of
course, get entirely rid of his Jewish
ideas and _ prejudices.” Miserable
gospel-tinkers! 4, The true gospel-
teacher calls to repentance and faith,
and offers pardon to the worst of
sinners. 5. We learn to encourage, in
every legitimate way, those to whom
we prcach the gospel.—7. J. McCrory.


Ver. 22. A Prophet like unto Moses.

I. Moses a prophetic type of Christ.
—1. In being of the same race with
those he delivered. 2. In delivering
his brethren from a state of captivity.
3. In acting as mediator between his
brethren and Jehovah. 4. In promul-
gating a system of divine laws to his
brethren. 5. In leading them through
the wilderness towards the borders of
Canaan.

JI. Christ though an antitype of,
yet greater than Moses.—1. In being
one with his brethren, yet of superior
n ture tothem. 2. In delivering His
brethren from a sadder than temporal
bondage, and at a greater cost to bim-


90


self than Moses incurred. 3. In being
the mediator of a better covenant
than that formed at Sinai. 4. In re-
vealing to men not the laws only, but
the grace and truth of Jehovah. 5.
In conducting all who obey Him, not
to the borders merely, but to the in-
terior also of the Promised Land.

Moses and Christ. Related to each
other as—

I. Prophecy and fulfilment.
II. Law and gospel.

III. Servant and Son.—Leonhurd

and Spiegel.


The World’s True Prophet. —'The
world needs a prophet—1l. Perfect, well-
instructed, filled with true wisdom.
2. Authoritative, one who speaks, not
from conjecture or in virtue of superior
talent or position, but from authority,
“as one having authority.” 3. Divine,
a teacher sent direct from God.
So must be the world’s true teacher.
God has given us such an one; not for
Israel only, but for the world. He
has sent His Son as the world’s
Prophet. He is all that is described
in the passage before us.

I. He is of our brethren.

II. He is raised up to God.—Not
self-called, nor man-called.

III. He is like unto Moses. 1. Be-
cause God speaks with Him face to face
(Numb. xii. 8; Deut. xxxiv. 10). 2. Be
cause Heis Mediator and Intercessor. 3.
Heislikeunto Moses, because He is Israel's
King. Moses was the only prophet
who was also king,—‘ he was king in
Jeshurun,” he was Israel’s captain.
4. He is like unto Moses because He is
a worker of miracles. 5. He is like
Moses because He is Israel’s great
Teacher. 6. He is like Moses because
of His meekness. 7. He is like Moses
because rejected of men. As Moses was
rejected of his brethren (vii. 35), so
was Jesus despised and rejected of
men.—H. Bonar, D.D.


Ver. 24. Christ in the Prophets.
I. His incarnation (Gen. iii. 15;
Isa. ix. 6),


* HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. Itt.





II. His humanity (Gen. iii. 15;
Psalm lxxxix. 19; Isa. xi. 1, xxxii. 2).

lII. His divinity (Psalm ii. 6,
ex 1):

IV. His sufferings (Gen. iii. 15;
Psalm xx. 6-21, lxix. 7-9, 20-26; Isa,
1. 6, li. 14, liti. 2-10; Zech. xiii. 7).

V. His death (Isa. liii. 8; Dan. ix.
26; Zech. xiii. 1).

VI. His resurrection (Psalm ii. 7,
‘xvi. 9, 10).

VII. His ascension (Psalm xxiv. 7,
Ixviii. 18).


Ver. 25. The Abrahamic Covenant.

I. The parties.—God and Abraham.

II. The promise—‘“In Thee and
in Thy seed shall all the families of
the earth be blessed.” 1. A promise
of salvation. 2. To all the families of
the earth. 3. Through a descendant
of Abraham.

III. The performance.—Seen in
Christ. 1. A descendant of Abraham.
2. The Author of Salvation. 3. To as
many as obey Him.

Lessons.—1. That salvation is all of
grace. 2. That it should be offered
to all. 3. That the New Testament
Church is a continuation and develop-
ment of the Old.


Ver. 26. The Mission of Christ.

I. By whom He was sent.—God.
1. To whom He stood in the twofold
relation of son and servant; and 2.
By whom He was raised up first, by
His incarnation, and secondly, at His
Resurrection.

II. To whom He was sent.—1. To
the Jews, who were God’s ancient
people, to whom pertained the adoption
and the glory, etc. (Rom. ix. 4,5). 2.
To the Gentiles, who, no less than the
Jews, were included in the Abrahamic
covenant.

III. For what He was sent.—For
blessing. 1. Of a spiritual sort, the
turning away of sinful men from their
iniquities, which meant more than the
+urning away from them of (the con-
sequences of) their iniquitis. 2. To
every one—i.e., who was willing to be
blessed—this condition, though not ex-


pressed, being manifestly and necessarily
implied, since no one can be turned
from his iniquities without the con-
currence of his will.

Lessons.—1. The grace of God. 2.
The power of Christ. 3, The respon-
sibility of Man.


The Names of Christ.

I. Jesus, Joshua or Saviour, the
personal name of Our Lord.

II. Christ, Messiah, His prophetic
designation.

III. The son of God, indicating His
relation to the first person in the God-
head.

IV. The servant of Jehovah, an
official title expressive of His economi-
cal subordination to the Father.

V. The Holy and Righteous One,
descriptive of His character as a man,
and as servant of Jehovah.

VI. The Prince of Life, depicting
Him as either the possessor or giver of
life or as both.

VII. A prophet like unto Moses,
setting forth the character of His work
as mediatorial and legislative.


Vers. 12-26. Peter’s Threefold Testi-
mony concerning Christ. As—

I. The substance of all miracles
(vers. 12-17).

II. The Redeemer of all souls (vers.
18-21).

III. The accomplisher of all pro-
phecies (vers. 22-26).—Lisco.


The Speech of Peter may be regarded
in four aspects :—

I. As showing the false method of
looking at human affairs.—‘“ As
though by our own power or holiness
we had made this man to walk.”
1. The visible is not the final. 2.
Second causes do not explain life. There
is a false method of looking at the
results (1) of preaching ; (2) of business ;
(3) of thinking. The man who does
not look beyond second causes lives in
distraction—in chaos !

II. As showing the true method of
regarding the most extraordinary
events.—‘‘God hath glorified His Son


91


CHAP, III.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Pe tesa. Saat cniRaRaNEn. SEERA ERT


Jesus.” “Faith in His name hath
made this man strong.” That is the
sublime explanation of all recovery,
all progress, all abiding strength and
comfort. Forget God, and society in
every phase and movement becomes a
riddle without an answer; its happi-
ness is but a lucky chance, its misery
an unexpected cloud. Regard human
life as controlled and blessed by the
mediation of Jesus Christ, then:
1. There is discipline in every event,—
design, meaning, however untoward
and unmanageable the event. 2. A
purpose of restoration runs through all
human training.

III. As showing the only method
of setting man right with God—
“ Repent ye, therefore, and be con-
verted, that your sins may be blotted
out.” The men who worked Christian
miracles spoke plain words about men’s
souls. There is no ambiguity here !
Are the old rousing words “repent,”
“be converted,” being allowed to slip
out of Christian teaching, and are we
now trifling with the character and
destiny of men? 1. Every man must
repent, because every man has sinned.
2. Every man must be converted,
because every man is in a false moral
condition.

TV. As showing the sublime object
of Jesus Christ's Incarnation.—< To
bless you, in turning away every one
of you from his iniquities.” 1. Where
iniquity is, there is no blessing. 2.
Physical restoration is but the type of
spiritual completeness. Two practical
lessons arise out of the subject. (1) It
is not enough to wonder at the mighty
works of God. (2) God’s glory is ever
identified with the well-being of man.
“ Restitution,” “refreshing,” “ bless-
ing.” Peter’s appeal rested upon a
solid biblical basis—Moses, Samuel, all
the prophets. God’s message is the
summing up of all the voices of holy
history.—J. Parker, D.D.


Ver. 25. Prophets and Sons of the
Prophets.—Therefore whatsoever the
prophets did you may do. God is as
near to you as He ever was to them.


92


He may inspire you for the work of
the hour—to understand its problems
and to fight its battles—just as He
inspired them for the problems and
battles of their day. God did not
speak to men for the last time nineteen
hundred years ago. Poetry was not
buried in Tennyson’s grave, and, given
the “ eye to see,” we may have Raphaels
and Murillos yet, who shall find their
subjects in the romance of these com-
monplace days. Romance! Ay, life
still teems with romance. And so here.
We may be sons not only of the
scientists and poets, of the critics and
painters: we may be “sons of the
prophets”; we may receive messages
as direct as any message they ever
received, and do work as distinctly
divine as they ever did. That, then,
is my subject—the prophet, the prophet
of the present hour, of to-day.

I. England as well as Judea has
had its prophets; and it is of the
English prophet I want to speak.
The prophet has always been the same
man, whether in England or in Judea.
The form which his work has taken
may be different in England from what
it was in Judea, but it has been
essentially the same work. And, to
start with—1l. The prophet is, first of
all, the good man; the witness for
truth and righteousness; the witness,
not by his genius, not by the work he
is able to do, but by what he is. That
in the Old Testament is always the
sign that a man is a genuine prophet
—his soul burnt with a passion for
goodness, for purity, for religion. The
prophet would sometimes be a herds-
man, sometimes a statesman; but he
was always a noble man. You have
noticed that in the Old Testament
story there were “schools of the
prophets,” what we to-day would call
theological colleges; but it did not
follow that because a man had had a
theological education he was a prophet.
To-day there are “schools” of art, but
every one who has been trained in the
school is not an artist. The first thing
the artist has often to do is to emanci-
pate his own soul, and shake off every


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. Tit.





sign of the school. Ifa man have the
soul of music in him the school may do
him good ; but the school cannot make
him a musician. So there were
“schools of the prophets,” which turned
out a prophet now and then, but
turned out many who were not
prophets. They had gone through all
the drill, were perfect masters of the
technicalities of their calling; they
had a high sense, I have no doubt, of
what was due to their order, of the
respect that ought to be paid to them ;
but the fire that burns in the prophet’s
soul—the passion for truth, for good-
ness, for purity, the courage that would
fight any battle for God—that burnt
but feebly in them. They were no
prophets. The prophet before every-
thing was a good man, consumed with
a passion for righteousness. 2. Then,
secondly, the prophet was the man
moved by what he saw and felt to act;
to whom to do was the first necessity.
Not only a man who understood the
times, but who rose up to do the
things which the times demanded ; who
not only saw, but who dared not be
silent. Elijah the Tishbite was not
the only man in Israel who saw the
curse that Ahab was to the land.
There were “seven thousand,” so we
read, ‘‘ who had not bowed the knee to
Baal” ; but he was the only man who
dared to confront the man who had
really troubled Israel. Three things
in this respect make the prophet, and
the man is never a prophet unless the
three be in him. First, he has the
‘eye to see.” Nothing tortures you
more than a man who tries to console
you, but does not understand you ; who
imagines he is soothing you, when
every word he utters cuts your soul
until it bleeds|§ How many good
people you have known who have been
a terror to you! They wanted to help,
but they did not know where the
problems of life hurt you—good, tender-
hearted souls, brimming over with
concern and sympathy; but your soul
shuts itself up, and you could die
rather than talk of your difficulties to
them, Others read you at their first


glance; their first word proves that
they have plumbed your soul’s deepest
depths. Like the physician who has
the “ eye to see,” they lay their finger
upon your soul and say, “Thou ailest
here, and here.” ‘Then, secondly, the
prophet feels. What he sees moves
him, haunts him, draws a veil of sad-
ness over his face. Many who imagine
they are sitting at the feet of Jesus
are calmly indifferent to the sorrows
and woes of the world. What do hosts
who “sit down to the feast” in our
churches every Sunday care for the
heathen London over which you fret ?
The prophet is the moved man, the
man who has made the sorrows and
problems of his generation his own ;
the throes of his hour beat in him.
Every shock of the French Revolution
broke through Carlyle’s heart. Carlyle
was not a spectator, but he tasted the
bliss and the horrors of it. Carlyle in
this also was a prophet. Once again:
The prophet descries the remedy. He is
the ‘‘seer.” But even that is not all.
He is not prophet mereiy because he
is “seer.” The prophet embodies his
vision—works out what he sees.

3. The prophets are uf many orders.
I will mention a few. The great
preachers. That goes without saying.
England has had a noble line of them.
No truth is established until it comes
into the pulpit ; the man who sets the
hall-mark upon it and gives it currency
is always the preacher. The great poets;
and England has had a grand suc-
cession of them. We are only slowly
getting to understand the poet’s mis-
sion. The poet is not the mere reciter
of the deeds of the past, the mere
romancist or troubadour, though we do
not despise Aim. The world will never
grow weary of Homer. Shakespeare
has brightened hosts in every genera-
tion for three hundred years; broken
the clouds of their despair and moodi-
ness. Spring breaks wherever he
comes. Zhe great reformers—creators
of new eras. And these are always the
world’s great saints. Tyranny was
buried in the grave of Charles. And
the men that did it—Cromwell, Milton,


nae
vy


CHAP, III.





Pym—did they no hard things? Nay,
we cannot say that; stern times demand
stern deeds, stern weapons. But these
men were made out of the stuff of
which prophets aremade. And now—

It. You are in the succession of
these prophets.—‘ Ye are the sons of
the prophets.” 1. That is your in-
calculable advantage. There are truths
which the prophets have established
that will never need to be opened up
again. That is a great gain. The
law of gravitation has been settled for
ever. We shall not need to discuss
that again. So there are social,
political, and religious battles that will
never have to be fought again. We
shal] never need another Magna Charta.
So also of the great questions of
theology. The hideous doctrines which
tortured our fathers, once swept out of
the Church, will never re-invade it.
And now you stand upon the threshold
of life— sons of the prophets.” What
will you make of it? Svlomon, when
he came to build the temple, found all
but everything ready to his hand. It
was for Solomon to see that the
temple should be worthy of the pre-
paration that had been made for it.
So you, who are just stepping out into
life. The generations that have pre-
ceded you—I will venture to say, the
generation that has immediately preceded
you—has been hard at work; but we
sometimes feel that we have been
doing nothing but preparing material,
making ready for you. And now it
is for you to build. It is for you to
determine the design into which the
temple is to grow. Christian en-
thusiasm shall exprcss itself. Will
you remember this? “ Ye are the sons
of the prophets.” 2. It is more than
an advantage—it is an inspiration. I
know a man at tie present moment
whom I revere—a noble specimen of
an Hnglish man of business. I have
often found him busy studying the
story of his own family, tracing the
line back through father, grandfather,
great-grandfather—honourable men of


94


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


business every one of them. And
when I have come upon him so en-
gaged, he has said, “I often go over
the story of my forefathers’ lives; I
remind myself of what they were, for
I must live to be worthy of them.”
Young men and women, ministers’
children many of you, listen. I remind
you of the homes in which you were
nurtured. I would not be a rake, or
an idler, or a spendthrift; I would be
a man. I would not be frivolous, or
shallow-souled and empty-headed, if I
were you; I would be a godly woman.
“ Ye are the sons” and daughters “of
the prophets.” 3. Once again: That
you inherit these memories is a great
responsibility. Will you forget who
you are? You are Englishmen. The
blood of Shakespeare, Milton, Bacon,
isin you. You are Protestants. The
hand of Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer,
John Rogers, is upon you. You are
Puritans. Greenwood, Barrow, Penry,
were your forefathers. That is the
succession in which you stand. Shall
your lives be small, narrow, wicked,
mean? I leave you with one sentence :
“Ye are the sons of the prophets,”—
J. Morlais Jones.


Vers. 25, 26. Israel beloved of God.—
“To the Jew first”; “beginning at
Jerusalem.” This was God’s order, and
it is so still. The designations of
honour, and the intimations of privilege
as still possessed by the sons of
Abraham (as given in these two verses),
are worthy of notice.

I. They are the children of the
prophets.

II. They are the children of the
covenant.

III. They are they to whom God
first sends His risen Son.—l. God’s
love to Israel. He looks down on them,
yearis over them, pities them, says,
‘“‘ How shall I give thee up?” 2. God’s
purpose concerning Israel. God’s desir«
that we should feel towards Israel av
He does.—H. Bonar, D.D,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IV.





CHAPTER IV.


THe Cuurcn’s First ConFiict with JUDAISM—OPPosITION FROM THE
SANHEDRIM.


§ 1. The Apostles (Peter and John) in Gaol; or, the First Taste of Persecution
(vers. 1-4).

§ 2. The Apostles before the Sanhedrim ; or, the Sheep among Wolves (vers. 5-12).

§ 3. The Apostles removed from Court; or, the Conspirators in Conclave (vers.
13-22).

§ 4. The Apostles with their own Company; or, the Welcome of the First Con-


fessors (vers. 23-31).
§ 5. The Apostles and the First Christians; or, the Effect of the First Perse-
cution (ver. 32-37).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. As they spake.—Lit., they, the apostles, either Peter for John or John with Peter
speaking. The discourse was probably interrupted after the utterance of the preceding
words. The priests.—JZ.e., those who had been at the time officiating in the temple. The
captain of the temple.—The priestly commandant of the Levitical troops, whose business it
was to preserve order in the sacred edifice (Luke xxii. 4), The Sadducees.—The rival sect to
the Pharisees had taken a foremost part in persecuting Christ (Matt. xvi. 1, xxii. 23, 34),
and were now most probably the instigators of this movement against the apostles, as they
were of a later (v. 17).

Ver. 2. Through, or in, Jesus.—J.e,, in the fact of His resurrection, in His personal example.
The resurrection from the dead.—A tenet denied by the Sadducees (xxiii. 8).

Ver. 3. It was now eventide.—When no judicial examination could take place.

Ver. 4. Men.—Most likely including (Hackett, Spence), though, according to others
(Meyer, Stier, Plumptre), excluding women. About five thousand.—The number of the new
converts (Stier), or better, of disciples altogether in Jerusalem (Alford, Hackett, Holtzmann,
Plumptre).

Ver. 5. Their rulers.— Not of the new converts or of the apostles, but of the people; hence
the Sanhedrists. Elders,—Heads of families, Scribes,—Teachers of the law, and chief
priests composed the Sanhedrin.

Ver. 6. Annas the high priest and Caiaphas.—Hxactly as in the gospels (Luke iii. 2; John
xviii. 13), which accord to the former the first place in the high priesthood, “although his
proper term of office (6—15 A D.) had long since expired” (Zéckler), while the active duties
of the high priest were performed by Caiaphas, his son-in-law (18—36 A.D.). At or in
Jerusalem should form part of ver. 5, asin the R.V. “In” may imply that the court met not
in the temple, but in the city (Alford), but this is only a conjecture. Some MSS. read into
Jerusalem, as if several of the members had resided beyond the precincts of the city, and
on being summoned had hastened in overnight (Holtzmann).

Ver. 7. In the midst.—TZ.e¢., in full view, in the centre of the Sanhedrists, if, as tradition
reports, these were accustomed to sit in a circle. By what power, or in what name, etc.—
Compare Luke xx. 2, of which the question here addressed to the apostles is supposed to be
a legendary echo (Gfrorer, Zeller, and others); but why the same inquiry should not have
been twice put, on different occasions, and to different individuals, is not easy to understand.

Ver. 8. Filled with the Holy Ghost.—Specially bestowed upon him for the crisis which
had arisen (compare ver. 31, ii. 4, xiii. 9; Matt. x. 19, 20).

Ver. 9. By what means.—Or in whom. Is made whole.—Lit., has been saved, not merely
from the power of disease, but from tbat of sin, of which the physical malady was a fruit
and sign (compare ver. 12),

Ver. 10. Of Nazareth. Frequently applied to Jesus (ii. 22, vi. 14, x. 38, xxii. 8; Matt. xxi.
11; John i. 45), Here connected with Jesus Christ (compare iii. 6), and used to identify the
Jesus of whom Peter spoke with the Jesus whom the rulers had crucified (John xix. 19).
Whom ye crucified ; whom God raised. —Peter seldom omits to exhibit the antithesis between


95


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





man’s treatment of Jesus and God’s. The death and the resurrection of Christ formed the
two poles of Peter’s teaching. The one without the other would have been defective and
powerless for salvation.

Ver. 11. The stone which was set at nought, etc.—Quoted from Psalm cxviii. 22, and applied
to Christ as already it had been by Christ Himself (Matt. xxi. 42; Luke xx. 17; compare
1 Peter ii. 4, 7).

Ver. 12. Salvation.—Should be the salvation, the Messianic deliverance and blessing,
which men were needing and the apostles were preaching (ii. 21). Given among men.—
Better, which is or has been given—i.e., provided. Hence the use of must, because no other
has been given or provided.

Ver. 13. Perceived.—Lit., having perceived from what they saw and heard at the time,
or from previous inquiry. It would certainly have been strange if the Sanhedrists, and
in particular Annas and Caiaphas (see John xviii. 16), had not been acquainted with Peter
and John (Zeller, Holtzmann); but this is not necessarily implied in the language, which
rather suggests that they recognised the apostles as having been formerly among Christ’s
disciples. Unlearned.—J.e., illiterate, untaught in the learning of the Jewish schools (see
John vii. 15), and Ignorant.—J.c., private or obscure persons, plebeian as distinguished from
persons in the higher walks of life (1 Cor. xiv. 16).

Ver. 15. Out of the council. Which was open to others, so that Luke could easily have
ascertained from parties who had been present what was said and done during the absence
of the apostles. It has been thought not improbable that Saul of Tarsus was there
(Hackett).

Ver. 16. That indeed a notable miracle hath been wrought by them is manifest.—This
confession on the part of the Sanhedrin has been pronounced incredible, and inconsistent
with the instruction given in ver. 17 (Gfrérer, Zeller); but their conduct in this instance
is no more difficult to understand than their behaviour in the case of the man who was born
blind (John ix.), with which it is pretty much of a piece.

Ver. 17. Let us straitly threaten.—Lit., with a threat let us threaten them. For a similar
construction see Luke xxii. 15. The R.V. omits “ with a threat.”

Ver. 18. Nor teach in or upon (é7i) the name of Jesus.—So as to make it a theme of
discourse.

Ver. 19. Whether it be right, etc——See on v. 29; and compare Amos iii. 8; 1 John i. 1-3.
This remarkable utterance is not without Greek, Roman, and Rabbinical parallels,

Ver. 21. Glorified God for that which was done.—Compare Luke v. 26; Gal. i, 24.

Ver. 22. Forty years old.—A note characteristic of Luke (compare ix. 33, xiv. 8; Luke viii.
43).
Ver. 23. Their own company.—Not the apostles merely, but their friends in the faith

generally.

Ver. 24. 0 Lord !—Addressed not to Christ, as in i. 24, whe, however, is also called
décrorns (2 Peter ii. 1; Jude 4), but to God as the absolute Master of the universe which He
has made (xiv. 15; Neh. ix. 6; Isa. xlii. 5; Rev. iv. 11).

Ver. 25. By the mouth of Thy servant David should be by the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of
our father, David Thy servant—the mouth of David being regarded as the mouth of the
Holy Ghost. The text in this verse is confessedly difficult, and “doubtless contains a
primitive error” (Westcott and Hort). The citation is from the second Psalm (LXX,) ;
which is undoubtedly ascribed to David.
aes 26. For Christ read Anointed, which term, however, applied by pre-eminence to

rist.

Ver, 27, The best texts insert in this city, év rj méde Tavry, after of a truth (compare x. 34),
which certifies the fulfilment of the divine oracle in the proceedings which were taken
against Christ by both Herod and Pontius Pilate (Luke xxiii. 1-12).

Ver. 28. To do whatsoever, etc.—Compare ii. 23.

Ver. 29. Lord.—As in ver. 24. Here distinguished from Jesus.

Ver, 31. The place was shaken,—In answer to the prayer of the disciples, not by an earth-
quake (Kuinoel), which, according to the notions of the time, gave intimation of the presence
of the Deity (see Virgil, ned, iii. 89, 90: Da pater augurium, atque animis illabere nostris;
vie ca fatus eram, tremere omnia visa repente), but by a supernatural movement of the
chamber according to the promise of “signs on the earth” in ii. 19.

Ver. 32. The multitude of them that believed were not the new converts merely, but the
general body of the disciples.

Ver. 33, Grace.—Not favour with the people, as in ii. 47 (Grotius, Olshausen, Holtzmann),
but divine favour, as in xi. 23; John i. 14 (Meyer, Alford, Zéckler, Hackett), of which vers. 34
and 35 furnish proof.

Ver. 36. For Joses read Joseph. Barnabas, the son of consolation, or son of exhortation

-(Holtamann, Zoéckler)—i.e., of consolatory discourse. A title given to J oseph from the
sympathetic character of his preaching (xi, 23). Barnabas afterwards became Paul’s com-


96


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IV.





panion on his missionary travels (xiii. 2). A Levite —A descendant of Levi, but not a priest.


be the country of Cyprus.—Rather, a Cyprian by birth—i.e., a Jew who had been born in
yprus.


Ver. 37. Having land, or a farm belonging to him. Whether in Palestine (Holtzmann,
Zockler) or in Cyprus (Hackett) is not said, but most likely in the former. Though the
Levites had no share in the soil of Canaan, that destroyed not their right of private ownership
within the forty-eight cities assigned them, or in the territory adjacent to these (see Jer.
xxxil. 7). The money.—The price realised by the sale of his farm, At the apostles’ feet.
—As a voluntary contribution to the common fund, for distribution among the poorer
brethren. The case of Ananias (v. 1) shows that Barnabas was under no compulsion to
either sell his farm or donate his money.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—4.


The Apostles in Gaol; or, the First Taste of Persecution.

I. The time.—l. While exhorting the people. At the very moment when their
usefulness appeared to be at its height, when their words seemed to be effecting
an entrance into the hearts of their hearers, they were apprehended. Verily,
“God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to perform.” One would have
expected that the hand of Providence would have kept the adversaries’ movements
in check, at least till Peter’s sermon was closed; but no; Peter’s enemies were
allowed the freest scope to carry out their malignant designs. Divine wisdom
is perfectly able to outwit the cleverest of man’s machinations, and cause man’s
wrath to praise Him, and therefore never needs to be in a hurry either to hinder
man’s projects or thwart his purposes. 2. At eventide. When Peter’s sermon
must in any case have before long been brought to a termination, and when it
was too late for him and John to be put on trial before the Sanhedrim; so that,
on the one hand, Peter’s hearers had received the most of what he purposed
saying, and, on the other hand, Peter himself, with John, had leisure to reflect
upon the situation before being called into court to answer for their misdemeanour.
There is always some mitigation, even in the worst lot.

II. The agents.—1. The priests. Those engaged at the time in the Temple,
the division into twenty-four orders originally made by David (1 Chron. xxiv. 3 ;
2 Chron. viii. 14) having been revived after the exile. If the Feast of Pentecost
had not yet terminated, a larger number than usual of these religious officers may
have been present on this occasion. A pitiful mistake it is when ministers of
religion leave their proper work to become instigators of persecution. This
unfortunately they have often done. 2. The captain of the Temple. Not the
Roman officer who kept guard at the Tower of Antonia, near by, but the priestly
commandant of the Levitical troops, whose business it was to preserve order about
the sacred edifice (compare Jos., Wars, VI. v. 3). Though the captain little
thought of it, what looked to him like disorder was in accordance with the
highest order of the Temple. It is not safe to judge according to appearances.
3. The Sadducees. The rivals of the Pharisees, properly the rationalists of the
day (xxiii. 8). From the first bitter enemies of Jesus (Matt. xvi. 1, 6, 12,
xxii. 23), these were most likely the prime movers in this hostile action against
the two apostles. The men who killed Christ were not likely to be scrupulous in
consigning His disciples to gaol.

III. The motives.—Twofold. Indignation at the apostles for—l. Teaching
the people. Strange that the priests should have been sore troubled at the
apostles for doing what they themselves should have done—“ the priests’ lips
should keep knowledge ” (Mal. ii. 7)—but possibly the consciousness of neglected
duty had rendered them uneasy. That the Sadducees should have objected to
the education of the vulgar crowd, whom they despised as the “scum” of the
world’s population, was not surprising. The Temple commandant presumably


H 97


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





shared the prejudices of the official class to which he belonged. 2. Promulgating
the doctrine of a resurrection.—This was the head and front of the apostles’
offence in the eyes of the Sadducees. To preach that Jesus, whom they had
hunted to death, was risen, and that all who believed on Him should eventually
rise like Him and by virtue of His power, was to lay the axe atthe root of their
favourite dogma, that this life was the whole of man’s existence. Such preaching
was of course an outrage upon their superior wisdom,

IV. The consequence.—1. The apostles were imprisoned. Their liberty was
for the first time abridged. No such experience had befallen them prior to the
crucifixion. They had seen their Master’s forerunner (Luke iii. 20) consigned
to a dungeon, and Peter at least had professed his readiness to follow Christ to
prison and to death (Luke xxii. 33). Now, for the first time, they knew what
it signified to languish within prison walls. How they spent their first night in
gaol is not recorded. Perhaps, like Paul and Silas, they prayed and sang hymns
to God, “who giveth songs in the night” (Job xxxv. 10), and of whom it is
written, ‘‘He hath looked down from the height of His sanctuary .. . to hear
the groaning of the prisoner,” etc. (Psalm cii. 19, 20), 2. The people believed. The
most foolish thing in the world is to expect to hinder any cause, and least of all
a good one, by means of persecution. So many received the word that after-
noon that the number of believers (men and women) swelled to five thousand


souls.


Christian Church (Exod. i. 12).


The experience of Israel in Egypt was repeated in the history of the


Learn.—1. That what seems a hindrance often turns out a help to the gospel.
2. That that religion condemns itself which opposes the education of the people.
3. That that religion is worthless as well as false which has nothing to say about


a resurrection.
the heart.


HINTS AND


Ver. 2. Troubles of Unbelievers.—
Like the priests, the captain, and the
Sadducees, many moderns are sore
grieved—

I. At the exaltation of Jesus.—
They would be much more comfortable
were they sure that He was only a man
crucified and buried.

Il. At the preaching of a resurrec-
tion.—They can see well that if Christ
is risen they are wrong in their
opinions, and in danger of the judg-
ment.

III. At the progress of Christianity.
—Having so often and so confidently
affirmed that Christianity was a decay-
ing religion, if not already obsolete,
it annoys them to see their predictions
turned to foolishness.


Ver. 3. Troubles of Christ's Servants.
I. Severe, but not more so than
were those of Christ. Like the apostles,
Christ was arrested ; but, unlike them,


98


4, That rationalism never will satisfy the deepest instincts of
5. That Christ’s enemies are always clever at outwitting themselves,


SUGGESTIONS.


who were only committed to prison
and afterwards liberated, He was
hurried from the garden to the hall
of judgment, and thence to the place
of doom.

II. Undeserved, but not more so
than those of Christ. The apostles
were put in prison for doing good;
Christ was nailed to the cross for seek-
ing the salvation of a lost world. The
apostles suffered while innocent of any
crime; Christ was numbered with
transgressors, though without sin.

III. Expected, but not more so than
were those of Christ. The apostles
must have known that opposition and
persecution would await them the
moment they stepped forth to advocate
the cause of their Crucified and Risen
Lord (John xvi. 2); but Christ’s
sufferings and death were foreseen
by Him from the first (Matt. ix. 15,
xvi. 21).

IV. Futile, but not more so than


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


were those of Christ. They came too
late to impede the triumph of the
gospel; and Christ’s sufferings were
too late to hinder the successful accom-
plishment of His design—the salvation
of the world.


The Opposition of the JewishLeaders.
—I. Why it began whenitdid. Why
commenced it not on the Day of
Pentecost ? Perhaps—1. Because they
were then too much occupied with the
festivities of the time. 2. Because
the popular enthusiasm aroused by the
apostles was too great. 3. Because the
task of apprehending one hundred and
twenty people without previous pre-
paration would have been a somewhat
formidable task.

II. Why it was prompted as it was.
—By the healing of the lame man,
and not by the preaching at Pentecost.
Probably because—1l. They realised
that the miracle would be more in-
fluential among the populace than the
sermon. 2. They saw that the miracle
confirmed what report said had taken


CHAP. IV.


place at Pentecost. 3. They feared
that the miracle might authenticate
the story of Christ’s resurrection.

III. Why it took the form that it
did.— Why, instead of offering violence
to the apostles, they did not expose the
deception contained in the so-called
miracle, and refute the errors pro-
pounded in the teaching of the apostles ?
Answer—1. Because they knew well
that they could do neither the one thing
nor the other. 2. Because they under-
stood that force was more convincing
than argument. 3. Because the isola-
tion of the two apostles afforded them
an excellent opportunity for using the
strong hand.


Ver 4. Hearing and Believing.

I. Hearing must precede believing,
otherwise believing will be (1) un-
enlightened and (2) unavailing, if not
(3) impossible.

II. Believing ought to follow hear-
ing, else hearing (1) will not save, but
(2) will increase guilt, and (3) result in
hardening.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—VERSES 5—12..


The Apostles before the Sanhedrim ; or, the Sheep among Wolves.

I. The mustering of the court.—1. Zhe time. On the morrow, probably with
the dawning of the day, say between six and seven a.m. As in Christ’s case
(John xviii. 28), no time was lost in bringing the apostolic offenders to book.
Wickedness can seldom afford to proceed at leisure (Prov. vi. 18); it is the good
man who never requires to make haste (Isa. xxviii. 16). 2. The place. Jeru-
salem, in a chamber connected with the Temple. If any of the Sanhedrists lived
beyond the city limits—quite a probable supposition—they were duly summoned
for the work on hand. 3. Zhe members. Seventy one persons in all, chosen from
(1) the elders, or heads of families, among whom were included both priests and
laymen ; (2) the scribes, or teachers of the law, professional jurists who mostly
adhered to the party of the Pharisees, as the priestly members commonly be-
longed to the Sadducees ; and (3) the chief priests and their families. Of these
the first mentioned is Annas, or Hanan—“ gracious ”—the aged head of the high
priestly house before whom Christ had been set for examination (John xviii. 13),
whom Josephus pronounced ‘‘the most fortunate man of his time,” because for
upwards of half a century he and five of his sons had occupied the highest
ecclesiastical position in the country, but whom “the most unsuspected sources ”
compel us to recognise as “ nothing better than an absolute, tyrannous, worldly
Sadducee, unvenerable for all his seventy years, full of serpentine malice and
meanness which utterly belied his name” (Farrar, The Life of Christ, chap. lviii.,
p. 639). Associated with him was Caiaphas, of evil fame, his bold and un-
scrupulous son-in-law, who first suggested the expediency of Christ’s removal by
death (John xi. 49, 50), and eventually put the crown upon his criminality by


99


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
ot ee


pronouncing Christ guilty of blasphemy (Matt. xxvi. 65), and handing Him over
to Pilate for crucifixion (John xviii. 28). Other members of the court were John
and Alexander, about neither of whom is anything known, and “as many as
were of the high priest’s family,” from which perhaps it may be inferred that not
only Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea were absent, but also Gamaliel, Paul’s
celebrated teacher, who honourably figured at a later meeting (v. 34). In short,
it was a packed assembly, and one not calculated to reassure the apostles, or even
promise them an honest trial. :

II. The examination of the prisoners.—Placed in the centre of the circle
which according to tradition the Sanhedrists formed, the apostles were asked two
questions. 1. By what power they had wrought the miracle on the lame man ?
This amounted to @ practical admission that the miracle had been wrought
(compare ver. 16), a serious difficulty in the way of those who deny the possibility
of miracles. Had the Sanhedrists been able to show that no miracle had been
wrought, who can doubt that they would cheerfully have done so? The fact that
they did not so much as attempt this proves that in their judgment the miracle
was undeniable. Even so the higher miracles of the gospel can as little be
challenged, 2. In what name they had performed the wonder ? The Sanhedrists
were perfectly acquainted with the name, but “ wanted to convict Peter and John
of sorcery, by having worked a miracle not in the name of God, but in that of
a crucified malefactor” (Spence). One marvels how they did not perceive that
if a crucified malefactor’s name could work miracles, the so-called malefactor
must have been other than they deemed Him. It is noticeable that the Sanhe-
drists avoid saying anything about what grieved them most, the apostles’
teaching the doctrine of the Resurrection. Was this due to the mixed composition
of the tribunal, as afterwards in Paul’s case (xxiii. 7)? Possibly.

III. The reply of the apostles.—Given in John’s name as well as his own, and
delivered by Peter, under the guidance of the Spirit. This consisted of three
propositions. 1. That the miracle in question had been done in the name and by
the power of Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had crucified but God had raised. The
apostles themselves had been nothing but instruments in the hands of the exalted
Redeemer, whose existence and power were certified by the miracle they had
wrought and none could deny. The utter absence of self- glorification on the part
of Peter and John is remarkable, only surpassed by their splendid confidence in
and absolute surrender to Jesus. 2. That they, the Sanhedrists, who were supposed
to be temple-builders for Jehovah, in crucifying Christ, had really rejected Him whom
Jehovah had chosen to be the Head Stone of the Corner. Their mistake had been
the most appalling that persons in their position could commit. God by raising
up Christ had demonstrated Him to be the true Messiah, whom they should have
been the first to recognise and welcome, but whom nevertheless they had despised
and rejected (John i. 11). Man’s judgment and God’s do not always coincide in
spiritual things, so much the worse of course for man’s judgment. Even those
who from their privileges and training might be expected to be men of “ light
and leading ” sometimes turn out “blind leaders of the blind.” As in the former
proposition the humility of the apostles was conspicuous, so in this stands out
strikingly their boldness. 3. That in no other name than Christ's could salvation
be found. The salvation of which Peter spoke was not temporal and corporeal
healing merely—although Christ’s name could effect that also—but spiritual and
eternal healing for the soul, the Messianic deliverance and blessing ; and of this
as of that, the Risen Christ was the sole fountain and source. His was the only
name given under heaven among men whereby the soul could be saved. This was
sufficient proof of ‘the completely certain knowledge” which the apostles possessed
of the nothingness of all other pretended ways of salvation” (Harless, System of
Christian Ethics, p, 159, E, T.). N.B.—A statement like this pronounces no


100


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IV.





judgment on the question whether one who has never heard Christ’s name, like
the heathen, or having heard it has not understood it like infants and imbeciles,
can be saved ; it simply asserts that Christ’s is the one saving name, and that all
who are saved must be saved through Him. Equally arresting in this third


proposition is the Apostle’s insight.


Learn.—1. The impotence of man when he conspires against God. 2. The


fortitude of those the Holy Ghost inspires.


name for salvation.


3. The all-sufficiency of Christ’s


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. The Builders and the Stone.

I. The Church as a building or
house.—1. A spiritual house (1 Peter
ii. 5). 2. Divinely planned (Heb. iii. 1-6).
3. Erected by human instrumentality.
4, Variously used. As (1) a dwelling
house (Psalm Ixxvi. 2 ; Eph. ii. 22); (2)
a treasure house (Mal. iii. 17; (3) a
banqueting house (Song ii. 4).

II. Christ as the corner stone.—
1. Of God’s choosing (1 Peter ii. 4).
2. Of God’s approving (Matt. iii. 17).
3. Of God’s trying (Isa. xxviii. 16).
4. Of God’s laying (Isa. xxviii. 16;
1 Cor, iti. 11).

III. The rejection of the stone by
the builders.—This proceeded from:
1. Blindness as to the excellency of
Christ’s person. 2. Ignorance of the
mystery of redemption and salvation
through Him. 3. Mistaken views of
the nature of Messiah’s kingdom.

IV. The exaltation of the stone by
God.—Implying: 1. Christ’s victory
over all His enemies. 2. His institu-
tion as King and Head of His Church.
3. The resting on Him of the whole
fabric of the Church. 4. His distinc-
tion as the centre of unity for and
chief ornament of the Church.—Com-
piled from Ebenezer Erskine.


The Rejected Corner Stone.

I. The sin of the builders.—1. The
Builders. The ecclesiastical leaders of
the Jewish people. The place occupied
and the function performed by them
have now passed into the hands of the
pastors and teachers of the Christian
Church. 2. The building. The temple
of God’s kingdom on the earth, sym-
bolised in ancient times by the Hebrew
nation, in modern days by the Christian


Church. 3. The stone which the builders
rejected. Christ, who was despised by
the Jewish authorities because of His
obscure personality and lowly condition,
and who is sometimes slighted and
passed over still by Church teachers,
who corrupt the true doctrine of a
crucified Saviour, or attempt to build
on another foundation than that of His
person and work.

II. The glory of the rejected stone.
—l. It had been prepared by God. The
Hebrew builders had not perceived, and
Christian builders occasionally forget
this, The incarnation, death, resur-
rection, and exaltation of Jesus were
successive steps by which God fitted
Him to be a sure and tried foundation
for His Church. 2. The supposed de-
fects about the stone were its best quali-
fications, for the place it was intended to
fill. The Jewish leaders could not away
with a Messiah who was meek and lowly
in His character, as well as spiritual
and heavenly in His mission, who was
to suffer, die, and rise again; but
these were the very facts about Christ
that fitted Him to be the Saviour and
Head of His believing Church. Modern
teachers who feel offended at a crucified
and risen Redeemer should ponder this.
3. The stone which the builders rejected
has become the headstone of the corner.
Christ crucified, dead, risen, and exalted,
is the sole source and author of salva-
tion to a perishing world, and the sole
foundation and support of His Church.


Ver. 12. Salvation in Christ alone.

I. There is no salvation out of Christ.
—1. No other name but that of Christ
has been given among men for this
purpose. 2. If any are saved, whether


101


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








in gospel or heathen lands, it is through
the name of Christ.

II. There is salvation in Christ.—
1. Salvation in fullest measure. 2.
Salvation on the easiest terms. 3.
Salvation with the greatest certainty.


None other Name.

I. No higher name than that of
Christ, the glorified Son of God.

II. No abler name than that of
Him who can save to the uttermost.

III. No surer name than that of Him
who has been given for the purpose.

IV. No sweeter name than that of
Him who is not ashamed to call men
brethren.

V. No easier name than that which
asks only faith to be exercised in it.


No Salvation out of Christ.

I. No other system of salvation
maintains the glory of God’s character
as moral Governor.—Two principles
in the character of God that can never
be disjoined in their exercise are Justice
and Mercy. In their manifestation
these principles are naturally sympa-
thetic and invariably coincident. Just
at this po nt every other system breaks
down, whereas in the gospel scheme
both are harmonised.

II. No other system of salvation up-
holds the honour of God’s law as the
rule of moral government.—The law
of God, being the counterpart of God’s
nature, can never change. It must
therefore be upheld in its exercise of
justice, before mercy can be shown to
the sinner. The gospel scheme alone
magnifies the law and makes it honour-
able.

III. No other system of salvation
bears the stamp of God’s sanction as
a Divine Revelation—An axiomatic
truth that no system of salvation is
worthy of acceptation which does not
bear as its credential the imprimatur
of God. This the gospel scheme alone
has. ‘‘ Whatever may be the pre-
tentiousness and plausibility of other
systems, they have no force or validity,
for they cannot put into their preamble,
‘Thus saith the Lord,’ ”


102


IV. No other system of salvation
meets man’s exigencies as a sinner
under the Divine condemnation.—
“The salvation man needs” is one
which shall, 1. Cancel the guilt which
has necessitated his condemnation.
“ Whence then is this salvation to
come? Not certainly by the law.”
2. Make provision for the renewal of his
whole nature after the image of God.
“ And where is the earthly alembic
that can transmute its character from
pollution to purity?” Every other
system, save that of the gospel, seems
to contemplate a salvation im sin and
not a salvation from sin.”—R. T.
Jeffrey, M.D.


The Only Salvation.—That in Christ.
Because—

I. Glorifies the divine character.—
By securing the salvation of the sinner
“without any rent in the divine cha-
racter, or collision of the divine attri-
butes.

II. Magnifies the divine law.—
1. Vindicates it by the vicarious sacri-
fice of Christ. 2. Amplifies it by an —
actual addition to its attributes, by the
introduction of mercy as an element of
its jurisprudence.

III. Verifies the divine word.—
Gives truth, substance, and significance
to all the divine disclosures contained
in scripture.

IV. Qualifies for the divine glory.—
By imparting 1. A right and title, and
2. A meetness for heaven.—R. T. Jeffrey,
M.D.


Vers. 8-12. The Characteristics of a
Good Preacher—As exhibited by
Peter.

I. Undaunted courage——He ad-
dresses “the rulers of the people and
the elders of Israel” without trepida-
tion. Preachers should fear the face
of no man (Ezek. ii. 6).

II. Genuine candour.—He is willing
to be ‘‘ examined of the good deed done
to the impotent man.” Preachers
should never shun investigation into
either themselves, their doctrines, or
their deeds (1 Cor, x, 15).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IV.





III. Clear exposition.“ Be it
known unto you all,” etc. Preachers
should have nothing to hide, and ought
to leave nothing obscure (2 Cor. iv. 2).

IV. Profound humility. Peter gave
the glory of the miracle entirely to
Christ, reserving none for himself.
Preachers should always say, ‘“ Not
unto us, O Lord, but unto Thy name


had no doubt as to the place occupied
and the part played by Christ in the
scheme of salvation. Preachers should
not instruct others before they know
the truth themselves (John iii. 11;
2 Cor. iv. 13).

VI. Evangelical fervour.—The sum
of Peter’s preaching was Christ.
Preach: rs that have no room for Christ


be the glory !” (Psalm exv. 1).
V. Immovable conviction,—Peter


in their sermons should seek sone
other calling (1 Cor. ii. 2).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 13—22.


The Apostles removed from the Court ; or, the Conspirators in Conclave.

I. The perplexity of the Sanhedrists.—These holy inquisitors before whom
John aud Peter were arraigned were 1. Staggered ui the boldness of their prisoners.
These behaved not like criminals who had been apprehended in acts of wicked-
ness, taken, as it were, red-handed, but like persons who felt conscious not of
having done wrong, but of having performed a great good. Peter could have
replied to Annas or Caiaphas—

“Thou shalt not see me blush

Nor change my countenance for this arrest ;

A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.

The purest spring is not so free from mud

As I am clear from (wrong doing).”—Shakespeare.
Neither Peter nor John resembled their old selves who ran away when they
beheld their Master bound with cords, and hurried off to face that awful tribunal.
Things had changed since the Gethsemane transaction, both with their Master
and with themselves. He had risen from the tomb into which His enemies had
thought to shut Him down, and had ascended to His throne; they were being
assisted and upheld by His Almighty Spirit. 2. Confownded by their prisoners’
eloquence. Peter and John, though neither learned nor distinguished persons like
their judges, but ignorant and obscure fishermen, nevertheless spoke with such
fluent and cogent utterance as the most gifted of their Rabbis could not equal or
even imitate. The only possible explanation of the phenomenon which presented
itself to the Sanhedrists was one they did not like—viz., that their prisoners had
been companions of Jesus. It was a virtual admission that Christ had impressed
even those who rejected Him with a secret conviction of His superhuman dignity.
3. Unable to deny the miracle. The evidence of its reality stood before them.
The man who had been healed was in court. The whole town besides was
ringing with excitement at what had happened, and had pronounced it a miracle.
The theory of imposture would impose on no one. Just as little would the
hypothesis of illusion or delusion. The man himself might have been a
hypochondriac, and the apostles might be counted jugglers, but a whole town
could not be cheated into believing that a miracle had been wrought, if no such
thing hadoccurred. 4. At a-loss what to do with their prisoners. To punish them
for healing a lame man would look ridiculous; common sense would say they
should rather be rewarded with the:freedom of the city. Besides, in the present
temper of the people, it would be dangerous to proceed to violence, the people
being manifestly on the side of the apostles. Then to debar them from working
similar miracles upon other lame persons would be hard upon the invalids. To
drive them from the metropolis would only be to send them with their philan-
thropies to other towns, When men will not do the obviously right thing, it is


103


CHAP. IY. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








no wonder they become perplexed in choosing the best of the wrong things.
Wrong things are never best. ;

II. The resolution of the Sanhedrists—How Luke ascertained what was
talked in the council chamber, after Peter and John had been removed, may be
difficult to tell. If the court was opened to tke public (see “ Critical Remarks ”)
some of the apostles’ friends may have been present ; if it was closed against the
public some of the Sanhedrists themselves, on becoming converted, may have re-
vealed the secrets of the court. In any case, what the Sanhedrists resolved upon
was this—l. Zo prevent, if possible, the spread of the report about the miracle.
They felt that if the story was repeated it would be believed, which shows that
they regarded it as true. So will Christ’s gospel, wherever told, commend itself
to men’s consciences in the sight of God. Hence, the chief aim of its enemies is
to prevent its diffusion among the people. 2. To forbid the apostles any more to
speak or teach in the name of Jesus. Still avoiding the explosive topic of the
resurrection, they limit their prohibition to a general order not to speak in
Christ’s name. What they wanted was, if possible, to suppress the name alto-
gether. But as Christ could not be hid when on earth (Mark vii. 24), so now
that He is risen can He not be suppressed. “He must reign till all His
enemies have been placed beneath His feet ” (1 Cor. xv. 25).

III. The action of the Sanhedrists.— Having concluded their deliberations, and
recalled the apostles, they did three things. 1. Charged them. Not to speak at
all, nor to teach in the name of Jesus. But such an order neither John nor Peter
could obey. It invaded the domain of conscience, which was God’s peculiar
territory. It traversed the commandment of Jesus, which had already bound
them to preach the gospel to every creature (Matt. xxviii. 19; Mark xvi. 15). It
sought to silence the convictions of their souls that what they had seen and heard
was true. It collided with that three-fold necessity which urged them on.
Hence Peter told the Sanhedrists, that where the alternative lay between obeying
them and obeying God, the choice could only be the latter. So affirmed he
afterwards to the same judicial body for himself and his brethren. ‘ We ought
to obey God rather than man” (v. 29). So replied Socrates to his Atheman
judges: “ Athenians, I will obey God rather than you; and if you would let
me go and give me my life on condition that I should no more teach my fellow-
citizens, sooner than agree to your proposal I would prefer to die a thousand
times ” (Apology, 23, B.). “In this first conflict between conscience and force,”
says Pressensé, ‘‘ victory remains with the former. This day is liberty born into
the world never to be destroyed.” 2. Threatened them. With pains and penalties
endeavoured to deter them from following the path of duty. “Had the judges
of Peter and John gone no further than this prohibition and threatening, they
would have been entitled to be called persecutors (Pressensé). The essence
of persecution is the application of physical force to religion, in which the only
forces admissible are those of truth for the understanding and love for the heart.
3. Dismissed them. The Sanhedrists lacked the courage to inflict punishment
upon their prisoners. As yet they feared the people, who, siding with the
apostles, and glorifying God for what had been done, would not have tolerated
either imprisonment or scourging. Hence they felt compelled to let their
prisoners go.

Learn.—1. The transformations Christ through His grace can effect on human
character and life, exemplified in Peter and John. 2. The best sort of evidence
in support of Christ’s religion—such miracles as are wrought upon men’s char-
acters and lives through its influence. 3. The holy courage that should at all
times be displayed by Christ’s servants—to obey God and Christ rather than man.
4, The confidence with which Christ and His servants can appeal to the
consciences even of their enemies,


104


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, IV.


a oy


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. Companionship with Jesus.
I. A distinguished privilege.
II. A transforming power.
III. A perilous distinction.
IV. A high responsibility.


Vers. 1-14. The Courage of the Apostles.

I. The occasion of the courage.—It
was an imposing assembly, made up
of the intelligence and authority and
ecclesiastical power of the Jewish
nation. The court demanded by what
power or efficacy, and in the use of
what name, they had done this now
notable miracle. Peter stood in view
of them all, calm and confident, a
splendid illustration of the truth that
“the righteous are bold as a lion”
(Prov. xxviii. 1), and made his reply.

Ii. The secret of the courage.—
“ Filled with the Holy Ghost.” This
was the secret of Peter’s boldness.
This made the difference between Peter
before the Ascension and Peter after it.
It was not natural courage, “to the
manner born.” Peter was impulsive
and forward, quick and stout in asser-
tion, but by nature a coward. The
coward is become a hero. The bank
of sand is transformed into a rock
of firmness. Impulse has given way
to principle. Fear of man is exchanged
for fear of God. His being “filled with
the Holy Spirit” accounts for the
difference. That Spirit has given him
a sense of things invisible, has opened
to his faith’s sight invisible troops of
God, has lifted him to a level where he
can look with something of the calm-
ness and fearlessness of his Lord upon
those who can only “kill the body.”
He knows now, even better than he
knew before, his own weakness and his
own need, but he has been taught of
the Spirit the illimitable sufficiency of
God. ‘ Filled with the Spirit” means
assurance of sonship. “Filled with
the Spirit” is proof that “ God, is for
us and in us,” and that therefore they
that be for us are more than they that
be against us. It can easily be under-
stood how this would arm the timid


soul with a dauntless and deathless


courage. One, with God, is a majority
always. Weakness, with God, is
omnipotence.


III. Characteristics of the courage.
—But a courage of this sort, born cf
the presence of the Spirit of God, true
Christian courage, will be marked by
certain characteristics. Let us look
at them as they appear in the record
of Peter's speech before the court.
1. Courtesy marks the first words of
this brave soul. Peter gives the men
of the court their appropriate titles,
recognises their office and authority,
and addresses them with deference and
respect : “Ye rulers of the people and
elders of Israel.” Bravery does not
consist in brusqueness and bravado and
bluster. To speak the truth boldly one
need not be a boar or a bear. The
bully is not the ideal hero. The king-
dom and patience of Jesus go hand in
hand. There is a so-called maintaining
one’s self-respect which is simply a
manifesting one’s impudence. 2.
Prudence is another characteristic of
Christian courage, as shown by Peter
in this defence. His courteous recogni-
tion of the position and office of the
men composing the tribunal is
immediately followed by a reference
to the character of the deed for which
he was arraigned: “ If we this day be
examined of the good deed done to the
impotent man.” ‘The deed was “ good,”
and Peter reminds them of it. An
impotent man has been made whole.
Mark the prudent wisdom of this
answer. Peter first turns attention
from the method of the doing to the
thing done. The work itself could
challenge only gratitude and joy. Of
itself it could provoke no opposition.
He thus by a wise tact sought to pave
the way for a favourable hearing. He
made the most of his circumstances,
So will the highest courage always. It
does not disdain the use of every
justifiable means to conciliate opposi-
tion. While scorning compromise of
principle, it presses into service every


105


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





alleviating circumstance. It does not
court a tilt or invite a conflict.
3. Frankness is another characteristic,
as exhibited by Peter. The council
demanded by what authority or by
what name they had done this. They
got for instant answer, ‘“‘ By the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth.” Here
Peter might have stopped. But this
was not the truth that put Peter in
bonds. Peter could answer the court’s
questions without any allusion to the
crucifixion and resurrection. But it
was this that got him into trouble, and
he must not withhold it now to get out
of trouble. Christian courage is always
the very soul of frankness. It will
wear no masks—tell the whole truth,
as well as nothing but the truth. The
temptation to be compromisingly politic
at the point of real danger is most
plausibly insidious and subtle, and a
brave spirit gets here its sorcst test.
4. Fidelity is one more mark of Chris-
tian courage that shone out con-
spicuously in this court-scene at
Jerusalem. This pushed Peter beyond
the mere claims of frankness. He had
fully stated the facts. The Jews had
crucified Jesus, and God had raised
Him from the dead. These two facts
Peter had put in the plainest terms.
They were offensive to the tribunal.
They implicated his hearers both in
crime and folly. Yet out they came
with courageous frankness. This was
the top and crown of Christian courage.
It was transforming the prisoner’s bar
into a pulpit from which to preach a
gospel sermon to men, some of whom
probably had never heard it before,
and whose ear the preacher might never
have again.

IV. Effect of the courage.—It only
remains to speak briefly of the effect
of this righteous boldness. These
effects are common where Christian
courage gets anything like such public
exhibition in such hostile circumstances.
1. Men wonder first at the boldness.
They see nothing behind it, nothing to
support it—no arms, no government,
no material resource—and they are
astounded. They marvel where it gets


106


its spring and inspiration. The world
knows not its secret. It is born of the
invisible Spirit of God. 2. Then they
have nothing to speak against. Chris-
tian courage has a wonderful way of
disarming opposition.

Christians, there are some things
taught here that ought to be to our
spiritual profit. 1. The Spirit of God
can make the weakest saint bold.
2. We can afford to trust Christ.
3. Truth will sometimes smite to silence
when it does not smite to heal.—H.
Johnson, D.D.


Ver. 16. What shall we do with these
men ?—The world’s question concerning
Christians.

J. To this the world has usually
answered.—Let us 1. Suspect them as
hypocrites. 2, Disbelieve them as
liars. 3. Oppose them as _ enemies.
4, Punish them as evildoers; and,
generally, 5. Persecute them as sec-
taries, separatists, and heretics.

II. To this the world ought to
answer.—Let us 1. Listen to them as
bringers of good tidings. 2. Honour
them as self-denying philanthropists.
3. Credit them as sincere preachers.
4, Reward them as benefactors of their
race; and, generally, 5. Imitate them
as noble exemplars of virtue.


Ver. 19. Liberty of Conscience.

I. The principle stated. — To
hearkcn unto God rather than unto
man.

II. The principle exemplified. By
the behaviour of the Apostles.

III. The principle justified By an
appeal to the moral and _ religious
instincts of the Sanhedrists.

IV. The principle recognised.—In
part, at least, by the dismissal of the
apostles from the council chamber.
(See further on, v. 29.)


Ver. 20. The Preacher’s Motto.

I. The nature of the preacher’s
function—To speak, to address his
fellow-men by the living voice. This
function can never be superseded by
the press. There is thatin the contact


%,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP. IV.





of soul with soul, through the medium
of the living voice, which no printed
page can supply.

IJ. The extent of the preacher’s
commission.—To speak what he has
seen and heard. This what the
apostles were called to do when they
were made witnesses of Christ’s resur-
rection. In like manner the proper
business of the Christian preacher is
to lay before his fellow-men the truth
of sacred Scripture as that is revealed
to and appropriated by his own
understanding, heart, and conscience.

III. The constraint of the preacher's
action.—‘“‘ We cannot but speak”
showed that the apostles had not
taken up their calling as a matter of
self-directed choice, but in obedience
to the impulse of conscience, and not
from interested motives as a means of
procuring a livelihood or acquiring
fame, but from an irresistible sense
of duty, or, as Paul afterwards ex-
pressed it, ‘‘ because necessity had been
laid upon them” (1 Cor. ix. 16). So
should none assume the preacher’s
office except under a similar constraint.
To exercise the preacher’s office for a
piece of bread (1 Sam. ii. 36) is to
_ desecrate the office and be guilty of
sacrilege.


Ver. 21. God glorified by the People
for the Healing of the Lame Man.

I. For the exhibition of divine
power which they had witnessed.

II. For the rich grace which had
been shown to the cripple.

III. For the signal honour which
had been put upon the apostles in
making them the instruments of this
miracle.

IV. For the glorious hope of
heavenly succour which was brought
to themselves, the people, through
this wondrous deed.


Vers. 1-22. The Jewish Leaders and
the Apostles.

JI. On the side of the Jewish leaders
there was—l. JTiliberality. “ Being
grieved that they taught the people.”
The highest pre-christian culture!


Christ alone has shown Himself the
friend of universal man—slave or
king. Christianity is a wniversal
appeal. It is nota taper, it is the sun.
2. Shortsightedness. They put the
apostles in prison! Fools! They
could not put God in prison! Had
the apostles been original workers,
had the cause of their actions lain with-
in themselves, imprisonment might
have met the case. But God! ete.
Why were the apostles put in prison ?
For two reasons: (1) They did good
to the diseased ; (2) They instructed
the ignorant. Christianity is still the
great physical and mental regenerator
of the world. The only charge which
can be brought against Christianity is
that i continually seeks to do good.
3. Impotence. ‘ What shall we do to
these men? For that indeed a notable
miracle hath been done by them is
manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it.”
They “ threatened” the apostles. That
is, they shook their fists in the face of
the sun in order to darken the world !
They stamped a foot angrily on the
sea-shore in order to repel the advanc-
ing tide! They sent a message to the
wind stating that they would hence-
forth be independent of the living air !
We see how small men are when they
set themselves against Truth. They
know not what they do! Truth is to
them an unknown quantity; at any
moment it may smite them; it is
subtle, mysterious,intractable. Terrible
is the hand of the Lord upon all them
that oppose the truth.

II. On the side of the apostles there
was—l. Complete intelligence within the
sphere of their ministry. Though the
apostles “‘ were unlearned and ignorant
men,” yet within the compass of the
work which they were called to do
they were wise and efficient. This is
the secret of success. Know what you
do know. Do not venture beyond
the line of your vocation. Every
preacher is strong when he stands upon
fact and experience. Christians must
not accept the bait which would draw
them upon unknown or forbidden


107


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


058585080858 8585858080 nT


ground. 2. Inconquerable courage im
narrating and applying facts. (1)
Look at the dignity of the address;
(2) Look at the calm and emphatic
assertion of the name of Christ; (3)
Look at the direct and special «mpeach-
ment of the hearers ; ‘“‘ whom ye cruci-
fied” ; “set at nought of you builders.”
Dignity is proper in the preachers of
truth; Christ is the life of Christianity
—beware of lauding the system, and
forgetting the Man. Accusation is the
first work of every Christian cvangelist.
Prove the world’s crime! 3. Christian
magnanimity in preaching the Gospel.
“Neither is there salvation in any
other; for there is none other name


under heaven given among men, where-
by we must be saved.” Thus was
the Gospel preached to the murderers
of God’s Holy One. ‘“ Beginning at
Jerusalem.” In this brief sermon
Peter proceeds upon two assumptions :
(1) That men need saving; (2) That
there is but one true way of saving
them. These assumptions have been
proved to be true. < 4, Incorruptible
loyalty to God and to His truth.
“Whether it be right in the sight of
God,” ete. (ver. 19). ‘Things which
we have seen and heard!” What a
field! Missions at home and abroad,
— Schools, — Labours, — Sacrifices, —
Death-beds !—J. Parker, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23-31.


The Apostles with their own Company ; or, the Welcome of the First Confessors.

I. The report of the apostles—1. Zo whom it was delivered. To their own
company—i.e., to their own colleagues in the apostleship, or, more accurately, to
their friends in the faith, who doubtless had convened at their usual resort, the
upper room (i, 13), on learning of the arrest and imprisonment of their two
principal leaders. Christ’s people, as brethren, should cultivate between each
other a spirit of mutual confidence and sympathy (1 Peter iii. 8), bearing each
other’s burdens, and so fulfilling the law of Christ (Gal. vi. 2), and remembering
that when one member suffers all the other members suffer with it (1 Cor.
xii. 26). 2. Of whut it was composed. ‘“ Of all that the chief priests and elders
had said unto them.” Most likely of nothing they themselves had said in reply
to the chief priests and elders (Chrysostom). If so, the report must have been
as remarkable for its omissions as for its inclusions. For Christ’s servants there
is a time to be silent as well as a time to speak (Eccles. iii. 7) ; the former, when
the glory of self is concerned (Prov. xxvil. 2), the latter when the honour of
Christ or the safety of His cause is endangered (1 Cor. xvi. 13). If “all the
words of the chief priests and elders” were faithfully reported, it may be
confidently assumed that none were added to them ; ‘‘if nothing was extenu-
ated” it may equally be assumed that “ naught was set down in malice.”

II. The prayer of the congregation.—1l. By what it was prompted. By the
dark outlook which, according to Peter’s and John’s report, loomed before the
friends of Jesus—the highest ecclesiastical tribunal of the land having pro-
nounced against them. As yet the adherents of the New Cause were a feeble
folk, poor in wealth and obscure in station, and therefore ill fitted to contend
against the ‘‘ powers that be” either in Church or State; and though for the
present the hostility of the Sanhedrim was held in check by the popularity of
the New Cause, no one could predict how speedily the favour of the crowd might
change and the aspect of affairs be completely altered.





“ An habitation giddy and unsure
Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart.”—Shakespeare.


And well the Church in Jerusalem knew, cr might have known from the case of


its Master (compare Matt. xxi. 9 with xxvii. 22), that the present popularity of
the apostles might not long continue.


108


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IV.





“The noisy praise
Of giddy crowds is changeable as winds.”— Dryden.
Hence, in circumstances so depressing, the Church betook itself to prayer—
invoked the aid of Him who is without variableness or shadow of turning
(James i. 17). An example deserving imitation by all (Psalm 1. 15, xci. 15; Phil.
iv. 6). 2. Zo whom it was directed. To God, the only hearer of prayer (Psalm
Ixv. 2), addressing Him (1) As Lord, or Master—.e., as the possessor of absolute
authority and power (Deut. iii. 24; 1 Chron. xxix. 11,12; Psalm Ixii. 11), this
being the import of the term used by Peter—a term which he also applies to
Christ (i. 24; 1 Peter ii. 3; 2 Peter ii. 1), as Paul likewise does (2 Cor. iii. 17 ;
Phil. iv. 5). (2) As Maker of the universe in its three parts—heaven, earth,
and sea, with all that im them is; and therefore as mightier than the Sanhedrim
or all Christ’s foes combined. (3) As Inspirer of sacred Scripture, who by
the Holy Ghost, speaking through David, predicted beforehand the opposition
of earth’s kings and rulers to Christ’s cause and the utter folly of it, and
therefore as one in a manner obliged by fidelity to His own word to defend
them in the crisis which had arisen. (4) As Lord and Father of Jesus, His
holy Child and Servant, for both renderings may be adopted ; and consequently
as one who must necessarily be constrained by love and faithfulness to champion
Christ’s cause. N.B.—Petitioners at God’s throne should have a clear grasp of
the greatness, majesty, and power of Him whose favour they bespeak. 3. In
what manner it was presented. (1) With one heart. “One heart,” says Delitzsch
(Bib. Psych., p. 295, E. T.), “is the conscious perfect agreement of will, thought,
and feeling”; and such oneness of heart existed in the present instance. All
realised the danger, discerned the only quarter whence help could be procured,
and bestirred themselves to act in concert in a fervent approach to the
Heavenly Throne. Prayer, of course, is only then united when the hearts from
which it issues are united, and to such prayer special hope of success has been
given (Matt. xviii. 19, 20). (2) With a loud voice. Whether all recited the
prayer together cannot be concluded from the writer’s words. Verses 25
and 26, culled from the second Psalm, would doubtless be familiar to the
audience, and if the whole passage (vers. 24-30) was an early Christian liturgy
composed shortly after the crucifixion (which is only conjecture) the whole
congregation may have simultaneously and vocally joined in the supplication,
though it is more likely one led the devotions with his voice while the rest
followed with their hearts and voices also as they felt inclined. Baumgarten’s
view may approach the truth that all sang the second Psalm, while Peter, or
some other, applied the contents to their situation in the terms here recorded.
4. For what it entreated. (1) That God would look upon the threatenings of
Christ’s adversaries, and consider the situation of His praying servants. The
peril then impending they regarded as of a piece with, in fact as a continuation
of, the machinations which in that very city had been formed against Jesus by
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and along with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel
who had then come together out of every tribe, to do whatsoever God’s hand and
counsel had foreordained to come to pass. Here again in the prayer of the
congregation, as in Peter’s sermon (ii. 23), the sovereignty of God and the
freedom of man are recognised, without the feeling that these were incompatible
the one with the other. (2) That God would embolden His servants, the
apostles, and the disciples generally, to speak His word—of grace and mercy,
salvation and eternal life—without shrinking through fear of man. Not a
whisper escapes their lips about calling down vengeance upon the heads of their
persecutors. (Contrast Luke ix. 54, xxii. 49; John xviii. 10.) The spirit of
their dying Master having taken possession of their hearts, they only ask for
themselves courage and constancy, that they might stand fast and not grow


109


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





weary and faint in their minds (Heb. xii. 8). (3) That God would continue to
stretch forth His hand in works of healing such as had been performed upon the
lame man, doing signs and wonders through His holy Servant Jesus, This
alone, the special manifestation of Almightiness, they craved. It was a
prayer remarkable for its comprehensiveness and its brevity, its sublimity and
its humility, its intelligence and its faith.

III. The answer of God.—Given in three ways. 1. A shaken chamber.
Scarcely had their supplication subsided than the walls of the house trembled,
‘“‘as if they had been touched by the wings of the descending Spirit” (Spence).
This supernatural vibration of the edifice, like the sound of the mighty rushing
wind on Pentecost (ii. 2), betokened the Divine Presence. (See ‘“ Critical Re-
marks.”) 2. The descending Spirit. “They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.” As on Pentecost, they were again taken possession of by an inward
spiritual influence, which abode not with them always, but seized them at
intervals. This to be distinguished from the permanent inhabitation of
believers by the Holy Ghost. 3. Cowrageous preaching. ‘They spake the
word with boldness.” Not within the chamber merely, but outside, in the
temple courts and on the streets (ver. 33; v. 12, 21, 25). What they
prayed for had been granted, instantaneously (Isa. lxv. 24) and literally (Matt.
xi. 22).

Pen That the best refuge in time of danger is God. 2. The best
prayer is that which directly tells God the soul’s or the Church’s need.
3. That the best way of overcoming enemies is to pray for their highest good.
4. That the best evidence of being filled with the Spirit, is to speak the word
with boldness.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 24. A Congregation at Prayer. The Worlds Treason against its
—A model for the times. King.
I. United.—‘‘ With one accord.” I. The fact.


II. Fervent.—‘“ They lifted up their
voice to God.”

III. Reverent.—“ Lord, Thou art
God,” etc.

IV. Believing.—“Whoby themouth
of Thy servant David,” ete.

V. Intelligent.—They knew whom
they addressed and what they wanted.

VI. Merciful—tThey asked not for
vengeance on their enemies.

VII. Hopeful.—They had large ex-
pectations as to the future of Christ’s
cause—“ that signs and wonders,” ete.
(ver. 30).


Ver. 25. Vain Imaginings.

I. That God’s purpose of salvation
can. be defeated by man’s opposition.

II. That Christ's cause can be de-
stroyed even by the fiercest persecution.

III. That the Spirit’s work upon the
earth can be arrested by the most
powerful combinations against it.


110


II. The impotence of their rage.—
It ws very useless anger. It accomplishes
nothing. 1. Jt won’t alter the purpose
of God. 2. It won't make Him afraid.
“ Are we stronger than He?” asks the
apostle. ‘Hast thou an arm like
God?” asked Job. 3. It won’t shake the
eternal throne. 4. It won't change truth
into error, or error into truth. It tries
to do this. But in vain.

III. The reason of their rage.—
1. Because they hate God Himself. 2.
They hate His government. 3. They
hate His Son. 4. They hate His Bible.

IV. God’s reasons for allowing this,
—Why not arrest the blasphemy ?
1. To show what the evil of sin is.
2. To show the abysses of the human
heart. 3. To show His power and
grace.

V. God’s time for interposing.—The
close of the Psalm shows that He will
interfere at length. He is not slack


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IV.





concerning His promises and threats,—
HT. Bonar, D.D.


Vers. 24-31. The Christian Concep-
tion of God.

I. A triune personality.— Father
(Lord), Son (Christ), and Holy Ghost.

IJ. The Maker of the Universe.—
Of ‘heaven and earth, and the sea,
and all that in them is.”

III. The hearer of prayer.—Im-
plied in the Church’s supplication of
His aid.

IV. The inspirer of Scripture —
““Who by the mouth of Thy servant
David hath said.”

V. The providential ruler of the
world.—‘‘ To do whatsoever Thy hand
and. counsel determined before to be
done.”

VI. The omniscient observer of all
men and things.—“ And now, Lord,
behold their threatenings.”

VII. The author of salvation.—The
Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whose name signs and wonders, moral
and spiritual, as well as physical and
temporal, were done.


Ver. 29. Boldness in Preaching.

I. Because the preacher’s commission
is from heaven.

II. Because the preacher’s message
is the Word of God. Which is 1.
True; 2. Life-giving ; 3. Much needed ;
4, Indestructible.

III. Because the preacher’s foes are
feeble.—In comparison with those who
are on his side.

IV. Because the preacher’s helpers
are divine——Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.


Vers. 18-31. Christian Cowrage.—
“ And they called them, and com-
manded them not to speak at all nor
teach in the name of Jesus,” etc. Itis
always an impressive moment when a
jury, or an important deliberative body,
is about to render a decision. This is
especially true if the question at issue
involves vital interests, and the deter-
mining body speaks with authority.
To such a decision from such a body


the text relates. The scene is in
Jerusalem, soon after Pentecost. In
considering the conduct of these men,
thus arraigned, threatened, and com-
manded, we notice—

I. The test of the apostles’ courage.
—lIt is evident that the early followers
of Christ did not design or wish to
separate themselves from the Jewish
Church. They differed from other Jews
in believing that Jesus of Nazareth
was the Messiah; but they still
supposed that the way into the
Messianic kingdom was through the
portal of the Jews’ religion. Hence,
although those of kindred spirit met
privately for worship in each other’s
houses and in upper rooms, the disciples
of Jesus kept up their observance of
the Mosaic ritual, and were constant
attendants upon the temple service.
See now these men, Peter and John,
confronted by a positive command from
the nation’s highest tribunal to be
silent. This is the first utterance of
the Sanhedrim concerning the new
religion since Christ’s resurrection.
These men remember how determined
this same court had been upon the
crucifixion of Him in whose name they
have been teaching. If they persist,
can they expect a better fate than
befell their Master? We can have
little conception of the severity of the
ordeal. National love, respect for law,
pride of race, reverence for institutions
hoary with age, strength of social ties,
personal friendships, a shrinking from
becoming disturbers of the peace, fear
for personal safety—all these conspired
to intensify the command “ not to speak
at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.”
What enables them to oppose the
Sanhedrim’s command? It is their
personal love for Jesus. In their
hearts a fire has been kindled, and
their breasts are aglow with flame.
To be silent is impossible. ‘‘ We can-
not but speak the things which .we
have seen and heard.” Instead of
being silent, they proclaimed Christ
with added boldness. There arecurrents
in the sea which, despite opposing winds
and storms and tides, move on their


111


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a EES


way unhindered, impelled by a mighty
force hidden far in the ocean’s depths.
Such a force in the hearts of these
disciples was love for Christ. This
caused them to listen to the Sanhedrim’s
decree unmoved. Love had cast out
fear. Such courage, resulting from
such love, could then, and can always,
bear the severest test.

II. The manifestations of the
apostles’ courage.—Men are sometimes
called courageous when they are only
reckless, The man of real courage
will be bold enough, and calm enough,
to act wisely. His bravery will be
something more than bravado. In the
conduct of the apostles—commanded
by the Sanhedrim to be silent, and
they resolved meanwhile to speak—
every mark of true courage is manifest.
They show that their course is not
prompted by impulse or passion.
They are moved by deep convictions.
“Whether it be right in the sight of
God to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye.” They plant
themselves on the highest conceivable
ground, the sense of right. They have
no ambitious ends to seek, no revenge
to gratify, no popular applause to gain.
There is no other courage so lofty or
so enduring as this. It keeps the
nerves steady and the head cool and
the heart brave. Note, as an evidence
of wisdom, how sagaciously the apostles
appeal to this self-same principle of
right in the minds of their accusers.
The idea of unquestioning allegiance
to God was deeply implanted in the
Jews’ religion, and the Sanhedrim was
set for its defence and inculcation.
Who, then, better prepared than the
Sanhedrim to decide whether it be
right to ‘‘hearken more unto men than
unto God”? “Judge ye.” This sense
that it is right to hearken more unto
God than unto men enters into the
universal consciousness, Whether this
principie is adopted in one’s practical
life or rejected, it must and does com-
mend itself to every man’s conscience.
Those who adhere to it gain the con-
fidence of all. It is the right rule for


112


the young to select. Another mani-
festation of the apostles’ courage is
seen in the company they keep. ‘ Being
let go, they went to their own company,
and reported all that the chief priests
and elders had said unto them.” The
scene now changes from the council
chamber of the Sanhedrim to the midst
of the Christian brotherhood. Those
to whom they are come have doubtless
been praying for their imperilled
brethren. How changed the aspect!
In the Sanhedrim the air was dense
with suspicion and malice—here is love,
purity, and the peace of heaven.
Courage is of the right kind when it
seeks to sustain itself by breathing an
atmosphere like this. It is a praying
circle into which these apostles come.
‘“‘ They lifted up their voice to God with
one accord, and said, Lord, Thou art
God.”

III. The source of the apostles’
courage.—What has transformed the
timorous Simon to the undaunted
Peter? The answer is not far to find.
A heavenly influence has fallen upon
him. This new-born courage of the
apostles, although in them, was not of
them. Its source was above: it was a
divine energy infused within them ; the
breath of God’s Spirit upon their spirits.
Christ did not send the apostles into
the trials and persecutions incident to
their day without providing them with
a power adequate to every want.
What Christ did for His early disciples
He does to-day. Often .to-day the need
of Christians is courage. Now the
opposition to be encountered is not,
usually, persecution or prison doors.
It may, however, be something requir-
ing as true a heroism to withstand.
So long as the world remains as it is,
no Christian, and especially no one
just becoming such, will find himself
where to stand by his principles will
not often be at cost, and require an
effort for which he is inadequate only
as God shall help him. To this end
the Holy Spirit is given.—Monday
Club Sermons.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. . omap.1v.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 32-37.


The Apostles and the First Christians ; or, the Effect of the First Persecution.

I. It united the congregation.—Contrary to the expectations of its instigators,
the hostility directed against the followers of the Nazarene resulted in banding
them more closely together. 1. In amity and concord. The multitude, by this
time, numbering at least five thousand persons, were of one heart and soul—
“heart ” representing the intellectual (Mark ii. 6, 8, xi. 23 ; Luke ii. 35, iii. 15, vi.
45), and “soul” the emotional (Luke ii. 35, xii. 22 ; John xii. 27) side of human
nature. In their views of divine truth had emerged no divergence, in their
regards for one another no estrangement, in their plans no division. As
brethren they were of one mind (1 Peter iii. 8), walked by the same rule (Phil.
ii, 16), and cherished the same love, being of one accord and of one mind
(Phil. ii. 2). “All wished the one thing, to be blessed; all thought the one
thing, to remain true to the Lord Jesus; all felt the one thing, the comfort of
the Holy Spirit ; and this oneness of heart in willing, thinking, and feeling was
the moving soul in the action of the whole body” (Besser). ‘‘ At the time of
Constantine Eusebius was able still to write of Christians, ‘One and the same
power of the divine spirit goes through all members, in all is one soul and one
liveliness of faith’” (Jbid.). Alas! that such cannot now be affirmed of the
Christian community as a whole, or of Christian individuals, who are not only
gathered into rival communities, but often filled with mutual jealousies and
engaged in mutual strifes. 2. In self-sacrifice and beneficence. ‘Not one of
them said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own, but they
had all things common.” Thus “they abolished property, as it were, without
abolishing it, and possessed it as though they possessed it not. Everything,
both heart, soul, and spiritual life, and also all property and worldly enjoyments
were in common, so far as was lawful and expedient” (Stier). They so con-
sidered each other’s needs that none were allowed to want. There were no beggars
among the Christians. Owners of houses and lands, like Barnabas the Cypriote,
sold these and cast the proceeds into a common treasury, out of which distribu-
tion was made to each disciple according to his need. That this was an attempt
to establish communism as a rule of the Christian society cannot be made out
(see on ver. 32). Most likely it was prompted by a desire to relieve the
necessities of those who, in becoming believers, had been obliged to renounce
their worldly goods.

II. It inspired the apostles.—Instead of intimidating the leaders of the new
society, the opposition of the Sanhedrim fired them with increased zeal. 1. Zo
continue their work of preaching. Changing not their theme, manner, or
place of preaching, they kept on repeating the old story of the resurrection of
Jesus, knowing it to be true, and to contain the one Gospel for sinful men. The
Church had prayed that they might be enabled to speak the word with boldness
(ver. 29), and so abating nothing of either their confidence in the message they
proclaimed, or the courage with which they set it forth, undaunted by fears or
frowns, they gave witness of what they had seen and heard. As a consequence,
their preaching was accompanied by great power—i.e., with deeply convincing
effect ; and no preaching will tell that lacks this element of boldness. 2. Z'o wnder-
take additional toil. Naturally, at first, the labour of distributing the common
funds fell to the apostles as the heads of the community, and as persons in whom
the community had confidence. Before long, however, it was seen that even
apostles might be overburdened with work. Besides, the work in question was
of a sort for which Jess than apostolic talent might suffice. Accordingly,
another order of officers, the diaconate, was soon after called into existence to
superintend this department of Christian activity (vi. 1-6).


T 113


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
ee ee ee


III. It enriched both.—Designed to dispirit them in their religious ardour
and discredit them in public estimation, the persecution of the Jewish rulers had
the contrary effect. It enriched them. 1. With divine favour. ‘“ And great
grace was upon them all,”—upon apostles and believers alike. ‘There is no reason
to depart from the ordinary sense of the term grace, though some (Grotius,
Kuinoel, Olshausen, and Holtzmann) understand by it the favour of the people
(compare ii. 47). That the apostles were recipients of this grace from Heaven
was evidenced by “the great power,” or convincing effect with which “ they
witnessed of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus”; that the disciples generally
were not without experience of the same was attested by the munificent
liberality which they displayed. 2. With popular acceptance. Though not the
best meaning of the term “ grace,” it need not beexcluded. Instead of damping
the cordiality of the people towards the apostles and disciples, the persecution of
them and their cause on which the ecclesiastical authorities had entered rather


helped to augment the same.


In this respect persecution is always a failure—


never killing, but rather strengthening the cause against which it is directed.
Learn.—1. The excellence of Christian unity. 2. The beauty of Christian
charity. 3. The power of Christian truth.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 32. All Things Common ; or, a
Sermon on Christian Socialism.

I. How the early Christians were
led to this experiment. 1. They were
not in any way commanded or counselled
so to act by the apostles. At least it
does not appear from the narrative that
they were. Who originated the pro-
posal is not told. 2. Most likely the
plan adopted was suggested by the neces-
sities of the situation. In the course of
a few weeks as many as five thousand
men (possibly not including women and
children) had passed over from Judaism
into the Christian Church, in many
instances, doubtless, not only snapping
the ties that bound them to their kins-
men and relatives, but also throwing
themselves out of their accustomed em-
ployments. 3. The plan would pro-
bably commend itself to them as desirable.
As being in accordance with (1) the
precepts (Matt. vi. 19, 20, xix. 21;
Luke xii. 33), and (2) the practice
(John xiii. 29) of Christ, who not only
enjoined the renunciation of earthly
goods but shared a common purse with
the Twelve. 4. The movement may
have sprung from the warm hearts of the
richer members of the Church who com-
passionately regarded the destitution of
their Christian brethren.

II. The exact character of this early


114


experiment. 1. The sale of goods and
lands was not compulsory, or binding
on believers as a term of communion.
The language of Peter to Ananias and
Sapphira (v. 4), and the case of John
Mark’s mother who had a house in
Jerusalem (xii. 12), show this. It is
not needful to add that it was their
own goods and not other people’s that
these early Christians cast into the
treasury. 2. Jt is not clear that all the
Jerusalem Christians were placed upon
this common fund. Possibly only those
were who from age, infirmity, lack of
employment, or want of friends were
destitute of support (the mention of
‘“‘ widows,” vi. 1, points to this); and
even of those it does not appear that all
received an equal aliment (“ according
as he had need,” iv. 35, favours this).
3. Hence what wears the aspect of a
universal sustentation fund was pro-
bably nothing more than a voluntary
relief fund, to which those contributed
who felt themselves able and were
moved thereto by love to Christ and
sympathy for their needy brethren, and
out of which those were supported who
were unable to maintain themselves.
III. Indications that this early ex-
periment was not designed to be per-
manent.—Hven should it be conceded
that the experiment in question was of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IV.





a strictly communistic character, and
that the apostles originally meant it to
become a fixed practice, there is ground
for thinking that they pretty soon
changed their minds in this respect.
1. Ji was not mentioned at the First
Council in Jerusalem as a method of
living which might be imitated by the
Gentile Churches. On the contrary,
Paul and Barnabas were directed to
remember the poor (Gal. 11. 10)—.e., to
lift collections from the rich Gentile
congregations for the support of the
poor disciples in the Judean metro-
polis. 2. Jé was probably found that
the experiment had not been successful
in Jerusalem, but rather hurtful. If it
met an emergency, it appears to have
been followed by the usual results which
flow from common funds. It destroyed
the independence of the Jerusalem
Church, which became practically filled
with lazy paupers, who sorned upon
their wealthier brethren. ‘“'Thesystem
of common property ” (among the New
England Pilgrims), writes Bancroft,
“had occasioned grievous discontents ;
the influence of law could not compel
regular labour like the uniform im-
pulse of personal interest; and even
the threat of ‘keeping back their
bread’ could not change the character
of the idle” (History of America, i., 238).


Christianity and Socialism.— As a
movement for the deliverance of the
poor and their introduction to a good
and happy life, the gospel of God’s
love in Christ thoroughly agrees with
socialism.” Yet ‘there is a broad line
of distinction between the two.”

T. Socialism insists on external and
economic conditions for good; Chris-
tianity insists on the inward and moral,
because all social disorders are spiritual
at heart, and the spiritual is the ulti-
mate root of all life.

II. Socialism makes the community
the final and absolute proprietor of all
wealth; Christianity makes God the
proprietor and us His stewards for
others.

III. Socialism too much seeks to
enforee its doctrine of property by brute


force; Christianity by the moral leaven
of love in the soul of man.

IV. Socialism thinks by equalising
human conditions to secure the greatest
amount of comfort and happiness ;
Christianity, or Jesus Christ, teaches
that all vital development must be
spontaneous, and from within, that a
change of character is to be sought
rather than a change of conditions.”
Yet “Christianity and socialism need
not be spoken of as rivals; they are
compatible, and should not be made
parties ina quarrel. The fact is that
socialism needs to be christianised,
and that Christianity needs to be
socialised.”—A. Scott Matheson.


Ver. 33. The Christian Ministry.

I. Its personnel.No longer the
apostles, but the pastors and teachers of
the New Testament Church.

Il. Its function.—Witness-bearing.
Not arguing or philosophising.

III. Its theme.—The resurrection of
the Lord Jesus Christ—including, of
course, all the connected facts and
doctrines.

IV. Its influence.—When rightly
exercised it wields great dynamic force
of a moral and spiritual kind.

V. Its reward.—It attracts towards
itself “ great grace ” both from God and
man.


The Best Graces for a Church.
I. The grace of unity.
II. The grace of witness-bearing.
III. The grace of liberality.


Ver. 33. The Risen Christ and the
Power of the Gospel.

I. The resurrection.—It is not so
much with death as with resurrection
that the apostles had to do, at least in
Jerusalem and Judea. The death was
a believed fact there, not needing
witnesses.

II. The testimony.—It was the
testimony of apostles; and yet it was
not as apostles, or with official authority
that they testified, but as men of in-
tegrity and good sense, who saw with
their eyes, and heard with their ears.


115


CHAP. IV.


III. The power.—‘ With great
power gave the apostles witness.” The
word which they spoke was in itself a
word of power. But apart from this,
the ‘“ great power” here spoken of was
exhibited. 1. In the accompanying
miracles, by which God identified Him-


self with the apostolic testimony, de-.


claring that their testimony was His
truth; for of this the miracles were
the seal. 2. In the accompanying
power exercised over, and in, men’s
souls.

IV. Thegrace.—It is“‘great grace” ;
free love in no ordinary measure.
H. Bonar, D.D.





Ver. 36. Joses surnamed Barnabas.

I. The possessor of a good pedigree.
—He was a Levite, a member of the
priestly tribe, though not himself a
priest.

II. The owner of a good name.—
The son of exhortation, or the son of
consolation, with reference to either his
eloquence or his sympathy.

III. The author of a good deed.—
‘“‘ Having land he sold it, and laid the
money at the apostles’ feet.”


Joses Barnabas ; or, the Consecration
of Wealth.

I. The pious landowner.—l. His
name and surname. Joses, or Joseph
—an honourable name in Israel. Bar-
nabas, the son of exhortation or conso-
lation—a more honoured surname in
the Christian Church. 2. His charac-
ter and ability. A good man and full
of the Holy Ghost; also a talented
man, as may be concluded from his
rank alongside of the apostles, his
power of eloquent speech, and his use-
fulness as a colleague of Paul. 3. His
land and property.—A native of Cyprus,
and the possessor of a piece of ground
in that island.

II. The great renunciation.—He


116


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


sold his land, that which men highly
value, probably his patrimonial inherit-
ance, and cast the proceeds into the
common fund. 1. Out of love to Christ,
whose disciple he was. 2. Under the
impulse of the Holy Spirit, by whom his
heart was filled. 3. From considera-
tion of his fellow-Christians’ needs, whom
he regarded as Christ’s brethren and
his own.

ill. The cheerful consecration.—He
laid it at the apostles’ feet. 1. No
doubt without reluctance, as a cheerful
giver. 2. Without reservation, keeping
back no part of the price. 3. Without
stipulation, leaving it for distribution
entirely under the apostles’ control.


Vers. 36, 37. A Sermon on Wealth.—
Its right use exemplified by Barnabas.

I. Wealth possessed.—No sin, at
least not necessarily, but a great talent.

II. Wealth surrendered.—Not an
obligation imposed upon Christians, yet
a sacrifice that may be freely offered.

III. Wealth consecrated.— Whether
retained or renounced it should be
devoted to the service of God and Jesus
Christ.

IV. Wealth distributed—One way
of devoting wealth to God and Christ is
to disperse it abroad and give to the
poor (Psalm exii. 9), to do good with it
and to communicate (Heb. xiii. 16;
1 Tim. vi. 18).


Vers. 31-37. The True Blossoms of a
Christian Congregation.

I. Where the preaching of Christ
flourishes there living faith flourishes.
“The multitude believed.”

II. Where living faith flourishes
there genuine love flourishes. “One
heart and one soul.”

III. Where genuine love flourishes,
there true prosperity flourishes. ‘ Na
one lacked.” —Gerok.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. V.
Se


CHAPTER V.


DANGERS BOTH WITHIN AND WirTHovuTt THE CHURCH—FALSE FRIENDS AND
Open Foss.


§ 1. The Story of Anauias and Sapphira ; or, Hypocrisy unveiled (vers. 1-11).

§ 2. A Page from the Church’s Life History; or, the Calm before a Storm
(vers. 12-16).

§ 3. Annas on the Move; or, the Bursting of the Storm (vers. 17-32).

§ 4. Gamaliel and his Colleagues; or, a Friend at Court (vers. 33-42).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Ananias.—Perhaps the same name as Ananiah (Neh, iii. 23) or Hananiah (1 Chron.
iii. 21; Jer. xxviii. 1; Dan. i. 6), translated in the LXX. ’Avavias, and signifying the cloud or
mercy of God. Sapphira.—Possibly from the Greek cdmrdepos, sapphire, or from the Syriac
nvew, beautiful.

Ver. 2. Kept back part of the price.—Lit. took away for himself from the price, as Achan
did of the accursed tuing (Josh. vii. 1); compare Titus ii. 10. Privy to it.— Conscious of it
to herself—i.e., aware of the reservation.

Ver. 3. Why hath Satan filled thine heart ?—Uompare the influence exerted by this father
of lies (John viii. 44) upon Judas (Luke xxii. 3; John xiii. 27), To lie to the Holy Ghost.—
Lit. that thou shouldst lie, as regards the Holy Ghost—t.e., with intent to deceive Him,
pevderOa, with the accusative of the person deceived, as in Deut. xxxiii. 29 ; Isa. lvii. 11 (LXX.).
Though the purpose was rather that of Satan who had filled Ananias’s heart, than of
Ananias himself, yet Ananias’s freedom of will and vower of resistance to the tempter
is recognised in the question “ Why ?”

Ver. 4. Was it—i.e., the possession—not thine own ? should be, remaining (unsold) did it not
remain to thee (as thy possession) ?. The language shows that the practice of selling private
property and casting the proceeds into a common fund was not obligatory on the first
Christians as a term of communion. Why %--7i 671 = ri éorw Gre = quid est quod = cur?
Hast thou conceived.—Lit. placed in thy heart; compare Dan. i. 8; Mal. ii. 2. “Satan
suggested the lie, which Ananias ought to have repelled; instead of that he put it in his
heart” (Alford). Not unto men, but unto God.—(Compare 1 1'1ess. iv. 8.) A weighty
testimony to the divinity, as well as personality of the Holy Spirit (compare Matt. xxviii. 19).

Ver. 5. Gave up the ghost.—ZHupired, breathed out his life; used again only of Herod
Agrippa (xii. 23). The phrase occurs frequently in the LXX. Great tear came on all them
that heard these things.—Not merely upon all present (De Wette), but upon all to whom the
report came. a

Ver. 6. The young, or younger men, were the more youthful members of the assembly
(Neander, De Wette, Alford, Hackett, Zockler, and others) in distinction from the older.
There is no need to suppose them a special class of assistauts (Kuinoel, Meyer), or that
presbyters had already been appointed (Olshausen), although on the ground of this natural
distribution of work between the young and old in the common life of the Church, the later
official distinction may have arisen (Holtzmann), Wound him up.—ovvcoreiray. T.e., taking
svoté\d@ to be = mepioréAdw (Hzek. xxix.5, LXX.;Jos., Ant., XVII. iii. 2), wrapping the body
wp—e.g., in their own mantles (Alford, De Wette); or, perhaps better, adhering to the literal
sense of the word, to place together, laying the body out, composing its limbs (Zéckler,
Holtzmann), and so making ready for burial. “The speedy burial of the dead practised
among the later Jews was unknown in earlier times. See Gen. xxiii, it was grounded on
Numb. xix. 11 ff. The practice was to bury before sunset of the same diy” (Alford),

Ver. 7. Three hours after allowed sufficient time for interment.

Ver. 8. So much.—Perhaps pointing to the gold still lying where it had been laid by
Ananias.

Ver. 9. To tempt the Spirit of the Lord.—Compare 1 Cor. x. 9. Behold draws attention to
the sound of approaching footsteps (Olshausen, Hackett, Holtzmann) although the whole
clause may be only a lively or poetic manner of speech (Alford, Zockler),

_ Ver. 10, Fell down straightway.—That the deaths of Ananias and Sapphira were designed


117


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ea!


by the writer as supernatural occurrences cannot be doubted; and that they were so is shown
by the impossibility of accounting for them by natural means, such as horror at detection
and fear superinduced by Peter’s words. The idea that the story of Ananias and Sapphira,
though having a basis in fact, is only a legend, corresponding to the Old Jestament narratives
of Achan (Josh. vii.) and Nadab and Abihu (Lev. x. 1-8), and framed for the purpose of sup-
porting the notion that he who is excommunicated must perish bodily (Weizsaicker) may be
dismissed as without plausibility.

Ver. 11. The Church, éxxAnoia. Here used for the first time in the Acts to signify the
body of believers who had been called out of the world.

Vers. 12, 13. Among the people.—Zc., the population of Jerusalem. AJll.—Hither all the
apostles, the rest being believers and unbelievers (Alford, Olshausen, Hackett), or more
likely all the believers, the rest being the people, or those not believing (Bengel, De Wette,
Meyer, Holtzmann, Zockler, Spence, and others).

Ver. 15. Into the streets.—So the best MSS. (&, A,B, D?). Codex D reads xara, along or
down, as if whole streets were occupied with sick people. That couches were cheap articles
(Kuinoel) used by the common people, whereas the rich employed beds, is an unfounded
distinction. The shadow of Peter, etc., should read, that, Peter coming along. at least his
shadow, etc. Compare the miracles wrought by Paul’s handkerchiefs (xix. 12). It is not
expressly said that Peter’s shadow worked cures, but this is thought by some (Zeller,
Holtzmann, Besser) to be implied by the narrator in the statement of.

Ver.16. And they were healed every one.— Yet the clause does not say they were healed by
Peter’s shadow. ‘“ If however this really took place with respect to some of them, it was,
done through faith” (Stier). (See further in “ Hints.”)

Ver. 17. The high priest.—Annas, as in iv. 6. Indignation.—Not envy or jealousy (R.V.),
but hot, angry zeal.

Ver. 19. Not the but an Angel of the Lord; ie. sent by the Lord, or the Exalted
Christ.

Ver..20. All the words of this life——JZ.e., of this resurrection life which the Sadducees
denied, or of this eternal life which the apostles preached, or of this blessed life which the
angel himself enjoyed, or all of these together.

Ver. 21. All the senate, or eldership. Whether a special meeting of the presbyters (a
wider conception than the Sanhedrim) was summoned to assist the Sanhedrim (Meyer,
Wendt, Holtzmann), or only the Sanhedrim, called in the Old Testament Apocrypha, the
senate (Schiirer, ii. 149) was convened (Zéckler, Hackett), cannot be determined.

Ver. 24. They doubted of them.—Better, were much perplexed concerning them—i.e., the
apostles (Alford), or the words reported about the apostles (Hackett). Whereunto this
would grow.— What this would become, this incident of their escape from prison and this
movement of which they were the leaders.

Ver. 26. Lest they should be stoned depends upon “not with violence” (Alford, Hackett),
rather than upon “ they feared” (Holtzmann).

Ver. 28. This man’s blood upon us recalls Matt. xxvii. 25.

Ver, 29. We ought to obey (re.Oapxeiv, to obey or acknowledge as ruler, stronger than dxovew,
iv. 19) God rather than man.—Compare Socrates to his judges, zetoowar d¢ waddov TH Oew F
tuw (Plato, Apologia, xvii. D).

Ver. 31. With, or by, rather than “to.” See ii. 33. Not to be, but (as) a prince (as in
iii. 15)—+.e., as theocratic Lord and King of His people, and a Saviour—+.e., as the originator
of the Messianic salvation (Holtzmann),.

Ver. 33. Cut to the heart.—Lit. sawn asunder, torn in pieces, sc. in their hearts. Compare
vii. 54—a much stronger expression than that used in iv. 2 or xvi. 18, and closely resembling
that employed in ii. 37.

Ver. 34. A Pharisee.—A member of one of the principal religious sects in Jerusalem, the
others being Sadducees and Hssenes. See further on xv.5. Gamaliel = “ Benefit of God”
(see Numb. i. 10, ii. 20). Probably Gamaliel the elder, one of the seven to whom the Jews
gave the title Rabbi. In the Talmud he appears as a zealous Pharisee and distinguished
teacher of the law.

Ver. 35. Take heed to yourselves.—LHither with respect to these men, what ye intend to do
(Hackett), or what ye intend to do with respect to these men (Holtzmann).

Vers, 36, 37. Theudas and Judas,—Concerning the supposed chronological difficulty con-
nected with these names see “ Homiletical Analysis.”

Ver. 39. In ye cannot overthrow it read for “it” them. Lest haply, etc., may be connected
either with ‘let them alone,” or with a supplied thought such as “and ye ought not to
attempt to overthrow them,” or “take heed to yourselves.”

Ver. 40. And when they had called the apostles, sc. wnto them, so as to preserve the force
of the preposition wpdés—the apostles having been removed a little space apart from the
council during the progress of the deliberations (ver. 34).

‘ Ver. 41. Worthy to suffer shame,—Or, worthy to be disgraced ; a bold oxymoron. For Hig


118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. V.





name should be for the name—i.e., of Jesus, which is here omitted, either because it had just
been mentioned (ver. 40), or because “the name” had already come to be a term in familiar
use among the disciples. (Compare ix. 16.)

Ver. 42. In every house.—Better, at home, or from house to house, as in ii. 46.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—11.


The Story of Ananias and Sapphira ; or, Hypocrisy unveiled.

I. The character and standing of Ananias and Sapphira.—1. Husbend and
wife. They stood towards one another in the holiest of natural relations.
“‘ Marriage is honourable in all” (Heb. xiii. 4). Happy they in whom the sacred
bond of wedlock is cemented by love and religion (Eph. v. 25). Had Ananias
and Sapphira been like their names, “finer names than Barnabas” (Stier)—he
a vessel of the grace of God, and she clear and transparent like the sapphire
(see “ Critical Remarks ”)—all had been well. But, alas! “ their souls were not
like their names” (Stier), and in them the marriage union, having been perverted
to unholy ends, what was meant for a blessing turned out to be a curse. Instead
of being helpers of each other’s faith and joy (2 Cor. i. 24), and provoking one
another to love and good works (Heb. x. 24), they became mutual tempters and
confederates in sin. Adam and Eve, if they were the first married couple who
conjointly went astray (Gen. iii), have, unhappily, not been the last: witness
Abraham and Sarah (Gen. xii., xvi.); Ahab and Jezebel (1 Kings xvi. 29-33);
Herod and Herodias (Matt. xiv. 3). 2. Of good social standing. This was
obvious from the circumstance that they possessed a bit of land. Ownership of
the soil—whether right or wrong—has always been esteemed a mark of superior
position (see Job xxii. 8, 9). The landless have ever been accounted mean, and
not unfrequently treated as slaves and chattels. Nor have such ideas been con-
fined to men of the world, but they have been suffered to penetrate even within the
precincts of the Christian Church. 2. Of fair Christian profession. “ Without
doubt,” says Besser, “the Holy Spirit had had His work upon them both. They
were both believers, and embraced in the precious word spoken of the multitude
of the faithful (iv. 32). Probably they had made themselves prominent above
others through their beautiful gifts (of grace), had prayed with power, and
been able boldly to despise the threatenings of the enemy.” Whether this was
so or not, unquestionably they belonged to the number of disciples. Having
publicly professed their faith in Christ, they had been baptised and received into
the Christian community. Whether their so-called conversion dated from the
day of Pentecost, or the healing of the lame man, cannot be ascertained. But
manifestly they were persons of repute in the congregation. ‘They hada name
to live” (Rev. iii. 1), whether it was deserved or not.

II. The project and sin of Ananias and Sapphira.—1l. Their project. (1) Its
substance was good—to sell their property, retain part of the purchase money,
bring the remainder into the Church, and lay it down at the apostles’ feet exactly
as Joses had done. If they had a wish to emulate the man of Cyprus, there
would still have been nothing reprehensible in what they proposed to do had
they only let the truth be understood that they were contributing not the whole
but only a part of their estate. (2) Its motive was bad—to obtain credit for
doing a handsome, generous, self-sacrificing deed of kindness without inflicting on
themselves a total loss, to secure for themselves praise to which they were not
entitled—viz., for giving all, whereas they were only giving part of their patri-
mony. In other words, vanity and greed lay at the root of their procedure.
(3) Its execution was clever—the scheme was carried out promptly, soon after it
had been conceived, so that no space was left for hes'tation which might lead to
an alteration in their plans ; faithfully, in exact accordance with the prearranged


119


CHAP. Ve HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
pees a eS eee





programme, so that little chance was left for miscarrying ; conjointly, with the
full concurrence of both partners, so that neither could cast the blame of failure
upon the other; and publicly, with the knowledge and approbation of the Church,
so that all might appear open and above board. 2, Their sin. (1) In what it
consisted. Not in selling the land or in contributing only a portion of the price
to the common fund. They need not have sold the land unless they pleased.
Nor were they obliged to surrender the whole or any portion of the realised
price, if they chose to do otherwise. ‘There was no law imposing payment and
specifying amount” (Binney). All was voluntary. Their transgression lay in
pretending to contribute the whole when they were only devoting a part.
Deception and hypocrisy were the faults with which they were chargeable.
(2) By whom it was instigated. The nearer motives have been explained.
The power nehind these was the Devil. Satan had filled their hearts with the
desire of gaining reputation as generous and self-sacrificing givers without parting
with too much of their property. To the promptings of the arch deceiver they
had yielded. Having opened the gateways of their souls at his suggestion, they
had soon sunk beneath his sway. (3) Against whom it was directed. It was a
sin against their own souls, against the apostles, against the Church, and even
against Christ ; but it was chiefly a sin against God and the Holy Ghost. This,
according to Peter, formed its main aggravation. Yetit must not be confounded
with what is specifically called the sin against the Holy Ghost (Matt. xii. 32).
III. The detection and punishment of Ananias andSapphira.—1. The detection.
—This was (1) unexpected. By Ananias and Sapphira themselves, who, no doubt,
never dreamt that any one, and least of all Peter, would get to know of their
little plot ; but hardly less by the congregation who, it may be imagined, never
anticipated that any of their number would be guilty of such a miserable crime,
The unexpected, however, is that which mostly happens ; nor can evil doers count on
a moment of security. (2) Instantaneous. No preliminary suspicions, or strange
surmises, or precognoscing of witnesses, or leading of evidence, was required. At
once and on the spot, with the suddenness of a flash of lightning, the secret offence
was laid bare. Ananias and Sapphira were hypocrites, and had lied unto the
Holy Ghost. (3) Complete. The whole story was divulged,—the selling of the
land, the keeping back part of the price, the concert between the two. Nothing
remained concealed from the searching gaze of Peter, whose eyes had been
inwardly illumined by the Holy Ghost. (4) Public. The sin had been conceived
in secret, but its exposure occurred in public, according to the saying of our
Lord : “There is nothing hid which shall not be manifested,” etc. (Mark iv. 22).
2. The punishment. (1) Sudden. Swift upon the heels of dection followed
the infliction of retribution, as it did with our first parents (Gen. iii. 8), with
Cain (Gen. iv. 9-12), with Judas, i. 18), with Herod (xii. 23), and as it often
does in Providence still. (2) Severe. ‘ Ananias, hearing Peter’s words, fell
down and gave up the ghost” and three hours after, “ Sapphira,” entering
the congregation, and learning what had happened to her husband, also ‘fell
down immediately at Peter’s feet.” One after the other their bodies were
composed for interment, wrapped up in linen, or perhaps in the young men’s
mantles, carried forth, and buried. Whether their souls perished with the
dissolution of their bodies cannot be told. Charity would incline one to the belief of
Augustine that this terrible doom was inflicted on their bodies that their spirits
might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus (1 Cor. v. 5). (3) Supernatural.
The suggestion that Ananias and Sapphira died through shame and the detection
of their crime, and fear of the consequences that might ensue to them on its
getting known to the community, will not explain the double death in manner
and circumstances so exactly alike, Besides, Peter’s language (ver. 9) shows that
both of the deaths were miraculous. To dismiss the whole story as a legendary


120


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. GTAP. Vo








working up of some simple occurrence connected with Ananias and S«pphira is
inadmissible. (4) Solemnising. It profoundly impressed the whole Church and
the outside public, so far as it became known. And no wonder. ‘ When God’s
judgments are abroad the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness ”
(Isa. xxvi. 9). (5) Sanctioned. By right and justice. Though severe, it was
not more severe than the sin deserved (Rom. vi. 23), or the circumstances of the
case demanded. It was needful to check hypocrisy on the threshold of the
Church ; and if the rigour of Divine vengeance has since then been relaxed, that
is not because the sin of hypocrisy has become less hateful in God’s sight
(Job xiii. 13, 16; Luke xi. 44), but because “mercy” has began to “rejoice
against judgment ” (James ii. 13).

Learn.—1. That two actions may be similar in men’s eyes, and yet intrinsically
different in God’s. Example: the actions of Barnabas and Ananias, 2. That
God will accept no gift for either His Church or His poor of that which hypocrisy
and greed leave over. God’s proper portion is the firstfruits. 3. That God still
sits over against the treasury of the Church and jealously guards His honour
from all reproach that may be cast upon it by His people's gifts. 4. That no
plot can be too secret to escape the all-seeing eye of God. 5. That, though hand
join in hand, yet will not the sinner go unpunished. 6. That “not a great and
mixed multitude, but the holiness of His people, is pleasing to the Lord of His
Church” (Lechler). 7. That Christ’s people should guard themselves carefully
against temptations to sin.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Ananias and Sapphira ; or,
the Fearful Perversion of the Marriage
State—This occurs when marriage
1s—

I. A fellowship of goods and a busi-
ness transaction, instead of a union of
hearts in the Lord.

II. A union to the service of the
flesh, the world, and the devil, instead
of a pious resolution, “‘ As for me and
my house.”

III. A walking together to hell,
instead of being helpers together of one
another’s joy, and pilgrims towards
heaven. Contrast Ananias and Sap-
phira with Zacharias and Elizabeth.—
Gerok.


Ver. 1, with iv. 3-6. Barnabas and
Ananias.

I. Compare.—In being—1l. Men;
2. Professors of Christianity ; 3. Givers.

II. Contrast. — In their—l. Cha-
racters. Barnabas, a good man and
sincere Christian; Ananias, an insin-
cere disciple and flagrant deceiver.
2. Gifts. That of Barnabas proceeding
from Christian love and sympathy, and
being complete as well as honest ;


that of Ananias being inspired by envy
and selfishness as well as impaired in
its extent, and deceitful in its mode of
presentation. 3. Kewards. Barnabas
being set upon a pedestal of immortal
renown; Ananias being fixed on a
pillory of undying shame. Barnabas
being promoted to a position of useful-
ness in the Church; Ananias being
punished with instantaneous destruc-
tion, and so held up as a warning to
future ages.

IIl. Suggest.—1. That all who pro-
fess faith in Jesus Christ are not sincere
disciples. 2. That all gifts to Christ’s
treasury are not equally acceptable to
Christ. 3. That different destinies
await the true and the false professor
of religion.


Ver. 3. Man's Partnership with Satan
in his Sins.

I. In connection with lies.— He is a
liar, and the forger of lies; the hater
of truth and uprightness.

II. In connection with errors.

III. In connection with forms.

IV. In connection with unbelief.
V. In connection with his own


121


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


$e en


original falsehood in Paradise.—ZH.
Bonar, D.D.


Ver. 3-10. Satan and the Holy Ghost.

T. Satan.—1. The existence and per-
sonality of Satan. Peter did not speak
in allegory when he said, “ Why hath
Satan filled thy heart?” 2. The
reality of Satanic influence on the human
heart.
phira was traced back to the direct
agency of the devil. 3. Satanic influ-
ence, though undeniable, does not destroy
the responsibility of man. Satan can
fill no man’s heart against his will.

II. The Holy Ghost.—1. The divinity
and personality of the Holy Ghost.
The former implied in the fact that the
Holy Ghost could be lied against and
tempted ; the latter in the title God
ascribed to Him (ver. 4). 2. The
access the Holy Spirit has to the human
heart. Proved by the inward illumina-
tion of Peter as to the conduct of the
guilty pair. 3. The perpetual inhabita-
tion of the Church by the Holy Ghost.
Ananias and Sapphira imagined they
had only their fellow-Christians to
hoodwink. Peter explained the aggra-
vation of their sin to lie in this, that
it had been committed against the Holy
Ghost.


Vers. 5-10 Sudden Deaths.

I. Possible occurrences.—And may
be either natural events or supernatural
judgments.

II. Impressive spectacles.—Calcu-
lated to arrest the careless and render
the wicked thoughtful.

III. Solemn lessons.—Teaching all
(1) the nearness of the end, and (2) the
wisdom of being ready.


Vers. 5-11. Church Discipline.

I. Its necessity—Shown then by
the case of Ananias and Sapphira ;
shown now by the admitted presence
in the Church of those who “ walk
disorderly.”

II. Its authority.—The example of
Peter, supported by the teaching of
Christ (Matt. xviii. 15-18), Paul (1 Cor.
v. 2-7; 2 Cor. ii. 6; 2 Thess. iii. 6;
Tit. iii. 10), and John (2 John 10).

122


The sin of Ananias and Sap-


III. Its effect—When faithfully
and lovingly administered mostly good ;
if not to the offending party sal. tary,
to the Church and the world mostly
impressive and instructive.


Vers. 1-11. The Sevenfold Union of
Ananias and Sapphira.

I. United in marriage ——Husband
and wife.

II. United in profession. — Both
members of the Church.

III. United in liberality. — Both
agreed to give a contribution to the
Church fund.

IV. United in sin —Their plot was
devised and acted on in concert with
each other.

V. United in detection.— Both were
found out at the same time and by the
same apostle.

VI. United in punishment.—Both
were visited with death.

VII. United in infamy.—Both serve
as a memorial and warning to future
ages.


The Love of Money, as exemplified in
Ananias and Sapphira.

I. It impaired their Christian cha-
racters.—Assuming them to have been
genuine disciples, it certainly prevented
them from rising to any height in the
religious life, if it did not uttcrly
extinguish grace within their hearts.
Alongside of the love of Mammon the
love of God cannot thrive (Matt. vi. 24).

II. It maintained its hold upon them,
notwithstanding their privileges.—
They had probably witnessed the
wonders of Pentecost, beheld the heal-
ing of the lame man, listened to Peter’s
sermons, enjoyed the fellowship of the
disciples, perhaps themselves led the
prayers of the congregation ; and yet
this deeply seated vice, the passion for
money, kept its ground.

III. It impelled them to a course of
heinous sin.—To avarice, to deception,
to hypocrisy, to vainglory, to lies, tu
pretence and ostentation—a_ pitiable
crop of evil to come to harvest in
Christian souls. ‘The love of money
is the root of every kind of evil”
(1 Tim. vi. 10).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP, V.





IV. It involved them in an awful
doom. — Detection, exposure, death,
infamy. “They that will be rich,”
etc. (1 Tim. vi. 9). For other examples
of the love of money see Simon Magus
(viii. 18-23), the Sorcerers (xvi. 19),
Demetrius (xix. 24-27), Felix xxiv. 26).


The sin of Ananias and Sapphira.

I. The character of the sin.—It was
not simple falsehood. The common
practice of holding it up_ before
children, as an illustration of the guilt
and danger of lying, has no warrant to
justify it. Their sin was the attempt
to deceive and defraud God. Many a
man since has ventured upon the same
experiment. In every community
there are some who are so convinced of
the worth of religion that they desire
to share in its blessings. They out-
wardly embrace the Christian faith ;
they unite with the Church; they are
measurably careful in the discharge of
routine duties. Neither their conduct
nor their neglect is such as to subject
them to discipline; and yet, while
conceding so much, they are far from
having made a complete surrender of
themselves to God. Their religious
life is a perpetual attempt at con-
promise. The bulk of their time and
energy is devoted to self and the world ;
the dust and sweepings are offered
to God. Ananias in broadcloth and
Sapphira in silk sit in the churches
every Sabbath. They call themselves
disciples, and pride themselves on their
consistency ; but both the name they
assume and the boast they make is
a lie to the Holy Ghost. They keep
back a part, and the greater part, of
the price of discipleship.

Il. The origin of the sin.—In
general phrase, we may say that it
was due to an evil heart, but its specific
root was the love of money. In our
day, when men are called to choose
between piety and property, there are
many who hesitate, prevaricate, and
end with a compromise. Multitudes
of avowed believers withhold as much
as possible of their wealth from God.
They are prodigal in their prayers and


hymns and exhortations, but close-
handed with their money. Like the
tree in the ancient legand, which
uttered a moan and bled whenever a
twig was broken off, those who call
themselves Christian men writhe and
suffer when forced to anything like a
liberal surrender of their worldly
substance for the glory of God and the
salvation of men. The old poison of
avarice is still in the veins of the
Church.

IIl. The discovery of the sin.—It
seemed unlikely that the transaction
would be made public. Ananias and
Sapphira would not circulate the story
of what they had done. There was
apparently no way in which the affair
could become known. So, doubtless,
these deceivers reasoned. But there
was an uncalculated factor in the
equation. There was a spiritual side
to the matter which was unreckoned.
It affected the kingdom of God as well
as the real estate market. It is a
truth which men are slow to learn,
that there is a Divine detective system
in the universe, by whose workings
“all things are naked and open to the
eyes of Him with whom we have to
do.” It is easy to deceive the world.
Men may considar us generous, when
in reality we are pinched and small in
our charities. To God, this world is
one vast whispering-gallery, and every
sin which men commit reports itself to
Him ; and “there is nothing covered
that shall not be revealed, and hid that
shall not be known.” Men cannot
measure our consecration to God.

IV. The punishment of the sin.—
It was startling and severe. One
moment Ananias and Sapphira stood
before the apostle in the flush of life
and health, with the lie upon their
lips; the next they were in eternity,
beginning the experience of its un-
changing awards. The penalty might
be judged extreme for a single sin;
but, at the outset of the Christian
Church, it was important to emphasise
the fact that the liberty of the Gospel
was not license. More than that, the
sin itself was significant. As the single


123


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





blossom is evidence whether the stock
from which it comes is noxious weed
or fragrant flower, so this action was
proof of a heart alienated from God in
its deepest life and purposes. Such
feeling and intention was a hindrance
to the kingdom of righteousness. And
this punishment was anticipated and
representative. The judgment con-
tinues to be executed. Men now who
attempt to defraud God by their partial
consecration, by the much they spend
on themselves and the little they
devote to Him, are not beaten down as
with a lightning-stroke; but, all the
same and just as really, they die
spiritually. They are dying at the
root. The complete loss of spiritual
life is only a question of time. Atom
by atom their interest in Divine things
dissipates ; headland after headland of
faith sinks into indistinctness in their
drift away from them; doctrine and
duty lose their hold on their acceptance
and conduct ; and at last they have a
name to live and are dead.—Monday
Club Sermons.


Ananias and Sapphira.

I. The sin of Ananias and Sapphira.
—It is expressly stated to have been
“lying unto the Holy Ghost” (v. 3).
It will be observed that in vers. 3 and
4 the personality and Deity of the
Spirit -are asserted in an incidental
way. Peter varies the charge of lying
to the Spirit in the third verse to lying
to God in the fourth. 1. Their act
was gratuitous.—In the community of
goods which prevailed in the infant
Church the rights of property were
not obliterated; there was no com-
pulsory communism. 2. Jt was marked
by covetousness. There is a strange
mingling of discordant elements in
their act. They loved the praise of
men, and were unwilling to be held in
less consideration than Barnabas. But
they loved money quite as well, even
better. Zeal and faith of some sort
led them to profess the name of Christ,
but beneath their profession lurked a
hateful lust for influence and greed of
money. 3. Unbelief also entered into


124


and aggravated their guilt. This had
a twofold aspect. Obviously, they
distrusted God. We can imagine that
the failure of the sustentation-fund
was the subject of anxious debate
between them. ‘Suppose this com-
munity of goods should become ex-
hausted, what then? Is it not our
duty to retain some security against
the contingencies of the future?”
They feared to endanger their comforts
beyond recall; a portion of their
property would be safest in their own
hands. Moreover, there appears to
have been a worse feature than distrust
of God in their act. There was the
feeling, latent, unconfessed mayhap,
that they would not and could not be
detected in their deed. 4. The sin
was preconcerted. They ‘agreed to-
gether ” to deceive the Church and the
Spirit in the Church. The plan was
concocted deliberately and dispassion-
ately. No doubt they spent much time
and thought in working out a device
which should save appearances with
the Church and gratify their avarice.
Together they contrived the pious
fraud, and they executed it together.
This fact intensifies the criminality of
their conduct. 5. The devil's agency in
the sin. “Ananias, why hath Satan
filled thine heart to lie unto the Holy
Ghost, and to keep back part of the
price of the land?” Covetousness and
unbelief prompted the deceit, we might
be disposed to say. But the apostle
saw deeper. He saw that the devil
had been joined by this guilty couple.
Whether consciously or unconsciously,
this wretched pair was assisted by the
devil in the attempt to impose upon.
the Spirit of God. ‘The device which
they adopted exposed them to his
assaults. Had they been honest with
themselves, with the Church, and,
above all, with God, they had been
kept from the snare of the fowler.
Instead, they helped him weave and
spread the net in which themselves
were taken. Poor victims !

II. Their Punishment—it was in-
stantaneous. As their sin challenged
both the omniscience and justice of


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. V.


—————


God, He at once vindicated the holiness
and majesty of His character. In-
stantly His wrath streamed forth and
consumed the guilty couple.

ITI. The lessons taught by this
solemn incident are many—a few of
which only may be designated. 1. And
mark well the Divine abhorrence of


prevarication. 2. The certainty of the
exposure of hypocrisy. God will un-
mask the hypocrite. 3. Religious
enthusiasm without grace is dangerous,
People run fearful risks when they
profess more than their spiritual
strength can carry.—W. G. Moorehead,
Del,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 12—16.


A Page from the Church’s Life ; or, the Calm before w Storm.

I. The miraculous activity of the apostles.—I. Jts scene. (1) Solomon’s porch,
in the Temple (see on iii, 11). In spite of the Sanhedrim’s prohibitory
menaces the apostles had returned to their accustomed post, thus carrying out
their own intimation (iv. 19, 20), and exhibiting praiseworthy faith and
fortitude. (2) The streets. Wherever the apostles were expected to come the
sick were by friends carried out in couches and laid in the way, that at least
Peter’s shadow might fall upon them. 2. Jts form. (1) Generally, signs and
wonders (see ii. 22). (2) Particularly, works of healing, wonders of mercy
as distinguished from miracles of judgment like those performed on Ananias and
Sapphira. This special activity in healing shown by the apostles was a manifest
answer to the Church’s prayer (iv. 30). 3. Jts subjects. The people—the
outside public as opposed to the inside brethren. The miracle of judgment took
place within the Church; the deeds of mercy were performed among the un-
believers. 4. Jés result. It impressed the people towards the new cause, and
gained accessions from their ranks to the Church community.

II. The rapid growth of the Church—1. Multttudes were added to the Lord.
This was not what. the Sanhedrists expected. Doubtless Annas and _ his
colleagues supposed the apostles, with their followers, would be overawed by the
display or authority which had been made. Little knew they that the apostles
had on their sides, at their backs, and within their souls a higher authority and
stronger power than that of the Sanhedrim (Rom. viii. 31). Nor were the
Church’s accessions flowing in in smaller, but larger numbers than before ;
and these composed not of women merely, who might be regarded as sentimental
and impulsive, but of men also, who were less easily moved by feeling than by
judgment. ‘ Men and women to make amends for Ananias and Sapphira,” writes
Stier, who likewise adds, “it must, of course, be understood that when married
couples were among these believers, their children were included in the bond of
union and were looked upon as hallowed.” 2. Through the preaching of the word.
It cannot be inferred that the apostles only worked miracles, and did not teach.
Nor is it reasonable to hold that what attracted the multitudes was the exhibition
of supernatural power rather than the unfolding of Christian wisdom. It is not
the sign that converts, but the thing signified. The Holy Ghost applies not miracles
but truth to the heart and conscience (see John xvi. 13, 14). 3. In spite of the
judgment pronounced on Ananias and Sapphira. At first this appeared to exercise
a deterrent influence upon the crowds. Ultimately the word of God prevailed, and
drew them over to the apostles and to the Lord in large companies.

Learn.—1. That no opposition will hinder a true minister from his sacred
calling. 2. That nothing should be allowed to break the unity of a Christian
congregation. 3. That faithful ministers and united Churches will always command
the respect of outside beholders. 4. That so long as a Church is alive with the
life of the Holy Spirit it will grow. 5. That it is a mistake to fancy Christian
discipline will frighten people from joining a Church.

125


CHAP V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a Enna aS


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12-14. The Palmy Days of the
Primitive Ohurch.—Then the Christian
disciples were—

I. United among themselves, which
they have never been since.

lI. Magnified by the people. —
Whereas, alas! now they are too often
despised.

IIT. Increased from without.—In-
stead of which there has often been a
falling away from within.


Ver. 14. Four Causes of Joy im a
Christian Church.

I. When the preaching of the gospel
results in making believers.—That
shows the truth is being preached with
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven.

II. When those who believe do not
stand aloof in isolation from their
Christian brethren, but connect them-
selves with the fellowship of the saints.
This is what is meant by being added
to the Lord.

TII. When the number of the
Church’s converts is large.—No doubt
one soul is infinitely valuable; but
special gladness attends the ingathering
of multitudes.

IV. When the Church’s converts
include persons of both sexes.— Within
the Church there is a place for both
men and women. Each has services
to render which the other cannot per-
form. A cause of regret it is when
either of them stand aloof in hostility
or indifference towards Christianity.


Ver. 15. Peter’s Shadow.

I. It is not affirmed in the narrative
that Peter’s shadow wrought miracles,
though Paul’s handkerchiefs and aprons
did (xix. 12).—That Peter’s shadow
could effect cures may have been only
a notion of the people, not of Peter or
of Luke.

‘II. If Peter’s shadow wrought
miracles, it was only instrumentally,


126


as was the case with the hem of
Christ’s garment (Matt. xx. 21) and the
handkerchiefs and aprons of Paul.—
Any instrument will do to work a
miracle with when it is used by Him
who can work equally well with or
without an instrument.

TII. If Peter's shadow wrought
miracles, the credit was due neither
to the shadow nor to Peter, but to God,
“who alone doeth great wonders ”
(Psalm exxxvi. 4), and to Christ, from
whom the healing virtue proceeded.

IV. If Peter's shadow wrought
miracles, how much more could Peter’s
Master, the Risen Christ, do the
same !

Note on Peter’s Shadow.—* We need
find no stumbling-block in the fact of
Peter’s shadow having been believed to
be (or, as is surely implied, having
been) the medium of working miracles.
Cannot the ‘Creator Spirit’ work with
any instruments or with none, as pleases
Him? And what is a hand or a voice
more than a shadow, except that the
analogy of the ordinary instrument is
a greater help to faith in the recipient ?
Where faith, as apparently here, did
not need this help, the less likely
medium was adopted” (Alford). ‘‘Those
who take offence at the healing virtue
of Peter’s shadow and of Paul’s sweat-
band (xix. 12) understand not the
humane and condescending gentleness
of God, who deale with all who seek
His help according to each one’s under-
standing. The shadow, indeed, wrought
not the healing, and had any one trusted
in the overshadowing of a mere man he
would assuredly have been punished by
the spirit-trying apostle ; but the heal-
ing was wrought by the power of God,
which the sick sought in Peter, who
looked upon them as he did upon the
lame man (iii. 4), and gave them what
he had, according to their faith”
(Besser}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. V.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17-32.


Annas upon the Move ; or, the Bursting of the Storm.

I. The high priest and the angel of the Lord.—The high priest’s action
against the apostles was: 1. Dictated by evil motives. (1) Indignation. If not
grieved at the miraculous activity of the apostles in healing (which they probably
were) he and his associates felt annoy«d at the persistence of the apostles in
teaching doctrines which they, the high priegt and his colleagues, did not believe.
Most men are intolerant of beliefs to which they cannot themselves subscribe.
No matter how excellent in character and beneficent in action other people may
be, unless these swear by their superiors’ Shibboleths, they are disliked, if not
oppressed, for their non-conformity. The Christian Church, to the amazement
of the world, has often followed in the steps of the Jewish Sanhedrim!
(2) Jealousy. The high priest and his associates were offended at the growing
influence of the apostles and the cause they represented. Few things are
harder to bear with equanimity than the popularity of rivals and much more of
opponents. The increase of the apostles in public esteem meant the decline of
the Sanhedrists in national favour. 2. Concurred in by his associates. ‘‘ Those
that were with him ” were not his colleagues in the Sanhedrim afterwards men-
tioned as the council (ver. 21), but his co-religionists, belonging to the sect of
the Sadducees. LEvil-doers never want allies. The difficulty has ever been to
find fellow-helpers in good. 3. Observed by an unseen eye. The Lord noticed the
angry feelings of the high priest, his rising indignation and jealousy, the secret
confabulations between him and his associates, the order issued for the arrest of
the apostles, the execution of that order by the officers of the Sanhedrim, and the
consignment of the servants of Jesus to the public ward. “ All things are naked
and manifest unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to do” (Heb. iv. 13;
compare i. 24; Rev. ii. 18, 23). 4. Cownterworked by an invisible agent. ‘‘ An
angel of the Lord,” celestial intelligences being all subject to the exalted Christ
(1 Peter iii. 22; Rev. xxii. 16), visited the prison by night at his King’s command
(Heb. i. 14), opened its doors, as he or another (xii. 7) afterwards did to Peter,
and having fetched them out commanded them to resume teaching in the temple.
When Christ and His battalions take the field against confederacies of evil,
whether human or angclic, these are sure to be overthrown and their projects
scattered to the winds (Psalm ii. 4, 5).

II. The high priest and the senate of Israel Having effected the arrest of
the apostles, the high priest and his confederates convened a meeting of the
Sanhedrim or High Ecclesiastical Council. 1. When? At daybreak, about
6 a.m., before which hour a meeting of the court could not be held,—about the
time when the apostles had resumed their public exhortations in the temple.

2. Why? To try the prisoners who on the preceding night had been committed
to the cells, and were now to be fetched from confinement and placed at the bar.
3. In what spirit ? With a firm determination to put down the nuisance of teaching
in the temple porch about Jesus and the resurrection. Thousands of civic and
ecclesiastical rulers since then have attempted to do the like, and with as little
success. Upon the whole the world’s potentates (and sometimes also the Church’s
rulers) do not relish preaching that talks about Jesus and the resurrection.

TII. The high priest and his apparitors.—1. The bootless errand. Commissioned
to fetch the apostles, the officers of the Sanhedrim repaired to the prison house
and found it shut, with the warders at their posts. Having opened its massive
gates and penetrated to the interior, to their astonishment they discovered no
man within. However they had escaped the prisoners were gone. 2. The
perplexed judges. When the officers returned with their tale, the high priest, the


127


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
pn ee


captain of the temple, and the chief priests were filled with terror. ‘Thus con-
science doth make cowards of us all.” They could not tell what to make of it.
What the upshot of this incident might be they could not predict. Not for an
instant dreamt they of treachery on the part of the gaolers ; they discerned that
it was a miracle by which they were confronted, and they feared. 3. The |
startling announcement. Whilst pondering the situation, they became further
dismayed by the exciting news, reported by a messenger, that the men wanted
had resumed their old work of preaching in the temple. This must have strongly
confirmed the Sanhedrists’ suspicion that the escape from prison had been effected
by supernatural means. Prisoners who had attained liberty by treachery would
hardly have returned to their accustomed haunts. The fact that the apostles
were again preaching in the temple indicated they had some superior authority
at their backs. 4. Zhe second apprehension. The captain of the temple and the
officers of the Sanhedrim, having renewed endeavours to arrest the preachers,
used no violence on this occasion because of secret alarms for their own safety,
the people being on the side of the apostles. Nor was violence required, since the
apostles offered no resistance—in this following both the teaching (Matt. v. 39)
and example (John xviii. 8) of their Master.

IV. The high priest and the apostles.—1 The accusation. Set before the
council, the apostles were charged by the president, in the name of his colleagues,
with three crimes: (1) With having disobeyed the instructions given by the
court at a previous sederunt. A grave offence had the court’s orders been just,
and dangerous considering the men who composed (iv. 5, 6) the court, and the
temper in which these then were (ver.17). (2) With having filled Jerusalem with
their teaching, an indirect admission of, and unwilling testimony to, the growing
popularity of the new religion, as well as of the unwearied assiduity of its
teachers in promulgating their tencts. (3) With seeking to fix on them, the
Sanhedrists, the guilt of their Master’s murder. This was putting into words
what the councillors’ own hearts kept whispering. Conscience is ill to silence
even in the worst and most ignorant of men; how much more in men who are
good (after a fashion) and enlightened? 2. The defence. Offered by Peter and
the apostles, or by him on their behalf and with their concurrence. (1) A great
principle restated. That it was their (the apostles’ and every one’s) duty to obey
God rather than man. Of this principle they had reminded the court on a former
occasion (iv. 19), and now satisfy themselves with its repetition. About the second
and third charges, which, being true, needed no defence, they are silent, confining
their remarks to the one which, though also true, required justification. And the
justification they offered was short, simple, sufficient, and unanswerable. (2) A
great story rehearsed, in four parts. /%rst, that they had slain Jesus by hanging
Him on a tree—they, the Jewish nation in general, and the Sanhedrists in parti-
cular. Peter and his fellow-apostles had manifestly lost nothing of their boldness
and plain-speaking since last they stood before their accusers. Second, that the
God of their fathers had raised up Jesus from the dead (once more the obnoxious
doctrine !), and exalted Him to the right hand of the Majesty on high (a claim
for divine dignity to the man they had slain !). Third, that Christ had been
exalted as Prince and Saviour, from which it could be gathered that they had
totally misconceived His character and mistaken His person. ourth, that the
grand object contemplated by His exaltation was that He might give repentance
unto Israel (them and the people) and remission of sins. A strong pressing
home of guilt on His accusers. (3) A great claim reasserted. That they, the
accused, were’ witnesses of these facts and doctrines complained of—witnesses
appointed and put forth by Him, and for Him, and therefore His witnesses
responsible to Him alone. Yea, going beyond this, that the Holy Ghost jointly
witnessed with them, since, having been given, to them by God and dwelling in

128


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. V.





them, He spoke and acted through them in the words they uttered and the
miracles they wrought.

Learn.—1. That “the angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
Him, and delivereth them” (Psalm xxxiv. 7). 2. That ‘He who sitteth in the
heavens ” laughs at His enemies and has them “in derision ” (Psalm ii. 4). 3. That
the doubts ot the chief priests as to whereunto this (Christianity) would grow
have been largely answered—the faith planted by the apostles intends to grow
till it fills the whole earth (Luke xiii. 21). 4. That nothing can release from
responsibility to God (Kecl. xii. 13). 5. That Christ will pardon even His
greatest enemies if they repent.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. Misdirected Indignation. III. His sphere.—The temple; or,
I. Against the publication of the in New Testament times the Christian
truth, rather than against the dis- Church.


semination of error. ' IV. His theme.—All the words of
II. Against well doing, instead of this life—the gospel, the whole gospel,
against evil doing. and nothing but the gospel.
ITI. Against good men, and not V. His audience.—“ The people,” to
against bad. believers and unbelievers ; to the former


IV. Against other people’s supposed for edification, to the latter for con-
wickedness, and not against one’s own version.
real sins.
Ver. 23. The World’s Veto upon
Ver. 19. Ministering Spirits—The Preaching.
angels of God are represented in Scrip- J. Unreasonable.—To expect men to
ture, and in this instance appear— keep silence who have been commanded
I. As the friends of the righteous. by Christ to speak, who know what
—Shown by the service rendered to they speak to be true, and who feel


the apostles. themselves impelled to speak by the
IT. As watchers in the night.— inner voice of conscience.

Proved by the observation taken of II. Unjust.—To command men to

the apostles’ incarceration. desist from preaching is to invade the
III. As rescuers from trouble— domain of conscience which belongs

Seen in the opening of the prisondoors, alone to Christ, and is therefore in the

and liberation of the prisoners. highest degree culpable and _repre-


IV. As directors in the way of hensible.
duty.—Exemplified by.the order given III. Unkind.—To impose silence upon
to the liberated apostles. men who offer mankind the highest
V. As messengers of the heavenly conceivable blessing (repentance and
life to the world.—Suggested by the remission of sins) on the easiest possible
commission put into the hands of the terms (faith in and obedience to Jesus
apostles. Christ) is surely the opposite of bene-
VI. As conveyers to the heavenly  volent.
life and eternal joy.—Evinced by the IV. Unsuccessful—Those who at-
interest taken in the gospel of life— tempt to put down preaching never
Compiled from Lange. really succeed. So long as Christ
lives and reigns they never will suc-
Ver. 20. The Preacher's Commission. ceed. All interdicts upon the gospel
I. His authority.—The divine com- break down. The more men are
mandment—“ Go ye !” punished for preaching, the hotter
II. His vocation.—To “speak,” not grows their zeal to persist in the
to write, but to proclaim with the voice. forbidden work.


i" 129


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Ver. 29. Obedience to God and Man.

I. It is possible to obey man rather
than God—which is sin. Unfortunately
this is often done, when inclination and
supposed self-interest side with man’s
orders rather than with God’s.

II. It is proper to obey God rather
than man—which is duty. Proper in


the sense of right, when God’s orders


and man’s come into collision, man


being a creature who is himself under‘


authority to God.

III. It is practicable to obey man
as well as God—which is both desirable
and dutiful, when man’s orders are not
countermanded by God’s.


The Power of the Civil Magistrate.

I. Its source.—God (Rom. xiii. 1).
Civil government a natural institution
and divine ordinance,

II. Its sphere.—Civil affairs, or men
considered solely as citizens. Things
temporal and material, social and
political.

III. Its limitations—1. Into the
domain of conscience, and that signifies
into the realm of religion it dare not
intrude. 2. Even in its own sphere
it is forbidden to enjoin anything
which contravenes the law of God.
3. The power of the sword, or the
infliction of pains and penalties, is
permissible solely within its own specific
province.

IV. Its guide.—1. The light of the
natural conscience. 2. The teachings
of revelation so far as these bear on
the duties of magistrates and citizens.


Ver. 32. The Witness of the Holy Ghost.

I. The subject of His witness.—
“These things.” The facts of Christ’s
death, resurrection, aud exaltation, and
the doctrines founded on and connected
with them.

II. The medium of His witness.—
“Those who obey Him,” the Holy
Ghost, by believing the gospel; whom
He thereupon inhabits, and through
whom He delivers His testimony.

III. The object of His witness,—
The unbelieving world who, by be-
holding the faith of Christians and


130


listening to their testimony, are fre-
quently brought to believe.


The Gift of the Holy Ghost.

I. The Author of this gift.—God,
the Father, from whom the Holy
Ghost proceedeth. No contradiction
to ii. 33.

II. The recipients of this gift.—
Those who obey God, who commands
gen to repent and believe upon His
Son.

III. The nature of this gift—An
inhabitation of the repenting and be-
lieving heart by the gracious influences
of the Divine Spirit.

IV. The object of this gift—To
enable those who receive it to witness
for Jesus Christ.

Vers. 17-32. The Fortunes of the
Twelve.

I. Incarcerated by the Sanhedrim.
—A signal honour to suffer affliction
for Christ’s sake.

II. Delivered by an angel.—“ Are
they not all ministering spirits?” ete.

III. Honoured by the people.—
These at this time heard the apostles
gladly. Popular favour not always a
good sign. Here, however, it was.

IV. Supported by the Holy Spirit —
A proof that they were obeying His
directions.


Vers. 17-32. The Sanhedrim and the
College of the Apostles.

In considering the lessons to be
drawn from this history we see—

I. How God overrules persecution
and opposition for the good of His
Church.—It seemed indeed a dark hour
for the cause of Christ when all of the
apostles were shut up in the common
prison, and left, apparently, in the
power of their bitterest enemies.

II. This history shows us rational-
ism confounded.—Just when rational-
ism thought to put down the super-
natural, lo! it appears in a new
manifestation before them. There
was evidently a power working for
these apostles which prison-walls.
bolts, bars, and guards of soldiers could
not restrain. The perplexity of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. V.





council is further increased when one
came saying, “‘ Behold, the men whom
ye put in prison are standing in the
temple, and teaching the people.” It
was this conduct, as much as the
strangencss of their deliverance, that
impressed the senate. Then, as often
since, men were made to see that there
is a hidden, spiritual force about the
gospel which cannot be accounted for,
save on the ground that the life of
Christ is in it.

III. We can also learn from this
that the enemies of the gospel are
made to fear and respect those who are
fearless in proclaiming it.

IV. Finally, we have in this history
Peter’s address to the Sanhedrim.—It
is the jewel of which all the rest is
only the casket. As a defence nothing
could be more admirable and to the
point than the words of Peter. The
specifications in the indictment against
the apostles were two: first, that they
had disobeyed the lawful authority in
continuing to preach after they had
been strictly charged to speak no more
in the name of Jesus; second, that
by their preaching they were stirring
up the people to avenge the crucifixion


of Jesus upon the Sanhedrim. To the
first Peter replies, “We ought to
obey God rather than men.” This was
their justification for the disobedience
charged. In answer to the second he
fearlessly tells the Sanhedrim their
guilt, and charges upon them the death
of Jesus. It is most significant that
in the defence which Peter makes, as
indeed in all apostolic preaching,
special prominence is given to the re-
surrection of the Lord Jesus. The
apostle well knew that the larger
portion of the Sanhedrim was of the
sect of the Sadducees, yet he does not
hesitate in his testimony. There are
three great indestructible facts that
have remained all through the ages
as witnesses to the reality of the re-
surrection. The first is the testimony of
the apostl:s ; the second is the Christian
Church ; the third is the ministry of
the Holy Spirit. The proof which they
furnish is conclusive, and we may rest
assured that our holy faith, so glorious
in the hopes which it inspires and so
wonderful in the destiny which it opens
for sinful men, is founded upon the
ROCK.—S. J. Niccolls, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 33-42.


Gamaliel and his Colleagues ; or, a Friend at Court.

I. The person of Gamaliel.—1. His name. Borne by more than one celebrated
scribe of the first and second centuries after Christ, this name—meaning
“Benefit of God” (Numb. i. 10, ii. 20, vii. 54)—belonged first to Rabbi
Gamaliel, the elder Hillel’s grandson; Gamaliel the younger flourished about
80-118 a.p. The former, in all probability, the individual referred to by Luke.
2. His profession. (1) A member of the Sanhedrim—“ one in the council” ;
hardly its president (the Talmud). (2) A Pharisce, one of the straitest sects of
religionists in Jerusalem, who differed from the Sadducees in holding the doctrine
of a resurrection, and outdid these in extravagant adherence to the letter of the
Mosaic Law. (3) A scribe or doctor of the law, virtually a professor of theology
like his grandfather Hillel and his father Simon (said to be, but hardly likely,
the Simeon of Luke ii. 25), whom he succeeded. He is reported to have had
one thousand scholars, of whom five hund.ed studied the law, and five hundred
Greek wisdom (Talmud)—a statement which, if it could be depended on, would
shed an interesting light on Paul’s knowledge of the Greek poets. (See Riehm’s
Handwirterbuch des Biblischen Altertums, art. Gamaliel). 3. His renown.
“ Had in reputation among all the people,” also among his colleagues, for his zeal
as a Pharisee, his learning as a teacher, and his charity as a man. In corrobo-
ration of the first may be mentioned that when he died men said reverence for
the law, purity, and continence had perished ; the best certificates of the second


13]


CHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








were his brilliant scholars, Onkelos the Targumist and Saul of Tarsus (xxii. 3) ;
the third his counsel to the Sanhedrists attested. 4. His history. According to
Christian tradition he embraced Christianity, and, along with his son Ahib and
Nicodemus, was baptised by Peter and John, the Clementine Recognitions even
affirming that at this time he was a secret disciple. This statement, however,
Jewish tradition declines to verify, making him die a Pharisee eighteen years
before the destruction of Jerusalem.

II. The advice of Gamaliel—1l. His recommendations. Two things he urged
upon his colleagues. (1) Caution. To “take heed to themselves with regard to
the apostles what they intended to do.” Always commendable, even in a right
course, circumspection and prudence are specially desirable when the path
inviting entrance is dubious and dangerous, not to say wrong. To look well
before one leaps is a safe maxim. (2) Tolerance. To hold their hands and let
the apostles alone. If they could not help their prisoners’ cause, at least
they should not hinder it. ‘‘ Neither punish them for what they have done nor
restrain them for the future. Connive at them—let them take their course—let
not our hand be upon them” (Henry). This, the least the truth has a right to
expect and receive at the hands of men. 2. His arguments. Also two: one for
each recommendation. (1) One for the caution, this, drawn from past experience,
that possibly need would not arise for action in the matter, as the present move-
ment would most likely run the course of other popular agitations which in former
times had suddenly sprung up, flourished for a season, and eventually subsid:d.
One such had been the insurrection of Theudas. (Vote. This Theudas was
not the revolutionary of that name in the reign of Claudius, and under the
procuratorship of Cuspius Fadus a.p, 44, ten or twelve years after this speech
of Gamaliel (Jos., Ant., XX. v. 1), but either another of the same name, which
was common, who had figured in the public gaze shortly before; or the Judas,
who, after Herod’s death, led a robber band against the palace of Sepphoris
in Galilee (Jos., Ant., XVII. x. 5), Judas, according to Matt. x. 3; Luke vi. 16,
being interchangeable with Thaddeus or Theudas; or the Simon (Jos., Ané.,
XVII. x. 6), one of Herod’s slaves, who got himself proclaimed king, burnt
down the royal palace at Jericho, with others of the king’s houses throughout
the land, but eventually was captured and beheaded—it being supposed
(Sonntag, see Hackett) that Theudas was a title Simon had assumed on
pretending to royal dignity). Another of these abortive insurrections was that
headed by Judas of Galilee (Jos., Ant., XX. v. 2; Wars, II. viii. 1), called also
a Gaulonite—,e.,an inhabitant of the district east of Galilee (Jos., Ant., XVIII.
i. 1), who, in the days of the taxing, or enrolment—.e., registration of persons
and property with a view to taxation, conducted under Cyrenius (Luke ii. 2),
raised a revolt against Rome which attracted numerous supporters, but terminated
in failure, he himself getting killed and his followers dispersed. One of these
followers is believed (but without foundation) to have been Simon the Canaanite,
or Simon Zelotes, the apostle. (2) For the tolerance this, derived from reflection,
that ‘resistance was éither needless or hopeless ” (Plumptre), that the movement,
if of men, would sooner or later collapse, while if of God, it would defy all
attempts at overthrow, while those who opposed it would be guilty of fighting
against God. Ifthe first pait of this argument sprang from timidity, the second
was the outcome of sober judgment. If God was behind the apostles it would be
fruitless and dangerous to stand before them. 3. His motives. Various have
been suggested. (1) A secret conviction that the movement was of God, though
as yet not prepared to act on this conviction and espouse it boldly. According to
this view (which, however, is pure conjecture), Gamaliel was a secret disciple
like Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, probably one of “the great company
of priests” who soon after “ became obedient to the faith” (vi. 7). (2) A latent


132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. V.


—_——_





sympathy with the apostle’s doctrine concerning Jesus, arising from the fact of
‘is being a Pharisee, and therefore a believer in the resurrection, and from the
probable circumstance of His having sat among the doctors whom Jesus, when
a boy, questioned in the temple (Luke ii. 46). (3) A perceptible leaning to the
sentiments of his two colleagues, Nicodemus who once advised that Christ should
be let alone (John vii. 50, 51), and Joseph of Arimathea, who consented not to
the counsel and deed of Caiaphas (Luke xxiii. 51). (4) Discernment to perceive
that if the movement was purely fanatical, it would not be suppressed but only
rendered more violent by opposition.

III. The success of Gamaliel—His advice prevailed. 1. Zo all appearance
unanimously. At least no opposition was offered to his cautious counsel.
Having a majority in their favour, his sentiments were accepted without a division,
and became the finding of the court. Yet 2. Wot altogether wholly. Though
persuaded to depart from their murderous intention (ver. 33) and to spare their
prisoners’ lives, his colleagues could not appease their rage without inflicting on
the apostles some punishment. Perhaps, also, they felt that something must be
done on the one hand to justify their interference with the apostles’ liberty, and on
_ the other hand to express their displeasure at the apostles’ disobedience. Accord-
ingly they beat or scourged the apostles as Christ had been (John xix. 1), and as
Paul afterwards was scourged on five occasions (2 Cor. xi. 24). The scourge was
a whip of two lashes, ‘knotted with bones or heavy indented circles of bronze,
or terminated by hooks, in which case it was aptly denominated a scorpion”
(quoted by Hackett). Still, 3. Zo all intents effectually. Charged not to speak
in the name of Jesus—a useless rehearsal of a useless interdict which they could
not obey (iv. 20), the apostles were forthwith dismissed, no doubt reluctantly, their
judges inwardly feeling they would rather have incarcerated permanently, or
killed off finally such obnoxious persons as the apostles were supposed to be, but
yet really so that they ‘“ departed from the presence of the council,” and on their
part triumphantly, rejoicing they had been counted worthy to suffer dishonour
for the name of Him whom they served, in whom they believed, and of whom
they witnessed, and permanently so that ‘every day in the temple and at home
they ceased not to teach and to preach Jesus as the Christ.”

Learn.—1. That God can raise up champions to speak for His people and de-
fend His cause in the most unlikely places and at the most unlikely times.
Examples: Moses at the court of Pharaoh; Elijah in the days of Ahab; John
the Baptist in the reign of Herod. Luther, Latimer, Knox. 2. That good men
generally carry with them an influence for good which weighs with and tells upon
their contemporaries. Witness Samuel and Daniel in Old Testament times ;
Nicodemus and Gamaliel in the Sanhedrim. 3. That God’s servants may
always comfort themselves with the reflection that His cause is invincible.
Emblem: the bush burning yet not consumed. 4. That those who fight against
God are engaged in a losing battle (Isa. xxvii. 4). 5. That God’s servants and
Christ’s followers may suffer wrong, and yet the cause for which they suffer win
the day. 6. That to suffer for righteousness’ sake is the highest honour a
Christian can enjoy on earth (Matt. v. 10; 1 Peter iv. 16). 7. That always and
everywhere Christians should publish the name of Jesus as the Christ, or
Anointed King and Saviour of mankind.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 36. The World’s Somebodies.— Vers. 38, 39. Gamaliel’s counsel.
Are not unfrequently.—1l. Pretentious I. The good advice it contained.
nobodies. 2. Worthless impostors. 3. Ar- 1]. To abstain from injuring the
rogant deceivers, 4, Disastrousleaders. apostles or hindering the cause they


133


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a aad


advocated. This was practically a
dissuasive against persecution. 2. To
wait with patience for the decision
which Providence would ultimately
give on this as on every other move-
ment. ‘Time tries all.” 3. To be-
ware of doing anything that might
seem like fighting against God.

IJ. The
preached. 1. That the goodness of a
cause may always be judged by its
success. 2. That men should regulate
their conduct by the bearing it will
have upon their own interests. 3. That
man’s responsibilities towards the
cause of God and Christ are discharged
by simply letting it alone.


Ver. 39. Fighting against God.
T. An old sin.
II. A common practice.
III. A hopeless enterprise.
IV. A perilous warfare.
V. A heinous wickedness.


Vers. 35-39. Gamatiel’s Counsel.

I. A convenient counsel for the
spiritually idle and for the politicians
of the world.

II. A true counsel in opposition to
senseless zeal.

III. A half counsel, when it con-
cerns us to recognise, decide, and act at
once.—Beck in Lange.


Vers. 38, 39. Of men or of God ; or,
the Origin of Christianity.

I. Christianity must be either of
men or of God.—Hither it is a creation
or evolution of the human mind or a
production and revelation of the divine
Spiit. Hither one, it may be the best,
of ordinary nature religions, like those
of paganism which it supplanted, lke
Buddhism, Confucianism, and Moham-
medanism, cr a distinctly supernatural
religion, as Christ (John vii. 16) and
His apostles affirmed that it was, and
as its adherents believed it to be. No
middle alternative is possible,

II. If Christianity be of men it will
assuredly come to nought.—It may
seem for a time to be possessed of


134


doubtful doctrine it™


vitality, to manifest growth and to be
productive of beneficial results, but
these appearances will only be tem-
porary. It will not succeed in lifting
men much higher than other nature
religions; it will not extend its
dominion over a much greater territory
than these; it will not exhibit qualities
of permanence beyond what are dis-
played by these.

III. Thus far Christianity has not
come to nought.—It has survived the
assaults of paganism, and even over-
thrown paganism wherever it has
spread. It has resisted the still more
dangerous onsets of philosophy and
science, and in a large measure Chris-
tianised these. It has stood up against
the combinations of world empires, and
reduced these, in name at least, to sub-
jection beneath the sceptre of Christ.
It has maintained its vitality and in-
fluence notwithstanding the corruptions
of its purity that have arisen within its
own burdens and from the midst of its
own adherents. It has met the deepest
spiritual wants of the individual soul
and of the worldin a way that no other
religion has done. It has extended its
sway to almost every country under
heaven. After nineteen centuries it
evinces no sign of decrepitude and
decay. Other religions are waxing old
and vanishing away; it is with the
passing years increasing in vigour and
acceptance.

IV. Hence Christianity can only be
of heavenly origin.—This a necessary
inference from the propositions laid
down by Gamaliel. ‘“‘ By its fruits ye
shall know it.” These are such as can
be explained only on the hypothesis of
its divine origin. This renders it cer-
tain that Christianity will prove itself
to be successful—+z.e., serving the ends
of a religion—i.e., saving; universal,
ultimately embracing the globe; and
permanent, enduring till the close of
time. ‘

V. No combination of forces can
hinder Christianity from eventually
accomplishing its mission —“ Ye will
not be able to overthrow it,” said
Gamaliel. Gamaliel was right. If


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VI.





God be for it who can be against it?
Who can fight successfully against
God? ‘No weapon that is formed
against it shall prosper”; “the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.”

Lessons.—1. The claims which Chris-
tianity as a supernatural religion has
on the minds and hearts of men.
2. The duty of Christians doing every-
thing to further its triumph. 3. The
folly of attempting to overthrow or
even hinder it.


Ver. 40. The Way of the Holy
Cross.


I. Threatening (iv. 21).


Ver. 41. Suffering Shame for the
Name.

I. Comfort in it. That what one
suffers for is Christ’s name (1 Peter
iv. 14).

IJ. Honour in it. That by means of
suffering one can help on the triumph
of that name.


III. Glory in it. Since if one suffers


' with Christ here, he shall reign with


Christ hereafter (2 Tim. ii. 12).
Four Classes in the School of Suffer-


ang.
I. Obliged to suffer.

II. Willing to suffer.

III. Able to suffer.


II. Imprisonment (v. 18).
III. Scourging (v. 40).
IV. Martyrdom (vii. 60).


IV. Permitted to suffer.—Hart-
man in Lange.


CHAPTER VI.


DISSENSION IN THE CHURCH—THE RisE oF A New OrpER or CHURCH
OFFICIALS.


§ 1. The Church’s first Strife allayed ; or, the Institution of the Diaconate (vers.
1-7).

§ 2. The Ministry of Stephen ; or, the rising of a Bright Particular Star in the
Church’s Firmament (vers. 8-15).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. In those days should be in these days,—i.e., shortly before Stephen’s martyrdom
which did not long antedate Saul’s conversion in A.D, 37. Hence the events recorded in the
present chapter may be set down as having taken place in A.D. 35 or 36, It is satisfactory
to know that while Baur denies, Zeller, and Weizsicker admit that the ensuing narrative
concerning Stephen proceeds upon undeniably historical ground. Was multiplied.—Better,
was multiplying, or becoming numerous, through the teaching and preaching spoken of in
ver. 42. Grecians.—Not Greeks, but Hel/enists or Greek-speaking Jews of the Diaspora
(ix, 29, xi. 20), as distinguished from the Hebrews or Palestinian Jews (Phil. iii. 5), who
talked in Syro-Chaldaic or Aramean. Were (habitually) neglected.—Or overlooked, the
imperfect hinting at the frequency of the occurrence, though it is not clear whether the
complaint was well founded or only imaginary. The daily ministrations were not of private
benefactions (Wendt) but of public alms from the funds already mentioned (ii. 45, iv. 35),
either of food or of money.

Ver. 2. The twelve must have included Matthias (i. 26), whose apostleship is thus placed
beyond dispute as valid, at least in the judgment of both his colleagues and the Church.
The multitude of the disciples.—Of those resident in Jerusalem, since many must by this
time have left the city. Not reason.—ovx« dpecrov, properly = non placet, not pleasing, or not
fit, becoming, suitable. Leave.—In the sense of “ forsaking,” “ deserting,” “ discontinuing.”
Serve or minister to tables.—The apostles had seemingly at first undertaken this work,
acting “not merely as a teaching college, judicial bench, court of representatives, but also
as an administrative authority; specially arranging, distributing, and superintending the
feedings” (Holtzmann),

135


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
pei i i a ok i

Ver. 3. Wherefore, brethren, or according to some MSS., but, brethren, look ye out.—lIf the
selection was made by the congregation, the appointment proceeded from the apostles. Of
honest report.—Lit. attested persons—i.e., of good report (compare Luke iv. 22 ; 1 Tim. v. 10).
For Holy Ghost read Spirit.

Ver. 4. But we will give ourselves continually to prayer.—The idea is that of steadfast
perseverance,

Ver. 5. On the names of the deacons see “ Homiletical Analysis.” That all the seven were
Hellenists arose not from the circumstance that they were intended solely to look after the
Hellenist widows’ interests—of which there is no hint in the narrative ; but probably from
a desire to avoid anything that might look like favouring the Hebrew widows (Holtzmann),
The statement that Nicolas was a proselyte suggests that all the others were Jews.

Ver. 6. They, the apostles laid their hands on them, the deacons.—The first mention in
Acts, but not the last (xiii. 3), of this ceremony which occurred in the Old Testament; in
the consecration of the Levites (Numb. viii. 10), and in the appointment of Joshua (Numb.
xxvii. 23) and afterwards in the New in the ordination of ministers (1 Tim. iv. 14; Heb.
vi. 2).

Ve 7. Increased and multiplied.—The tenses (imperfect) indicating gradual and continuous
growth, might be rendered kept on increasing and multiplying. A great company of the priests.
—Not merely persons of Levitical descent (Zodckler), but real sacerdotal persons, priests
proper, who must then have been numerous, considering the number, 4,289, that returned
from Babylon (Hzra ii. 36, 38). Obedient to the faith.—A genuine Pauline expression (see
Rom. i. 5).

Ver. 8. PRET CATT to the best texts should be grace (iv. 33); the change having
probably been made to correspond with ver. 5.

Ver. 9. The synagogue which is called, etc., should be of the Libertines and of the Cyrenians
and of, etc. The Rabbis credited Jerusalem with 480 synagogues, but Talmudic information
is not perfectly reliable. The Libertines, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians may have attended
one synagogue (Holtzmann, Hausrath, Zockler, Plumptre), and the Cilicians along with
the Asians another; but the simplest view is to repeat ‘some of,” etc., before each proper
name, and to count as many synagogues as there are names (Meyer, De Wette, Hackett).
The Libertini were Jews who had been slaves at Rome, having been deported thither after
Pompey’s war, but on obtaining their freedom had returned to Jerusalem. ‘Tacitus
(Ann., ii. 85) speaks of 4,000 of such Jewish freedmen as having been banished to
Sardinia. From this class Stephen may have sprung. The Cyrenians were Jews from
Cyrene (ii. 10), of the population of which island the fourth part were Jews. The Alexandrians. »
—From the city of that name, of which the fifth part was Jewish. To the synagogue of
Cilicia Saul of Tarsus may have belonged (vii. 58). Asia, being distinguished from Cilicia,
cannot mean the whole of Asia Minor, but must be restricted to Proconsular Asia, as in
li. 9, xvi. 6, xix. 10, 22, 26, 27, etc. (Holtzmann); though Ramsay (Lhe Church in the Roman
Empire, p. 150) thinks the use of the term here “is quite consistent with either the Roman
(the narrower) or the popular (the wider) sense.” y

Ver. 11. Suborned.—/.e., secretly instructed, putting the charge into their mouths (com-
pare Matt. xxvi, 59, 60). Blasphemous words.—Compare Matt. xxvi. 65.

Ver. 12. The elders and the Scribes.—The classes from which the Sanhedrim was taken.

Ver. 13, Set up.—Introduced and placed before the council (Hackett). False witnesses.—
No extravagant exaggeration of Luke, contradicted by the actual facts of the case (Baur,
Zeller, Overbeck), since, according to chap. vii. Stephen had made no such assault upon the
Law and the Temple as that with which he was charged (Zéckler). It is noticeable that the
adjective blasphemous is now in the best texts omitted as an insertion from ver. 11.

Ver, 14. This Jesus of Nazareth_—In the witnesses’ mouths an expression of contempt.
Shall destroy this place.—The temple, in a room or chamber of which the court may have
been sitting. Based probably on a reminiscence of Christ’s words in John ii. 19, which
Stephen may have quoted. The customs which Moses delivered us.—Compare xvi. 21,
xxi, 21; meaning the ceremonial ordinances.

Ver. 15, Ail that sat in the council. Baur finds in the statement that the scene with
reference to Stephen was laid before the council a desire to institute a parallel between
Stephen’s trial and that of Christ; but no sufficient reason can be given why the accuracy of
Luke’s narrative should be challenged. Weizsiicker admits that Stephen was put upon his
trial, and, as the result, stoned to death (see on vii. 59), The face of an augel.—Sienifying
more than that Stephen’s countenance was illumined by a radiant serenity produced by the
fulness of the Spirit which dwelt within him (Holtzmann). At the least the expression
points to a supernatural lustre like that with which the face of Moses shone on descending
from Sinai (Exod. xxxiv. 29-35; 2 Cor. iii. 13). According to Old Testament conceptions
angels were superterrestrial beings, who, in order to be seen by men, were able to assume
bodily forms corresponding to their rank. Since all in the council beheld Stephen’s face, it is
clear that the historian is not dealing with a vision, but depicting an external phenomenon.


136


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VI.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—7.


The Institution of the Diaconate ; or, the Church’s First Strife allayed.

I. The occasion of its institution—1. The rapid increase of the Church’s
members. It was certainly gratifying that, notwithstanding the persecutions
directed against the apostles, their labours in propagating the gospel were
attended by conspicuous success. The remarkable influx of disciples which took
place under their preaching would most likely have called for assistance of some
sort in the organisation of the Christian community. The special form of
assistance they did solicit was dictated by the state of matters now to be
mentioned. 2. The unexpected rise of dissension among the Church's members.
(1) The opposing parties in the Church were the Palestinian, or Hebrew (2.c.,
Syro-Chaldaic, or Aramaic) speaking, and the Grecian, or Greek-speaking Jews.
Though both of one blood, they were nevertheless divided by speech, and as a
consequence by habits of thought and social customs. The rivalry, and even
jealousy between them, the Hebrew or Conservative party, who adhered with
greater closeness and tenacity to the law and traditions of Mosaism, and the
Grecian (Hellenists) or Liberal party, who had been influenced by the broader
culture and laxer notions of the empire generally, perpetuated itself for long
years in the Christian Church, and was a source of much strife during the early
centuries of our era, (2) The cause of their dissension was the habitual neglect
(whether studied or accidental, real or imaginary, is not stated) of the Grecian
widows in the daily distribution of food or money. It is not likely that the
apostles or their helpers deliberately arranged thus to set a mark of inferiority
upon the Greek-speaking Christians ; but one can readily perceive how widows of
foreign origin might not be so well known as those who resided in Palestine and
Jerusalem, and how, being foreigners, they might have greater difficulty in making
their wants known and getting them attended to. In any case it is not hard to
understand how the Grecian Christians should feel somewhat sensitive over what
had the appearance of a studied neglect.

II. The mode of its institution.—1. The apostolic decision concerning themselves.
(1) To withdraw from the business of dispensing the Church’s alms. Not
because they resented the suspicion of unfairness implied in the complaints of
the Greek-speaking Jews (or Christians). The complaint may have been
just, and (whether it was just or not) the apostles may have seen that some
different arrangement, as, ¢.g., the distribution of the Church’s alms by responsible
officials— would be required in order to restore confidence and prevent the recur-
rence of similar mistakes or complaints. Not because they deemed the service of
tables too mean an occupation for persons of their capacity and dignity. It may
be taken for granted that the apostles were not actuated in their procedure by
personal vanity or self-estcem, but because they considered themselves to have
been called to a higher form of ministry with which this lower interfered, to the
extent of threatenivg to withdraw them altogether from it. In their estimation
preaching was a more exalted form of work than ecting as Church almoners, dis-
tributing the bread of life, a more urgent Jabour than doling out, even to poor
widows, loaves and fishes or the wherewithal to purchase them. And because
this latter was work for which the Church had an ample supply of competent
workers within her ranks. (2) To reserve themselves for the more spiritual
labours of the apostolate—praying and preaching. By-and-by they would need
assistants in these duties also; but in the meantime these claimed their whole
time and attention. N.B.—The position of pre-eminence among ministerial duties
here assigned to praying and preaching should be noted by those who think that
in modern times these should be reduced toa minimum. Praying and preaching


137


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





are twin gospel ministries that never should, and cannot be dissociated except to
the detriment of both. 2. Zhe apostolic direction to the Church members.
(1) What it was. To “look out from among themselves seven men of good
report, full of the Spirit and of wisdom,” whom the apostles might appoint over
the business of serving the Church’s tables. In which direction should be noted :
First, the proper work of the diaconate. “To serve tables,” to distribute the
Church’s alms, and care generally for the poor. This, as the cases of Stephen and
Philip showed, excluded not the exercise, where possessed, of the gift of preach-
ing, praying, or working miracles. Secondly, the requisite qualifications for the
diaconate. Approved character. The deacons (seven in number, most likely
because no more were required ; but see “ Hints on ver. 5”) were to be of “ good
report ”—z.e., of recognised Christian standing and worth (compare 1 Tim. iii. 8-10).
Eminent piety. “Full of the Spirit”—7.e., of the Holy Spirit, which would be
known by the fruits of the Spirit appearing in their lives (Matt. vii. 20).
Practical sagacity. “Full of wisdom,” which probably meant that insight into
truth, discernment of character, and knowledge of how to act, which resulted
from being inspired and led by the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, the body to elect the
diaconate. The congregation of believers. Neither their leaders, the apostles,
nor a committee of their number, but the whole assembly of the Church members
—all who chose to take part in the proceedings, which would likely be the
majority of those residing in Jerusalem. The apostles’ language expressly
recognises the Church as the elective board. Fourthly, the source of authority
for the diaconate. This the apostles as distinctly reserved for themselves. If
the congregation selected, they appointed; if the congregation called, they
ordained. (2) How it was received. “The saying pleased the whole multitude.”
This showed the wisdom by which the apostles had been guided in proposing their
motion ; the confidence with which they were regarded by the believing com-
munity, no one attempting or desiring to dissent ; and the spirit of unity which
still prevailed and could triumph over the incipient stirrings of discord. Happy
the Church whose pastors are guided by the Chief Shepherd, whose counsels are
accepted by their congregations, and whose people are actuated by a spirit of love
and concord! (3) How it was carried out. First, the election of the seven.
‘“‘ They chose Stephen,” etc. (see ‘‘ Hints”). Secondly, the presentation of the seven.
To infer that the election was conducted in the absence of the apostles would not
besafe. Thirdly, the ordination of the seven. The apostles, having prayed, “ laid
their hands upon them.” In this act the brethren did not join, showing that
the authorisation of the new officers proceeded not from them. The laying on of
hands—first mentioned in connection with the blessing of Ephraim and Manasseh
(Gen. xlviii. 10-14), of frequent occurrence in Mosaic ritual (Lev. iii. 2, xvi. 21;
Numb. viii. 12), and used in appointing Joshua to succeed Moses (Numb. xxvii. 18)
—became the customary form in the New Testament Church of Dedication to a
sacred office (xiii. 3, 1 Tim. iv. 14). “It was a symbol of the impartation of
the gifts and graces” which those dedicated “ needed to qualify them for the
office,” and was “ of the nacure of a prayer that God would bestow the necessary
gifts rather than a pledge that these were actually conferred” (Hackett).

III. The result of its institution.—By setting free the apostles to attend to
higher duties important consequences followed. 1. A wide extension of the
gospel. ‘The word of God increased.” The area over which it spread enlarged.
The influence it wielded deepened. 2. A large increase of disciples. Their
number multiplied in Jerusalem greatly. Christ promised, if He were lifted up,
to draw all men unto Himself (John xii. 32); and wherever the gospel is openly,
courageously, affectionately, and faithfully proclaimed, it seldom fails to secure
adherents. 3. A great accession from the priesthood. This must have been a
numerous body at the time to which this chapter refers, since, according to Ezra


138


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VI.


(ii. 36-38), it was 4,289 strong on returning from Babylon. The coming over to
Christianity of so considerable a company of priests, of whom none had ever
followed Christ, marked a signal advance in Christianity. Plumptre suggests
that their conversion may have been due to the preaching of Stephen, who
anticipated Paul in announcing the passing away of the temple worship, which
had probably become a weariness to the flesh and an intolerable burden to the
spirit of the more earnest, at least of the priests, who, accordingly, responded
to the fascination of a simpler and more spiritual worship.

Learn.—1. That Christians ought to be, but are not always, adove quarrelling
(1 Cor, in. 3; Gal. v. 20; Phil. ii. 3). 2. That oversight may occur in the best-
regulated congregations. 3. That Christian ministers and people should ever
study the things that make for peace (Rom. xiv. 19). 4. That nothing should
be allowed to hinder a Christian minister from his specific work of preaching and


praying. 5. That Christian congregations have a right to elect their own office-
bearers. 6. That those who hold office in the Christian Church should be above
suspicion. 7. That the word of God cannot be bound (2 Tim. ii. 9).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Murmuring in the Primitive
Church.

I. The occasion of it.—It sprang out
of the multiplying of the disciples.
This teaches—1. That increase of num-
bers does not always mean increase of
happiness, increase of devotion, increase
of spiritual life, but has often brought
increase of trouble and discontent
alone. Undiluted joy, uninterrupted
success, is not to be the portion of God’s
people while tabernacling here below.
2. That the presence of supernatural
gifts, the power of working miracles
and speaking with tongues, did not
raise the spiritual level of individual
believers above that we find in the
Church of the present day. What a
comfort to God’s servant striving to do
his duty is the study of this sixth
chapter of the Acts! The apostics
themselves did not escape the accusa-
tion of favouritism. 3. That the
primitive Church was no ideal com-
munion but a society with failings and
weaknesses and discontent, exactly like
those which exist in the Church of our
own times,

II. The ground of it.—That which
lay at the basis of this murmuring was
“a racial question,” or perhaps it should
be said those “ social and linguistic dif-
ferences” which “had found place in
the Church.” ‘The bitter dissensions


which racial and linguistic differences
have made in the Church of every age
are here depicted in miniature. The
quarrels between the East and West,
between Greeks and Latins, between
Latins and Teutons, between Teuton
and Celt, between Roman Catholic and
Protestant, between the whites and ne-
groes, between European Christians and
Hir.doo converts—the scandalous scenes
still enacted round the Holy Place at
Jerusalem, where peace is kept between
nominal Christians only by the inter-
vention of Mahometan soldiers—all
turn upon the same points and em-
body the same principles.

III. The removal of it.—The diffi-
culty which had arisen was solved by
laying down the following principles :
1. That there are diversities of functions
and of work in the Christian Church.
There is a ministry of the word and
there is a serving of tables. 2. That
one class should not absorb every func-
tion ; for if it does, the highest function
of all, the ministry of the word and
prayer, will inevitably suffer. 3, That
the Church of Christ should ever have
the power to organise herself in the face
of new departures, while at the same
time she proclaims the absolute neces-
sity and the perpetual obligation of the
Christian ministry in her midst.—
G. T. Stokes, D.D.


139


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a aa an


Dissension in the Church.—l. Old.
Dating from Apostolic, yea, even from


Pentecostal times. 2. Common. Hav-
ing shown itself in almost every
Christian community since. 3. Unbe-


coming. All sin is; this especially so
as breaking out among those who
should love as brethren. 4. Hurtful.
As again all sin is, but this in par-
ticular as marring the beauty, destroy-
ing the peace, and hindering the use-
fulness of the Church.


Ver. 2. Serving Tables; or, the
Church's Care of the Poor.—Of Christian
service this is

J. A necessary form.—Considering
that God hath chosen the poor of this
world to be rich in faith (James ii. 5),
that Christ esteems them as His
brethren (Matt. xxv. 40), and that
kindness to the poor has been specially
enjoined on Christ’s disciples (xx. 35,
Gal. vi. 10; Eph. iv. 28).

II. An honourable form.—Though
not to be placed on a level with preach-
ing, yet to be highly esteemed as one
requiring the most exalted gifts and
conferring the most enduring benefits
(1 Tim. v. 10).

III. A difficult form.—Calling for
much wisdom and tenderness, so as to
avoid giv:ng offence by either neglect-
ing or hurting the sensibilities of the
recipients of the Church’s bounty (Rom.
xii. 8).

IV. A profitable form.—Since Christ
will reward all such service as done to
Himself (Matt. xxv. 40).


Vers. 1, 2. Blots in a Church.

I. When nominal adherents multiply
faster than true disciples.

II. When a spirit of discord and
division breaks out among its members,

III. When the poor are neglected
and the rich only attended to.

IV. When ministers have no time
to preach because of being absorbed in
secular business.

V. When the spirit of prayer dies
out of both pulpit and pew.


Ver. 4. Praying and preaching.
I, Praying without preaching.—
140


An imperfect if not a presumptuous
ministry. Christ having ordained the
preaching of the gospel as a means of
its propagation (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20;
Luke xxiv. 47). This form of worship
cannot be discontinued without sin.
A word for those who would dispense
with the sermon in church services or
reduce it to the smallest dimensions.

II. Preaching without praying. —An
unprofitable exercise. The same Lord
who commanded His disciples to preach
also taught them to pray (Matt. vi. 9;
Luke xi. 1), and said, ‘“‘ Without Me ye
can do nothing” (John xv. 5). A hint
to those who forget that the ends of
the ministry cannot be reached by
human wisdom or eloquence alone.

Ill. Praying and preaching —The
true ideal of an acceptable ministry.
What Christ hath joined let none of His |
followers put asunder (1 Tim. ii. 1-8).


Ver. 5. The First Christian Deacons.

I. Their number. — Seven. Not
likely either: 1. Because the congrega-
tions in Jerusalem were seven in
number, and each selected a man ; or
2. Because the number of believers was
now seven thousand, and one was chosen
for each thousand; or 3. Because of
the sacredness of the number seven ;
or 4. Because there were already dif-
ferent elements in the Church, Hebrews
(3), Hellenists (3), Proselytes (1), that
required to be provided for; or 5. Be-
cause Jerusalem was divided into seven
districts; or 6. Because there were
seven archangels; or 7. Because the
gifts of the Holy Spirit were sevenfold ;
or 8, Because among the Libertini of
Rome “there was a distinct guild or
collegium known as the Septemviri
Epulones or Seven Stewards, whose
business it was to arrange for the
banquets held in honour of the gods
which were more or less analogous to
the Christian agape, on certain set
days” (Plumptre); but 9. Probably
because, for some reason not stated,
seven was considered by the apostles
the number required for the work.

Ii. Their names.—All Greek. But
not therefore all belonging to Hellenistia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VI.





Jews, since Palestinian Jews with
foreign names were not rare (see i, 23).
1. Stephen. An uncommon name ap-
pearing in few inscriptions, but found
in the burial place of the Empress
Livia as the designation of a libertinus
' or freedman, a goldsmith, and an im-
munis—i.e., one exempted from the
religious obligations of his trade guild.
In addition the name is found ‘on a
tablet in the museum of the Collegio
Romano.” Wherefore it has been con-
jectured that “in the proto-martyr of
the Church . . . we have one: of the
earliest representatives of Roman
Christianity” (Plumptre), His cha-
racter is given in words afterwards
used of Barnabas (xi. 24). 2. Philip.
Subsequently styled an Evangelist
(xxi. 8), and employed to preach the
gospel to the city of Samaria (viii. 5)
and to the eunuch (viii. 26). A tradi-
tion, preserved by Epiphanius, places
Philip as well as Stephen among the
Seventy. The fact that, when Paul
arrived at Cesarea (xx. 8), Philip had
four fully grown daughters renders it
probable that at the date of his elec-
tion he was married. 3. Procorus.
4, Nicanor. 5. Simon. 6. Parmenas.
Of these four, nothing being known,
nothing need be surmised. Christ can
be as well served by obscure as by
famous men. If Stephen acquired
the glory of being the first martyr
perhaps they, like Philip, had the
honour of long service, and unlike him
had the merit of serving without dis-
tinction. 7. Nicolas. What Luke re-
cords of him is that he was a proselyte
of Antioch, and therefore the first
Gentile named as having been admitted
to the Christian Church; what Luke
does not record is that he was the
founder of the sect of the Nicolaitanes
(Rev. ii. 6, 15)—a supposition not
hastily to be credited, though attested
by Irenaeus (I. xxvi. 3; III. xi. 1),
Clement of Alexandria (Strom. II. xx.
118; III. 4), and Hippolytus (vii. 36),
and accepted by some moderns (Zéckler
and others). Thestatement that Nicolas
was a proselyte may imply that the
others were of Jewish birth,


III. Their duties.—1. Principally
to attend to the administration of the
Church’s benevolence, and generally to
care for the poor. 2. In addition to
evangelise, if they possessed the gifts
for such work—as was shown by both
Stephen and Philip.


Note.—That the seven men, though
not expressly named “deacons,” were
the forerunners of the ecclesiastical
officers who afterwards bore that title
(1 Tim. iii. 8), is apparent. Though
nothing is said by Peter about their
being constituted a new order of Church
rulers, it need not be doubted that the
Church came to recognise them as such
on the ground of this transaction.
Since the days of Cyprian this opinion
has prevailed. That the seven are
not like the later deacons subordinated
to the presbyters is no valid objection
(Holtzmann), because the organisation
of the Church at this time may not
have been complete. That the seven
formed a special order of officials created
for a special purpose (Weizsiicker) may
be true without the inference being
correct that the order was not designed
to be permanent. That funds for the
poor were at a later period entrusted
to the hands of the elders (xi. 30) does
not prove that the diaconate gradually
developed into the presbyterate (Vi-
tringa, Bohmer, Lange, Ritschl, Wendt,
Lechler), but merely that the elders,
as the spiritual rulers of the Church,
received the money from those
who brought it. The actual distribu-
tion may lave been carried out by
deacons. The notion that the seven
were the predecessors of both bishops
(émioxorot) and deacons (daxovor), and
that neither of these constituted a
preaching or teaching order, but were
merely finance officers (Hatch, Har-
nack), is not in accordance with Scrip-
ture (1 Tim. iii, 1-12; 2 Tim. ii. 24).


Vers. 1-5. The Seven Chosen.

I. The unique functions of the
Church.—It must be assumed that, in
the rise of the Christian Church, a new
power obtained among men. Baptised


14]


CHAP. VI.





with this new “power,” the Church
confrented the world with the fact of
the unity of the race. The wonderful
works of God were confined to no
peculiar peoples; they meant the Church
for the world. In addition to this was
the new principle as to social life.
The poor should share, equally with
the rich, the gospel benefits. Says
Mr. Lecky : ‘“ No achievements of the
Christian Church are more truly great
than those which it has effected in the
sphere of charity.”


II. The choice of “the seven.”— |


That the best men cannot always
please is evidenced by the text. In
their distribution of charity the apostles
failed. They were accused of neg-
lecting the Grecians in their zeal for
the Hebrew converts. There are two
important truths involved in that
election, claiming special notice. Thus,
firstly, the responsibilities inhering in
the Church-membership. It was not
an apostolic appointment. Not even
Peter could choose ; the election was the
act of the multitude. Secondly, the
wisdom of the Church is evidenced in
their choice. Instead of further mur-
muring there had come a profound
peace—a peace built on no compromise.

III. The characteristics of “the
seven.”—They must be men of “ good
report.” There is no disputing the
fact that, in the apostolic estimate, the
truest religion makes men of the best


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS.





and most honest report. No office—
of bishop or evangelist or deacon—can
give a good report to a dishonest man.
Character is greater than office-bearing.
Again, “the seven” must be “full of
the Spirit and of wisdom.” In this
demand lay hidden the secret of their
spiritual power.

IV. The model character of the
diaconate.—It is a natural sequence
of the choice of “the seven” that it
should be supplemented by a character
equal to the highest ideal. Stephen
met the fullest requirements.— Monday
Club Sermons.


Ver. 7. The Progress of the Church.

I. How it is effected.— By the
preaching of the word. 1. In ever-
enlarging fulness. 2. In ever-widening
circles. 3. By ever-increasing agents.
4, With ever-deepening earnestness.

II. How it is revealed.—By the
multiplication of disciples. 1. Not of
merely nominal adherents, which are
not always a source of strength.
2. But of genuine believers, whose
hearts have been touched by grace.

III. How it is consolidated.—By
obedience to the faith. 1. By the
submission of the whole being to the
Lord of faith, Christ. 2. By the con-
secration of every power to the life and
work of faith. 3. By regulating every
step in accordance with the principle
of faith.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS,.—Verses 8—15.


The Ministry of Stephen ; or, the Rising of a Bright Particular Star.

I. The miracles and preaching of Stephen.—l. His miracles were great.
(1) In origin, proceeding from the grace (rather than faith) of which he was full
—grace here being the supernatural endowment conferred on him by the Holy
Ghost. (2) In efficiency, being remarkable for the indications they gave of
divine power. (3) In number, it being most likely they were neither few nor
small, but numerous and striking. (4) In impressiveness, having in all probabi-
lity arrested the attention and awed the hearts of those in whose presence they
were done. What they were is not told—an indication that Luke was not com-
posing a romance but writing a history. 2. His preaching was irresistible.
(1) For the wisdom (knowledge of divine truth) and spiritual insight (discernment
of its applicability to souls) which it displayed, and (compare Luke xxi. 15)
(2) for the Holy Spirit who was behind that wisdom and that insight as their
source, inspiration, and power (compare Mark xiii. 11). No interpreter of


112


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VI.





Scripture can be placed alongside of the Holy Ghost for either clearness or
force of exposition (1 Cor. ii. 13).

II. The opponents and revilers of Stephen.—1. His opponents. Certain parties
from the various synagogues in the metropolis, of which, according to the
Rabbis, there were then 480. (1) Their designations. Libertines: freed
men who had been slaves, their fathers having been sold as bondmen to
Rome after Pompey’s expedition against Judea in p.c. 53. Cyrenians: belong-
ing to the city of Cyrene in Lybia, North Africa, of whose population a fourth
part were Jews (Jos., Ant., XIV. vii., 2), the rest being derived from the Lacede-
monians (Wars, I. xvi., 4). From this class came Simon the Cyrenian (Luke
xxiii. 26), with his two sons, Alexander and Rufus (Mark xv. 21). Cyrenians
attended Pentecost (ii. 10), and preached to the Greek-speaking Jews at Antioch
(xi. 20), while Lucius of Cyrene was among the prophets and teachers associated
with the Church in that city (xiii. 1), Alexandrians: Jews from Alexandria in
Egypt, the second city in the empire, and a principal seat of Hellenic learning
and culture. Numbering one hundred thousand, they occupied a quarter of the
city by themselves, were governed by an ethnarch of their own (¢.e¢., enjoyed
Home Rule), and had high privileges conferred upon them by Ptolemy Phila-
delphus. There Philo at that time resided. From Alexandria in former times
(z.c. 280) had come the Septuagint or Greek translation of the Hebrew Scrip-
tures. Cilicians: from the south-east of Asia Minor, where many Jews were
settled, Antiochus the Great having established a colony there. Among
those attached to their synagogue would no doubt be Saul of Tarsus (ix. 11).
Asians : from the pro-consular province or geographical division of Asia Minor,
which “included Mysia, Lydia, and Caria, and had Ephesus as its capital. Asian
Jews appear at a later stage in the history of Paul (xxi. 27). (2) Their dispu-
tation. They discussed with Stephen the teaching he promulgated, which, in
addition to the doctrine of Jesus and the resurrection, embraced that of the
passing away of the Old Testament temple-worship, for the permanence of which
they as patriots and disciples of Moses jealously contended. (3) Their defeat.
They could not resist the wisdom and spirit with which he spoke. Not his equals
in either Biblical learning or sacred eloquence, they could not reply to his argu-
ments, or deny his conclusions, being inwardly convinced of the truth of both.
(4) Their duplicity. To avenge themselves of their victorious adversary they
secretly instructed witnesses to appear against him with a trumped-up accusation,
the terms of which they had previously concerted. 2. His revilers. These .
wretched instruments of his opponents’ treachery, were without question, “ lewd
fellows of the baser sort,” creatures without consciences—


‘“‘ Fellows by the hand of nature mark’d
Quoted and sign’d to do a deed of shame”—
Shakespeare, King John, Act IV., Sc, 2.


who for a consideration would lend themselves to any “bloody villainy,” and
would not hesitate to swear away the lives of the innocent. Such monsters of
wickedness had appeared against the Saviour (Matt. xxvi. 59).

III. The arrest and indictment of Stephen.—1l. His arrest. (1) Moved by
his defeated opponents. A poor answer to give another’s arguments to shut
him up in prison or charge him with a crime he has not committed. But
people who fail in logic frequently resort to law, endeavouring to reach by force
or fraud what they have not been able to gain by honesty and reason. (2) Effected
by the populace, the elders, and the Scribes. It is never difficult to inflame the
mob, whose inconstancy is as proverbial as that of the wind. If the elders and
the Scribes were ablaze already against the new sect and its leaders, hitherto the
people had sided with the Christians (v. 22). Now, however, their patriotic fears


143


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
= ee


had been stirred by the slanders poured into their ears. (3) Followed by a speedy
trial. Having seized him either in his house or most likely in the temple while
teaching they hurried him off, as they had hurried Christ, not to prison but to
judgment—haling him before the council or Sanhedrim which probably had
arranged to meet for despatch of business, so important was the occasion that
had arisen, 2. Hisindictment. (1) Technically correct. Consisting of two counts
which were really one. Virst, that he had spoken blasphemous words against
Moses and against God. Secondly, and in this lay the blasphemy, that he had
uttered words against the temple and the law, saying that Jesus of Nazareth
would destroy the temple and change the customs which Moses had delivered to
the nations. Like the similar impeachment preferred against Christ (Matt.
xxvi. 61, 63; John v. 18) which had rested on words actually used by Him,
these accusations against Stephen may have been based on sentences which had
escaped his lips. Yet were they (2) Essentially incorrect. Stephen indecd
had, ostensibly, and in the letter, spoken against the Hebrew Lawgiver and the
Jewish temple in so far as he had taught, that the Christian was superior to the
Mosaic dispensation, that the days of sacrificial worship were numbered, that the
gospel was designed to supersede the law, that observance of the Levitical ritual
was henceforth to be no condition of justification, and that worship was no more
to be limited to Jerusalem, but might be freely, if spiritually, offered anywhere.
Yet in so teaching Stephen had neither blasphemed God nor contemned Moses,
inasmuch as Christ was the prophet like unto himself (Moses), whom the Law-
giver foretold, and the system of worship inaugurated by Christ was in reality a
carrying forward into fulfilment of all that had been prefigured and pre-signified
by the Mosaic dispensation. That Stephen’s accusers felt secretly conscious of
distorting his words has been argued from the anti-climax which reveals itself
in their indictment. First, before his arrest they accuse the eloquent deacon
of blaspheming Moses and God—a palpable exaggeration. Next, in the
council they drop the term of blasphemy and limit their charge to speaking
against the temple and the law. Lastly, confronted with the accused, they
water down their language to this, that they had heard him repeat some
statement about Jesus of Nazareth’s intention to destroy the temple and change
its customs.

IV. The attitude and appearance of Stephen.—1. His attitude. One of un-
resisting meekness. With perfect calmness he listened to the charges preferred
against him. Like his master, he opened not his mouth, answered not a word
till invited to speak. Conscious of no crime, he was in no haste to defend him-
self. 2. His appearance. One of unearthly beauty. ‘All who sat in the
council,” his accusers and his judges, “fastening their eyes upon him,” in expecta-
tion of what he would reply to the grave indictment to which he had listened,
‘saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.” The radiance was one which
never shone on sea or land, was more than the serene and dignified lustre, solar
light it has been named, wherewith the soul in moments of crisis, when conscious
of innocence, illuminates the countenance; it was the shine of supernatural
glory, reflected back from the face of the Risen Christ on whom he gazed
(vii. 55)—like the light which rayed forth from the countenance of Moses when
he descended from the Mount (Exod. xxxiv. 29, 30, 35)—attesting to those who
beheld it, his innocence.

Learn.—1. The secret of true ministerial influence—hbeing filled with grace and
power, with wisdom and the Holy Spirit. 2. The triumphant career which lies
before the gospel—its enemies will not be able for ever to resist its progress, dis-
pute its truth, or prevent its sway. 3. The certainty that all faithful preachers
of the gospel will excite against themselves hostility,—all whose interests the
gospel threatens will array themselves against it. 4. The falsehood of all such


144


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. THE ACTS,


CHAP, VI.


charges against the gospel as that it is revolutionary and destructive, whereas it


works its changes by slow degrees and destroys nothing but sin.


5. The glory


that will even here irradiate and hereafter crown every faithful servant of


Christ.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. The Biography of Stephen.

I. A devout Christian.—Full of faith
and of the Holy Spirit.

II. A trusted Deacon.—The
elected to the office.

IlI. An eloquent Preacher.—His
opponents could not resist the wisdom
with which he spake,

IV. A glorified Prisoner.—His face
shone as it had been the face of an
angel.

V.A blessed Martyr.—“ They stoned
Stephen,” etc. (vii. 59).


first


Ver. 15. The Face of an Angel.—
“Dante, describing the angels whom
be met in the Paradiso, impresses us
with their external glory and their
spiritual effulgence. Invariably he
makes the former a result of the latter.
With closer faithfulness to physical
science than he dreamed, and building
better than he knew he sings (Paradiso,
Canto ix., 13-19).

‘ Another of those splendours

Approach me, and its will to pleasure me

It signifies by brightening outwardly,

As one delighted to do good ;

Became a thing transplendent in my sight,

As a fine ruby smitten by the sun.’”


Joseph Cook's Monday Lectures, Second
Series, p. 148.


Stephen’s illuminated Face.— He
had been accused of blaspheming
Moses, and lo! the clearness of the
face of Moses, a reflection of God’s
glory (vii. 2), was to be seen on him
and vindicated him. A morning beam
of the heavenly splendour, in which the
teachers of righteousness will eternally
shine (Dan. xii. 3), surrounded him ;
and well might he have been regarded
as an angel, since, as the angels always
behold the face of God, and reflect His
glory, so was it granted to him in this
hour of witness for encouragement to


look, first into the opened mystery of
God’s historical glory upon the earth,
and then into the opened heaven, and
to see Jesus standing at the right hand
of God (vii. 55).”— Besser.


Ver. 8-15. The Opponents of Stephen.

I. Devout Jews,— They were
Stephen’s countrymen and fellow-wor-
shippers, believers in the same God,
disciples of the same lawgiver, probably
members of the same synagogue.
Three arguments which should have
caused them to befriend rather than
hate Stephen.

II. Defeated controversialists.—They
could not resist the wisdom and the
Spirit by which Stephen spake. This
should have cautioned them against
opposing one who obviously possessed
clearer insight than themselves, and one
with whom their inmost convictions
sided.

III. Unserupulous calumniators.—
They suborned men who said (no doubt
what Stephen’s adversaries told them)
that Stephen had spoken blasphemous
words against Moses and against God
—Moses first and God second—which
was not true.

IV. Murderous conspirators.—Their
object in moving the elders and the
Scribes was to bring upon their foe the
wrath of the Sanhedrim, which they
knew would mean arrestment, im-
prisonment, and perhaps death,


Stephen the Deacon.

I. The central figure of this whole
section is St. Stephen. He is intro-
duced into the narrative with the same
startling suddenness which we may
note in the cases of Barnabas and Eli-
jah. He runs a rapid course, flings
all, apostles and every one else, into the
shade for a time, and then disappears,”
exemplifying the saying of inspiration,


149


CHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


i


“The first shall be last, and the last
first.”

II. The union of the words grace
and power is significant. ‘It was not
the intellect, or the eloquence, or the
activity of St. Stephen which made
him powerful among the people and
crowned his labours with success. It
was his abundant grace. Eloquence
and learning, active days and laborious
nights, are good and necessary things.
But these will be utterly useless and
ineffective apart from Christ and the
power of His grace. To this busy age
these words convey a useful warning
that the best organisations and schemes
will be useless to produce Stephen’s
power, unless Stephen’s grace be found
there as well.”

III. “This passage is a prophecy
and picture of the future in another
aspect. The fulness of grace in Stephen
wrought powerfully amongst the people.
It was the savour of life unto life in
some. But in others it was a savour
of death unto death, and provoked
them to evil deeds, for they suborned
men who said, “ We have heard him
speak blasphemous words against Moses
and against God.”


146


IV. These words, even through their
falsehood, afford “a glimpse into the
character of St. Stephen’s preaching.
A false accusation need not be neces-
sarily altogether false.” “In order te
be effective” it must have ‘some basis
of truth. St. Stephen was ripening for
heaven more rapidly than the apostles
themselves. He was learning more
rapidly than St. Peter himself the true
spiritual meaning of the Christian
scheme. He had taught, in no un-
ambiguous language, the universal
character of the gospel and the catholic
mission of the Church.”

V. “We learn how religious zeal
can overthrow religion and work out
the purpose of evil. Religious zeal,
mere party spirit taking the place of
real religion, led the Hellenists to
suborn men and falsely accuse St.
Stephen. They made an idol of the
system of Judaism, and forgot its
spirit. They worshipped their idol so
much that they were ready to break
the commandments of God for its sake.
How true to life has our own age found
this prophetic picture !”—G. 7’. Stokes,
D.D.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.





CHAPTER VII.
Tue CHURCH BEGINS HER Martyr Rott—Tue Murper or STEPHEN.


. The Apology of Stephen ; or, a Vindication of Christianity (vers. 1-53).

. The Progenitor of Israel ; or, the History of Abraham (vers. 2-8).

. The Last of the Patriarchs ; or, Joseph a Type of Christ (vers. 9-16).

. The Founder of the Nation ; or, the Biography of Moses—in three chapters
(vers. 17-44).

. From Joshua to Jesus ; or, the Downward Course of Israel (vers. 45-53).

. The Martyrdom of Stephen ; or, the First Taste of Blood (vers. 54-60).


MO Mrmr
o> o1 em Co bo


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. The high priest’s question, Are these things so? analogous to that put to Christ
(Matt. xxvi. 62), was equivalent to a modern “ Guilty or not guilty?”

Ver. 2. Concerning what Stephen said in reply, Luke’s information may have been derived
either from Paul, who probably was present on the occasion (xxvi. 10), and afterwards in his
own speeches and writings reproduced the martyr’s language (compare ver. 48 with xvi. 24,
and ver. 53 with Gal. iii. 19), or from records of it preserved by the Church at Jerusalem.
The God of glory.—J/.c., who manifested His presence by means of the glory (Exod. xvi. 7, 10,
xxiv. 16, 17, xxxiii. 18, 22, xl. 34, 35; Lev. ix. 6, 23; Numb. xiv. 10, 21, 22)—i.e., of the
Shechinah or luminous appearance which shone between the Cherubim (Psalm lxxx.1). Before
he dwelt in Charran, or Huran.-—Carre in North-West Mesopotamia, about twenty-five miles
from Edessa, one of the supposed sites of Ur of the Chaldees, which, however, is now almost
unanimously found in Hur, the most important of the early capitals of Chaldza, the present-
day Mugheir, at no great distance from the mouth and six miles to the west of the Euphrates.
That Stephen’s statement does not contradict Genesis (xii. 1), which places the call of
Abraham at Haran (Holtzmann) may be inferred from these facts—(1) that Gen. xv. 7 and
Neh. ix. 7 both represent Ur of the Chaldees as the locality in which Abraham received
Jehovah’s call, and (2) that with these both Josephus and Philo agree. There is nothing
unreasonable in supposing the call to have been given twice, first in Ur and again in Haran.

Ver. 4. When his father was dead.—If Abraham was Terah’s firstborn (Gen. xi. 26), and
seventy-five when he departed from Haran (Gen, xii. 4), then Terah could only have been
one hundred and forty-five years old at his death, whereas, according to Gen. xi. 32, Terah
was two hundred and five when he died, and must have survived Abraham’s departure from
Haran by sixty years; but if Abraham was Terah’s youngest son, and born in Terah’s one
hundred and thirtieth year, which, according to the Hebrew narrative, is not impossible, then
as Abraham was seventy-five years old when he migrated from Haran, Terah must have been
two hundred and five when he died—which agrees with Stephen’s narrative. For he removed
the best texts read (God) removed him.

Ver. 5. None inheritance in it.—Not contradicted by Abraham’s purchase of the field and
cave at Machpelah (Gen. xxiii. 9-11), which were meant for “a possession” of a burying place
but not for an inheritance in the strict sense of the term.

Ver. 6. Four hundred years.—If Stephen included in these four centuries the whole period
of sojourning, bondage, and oppression, exactly as Jehovah did in Genesis (xv. 13), this seems
to be at variance with Paul's reckoning of the interval between the Abrahamic promise and
the Mosaic law as four hundred and thirty years (Gal. iii. 17), which interval again is repre-
sented in Exodus (xii. 40) as “the sojourning of Israel who dwelt in Egypt.” Assuming
that four hundred may have been a round number for four hundred and thirty, the difficulty
remains how to harmonise the statements of Stephen and Paul. If, according to Paul, the
interval from Abraham to Moses was four hundred and thirty years, then, inasmuch as
Isaac was born twenty-five years after the promise was first given, and was sixty years
old at the birth of Jacob, who was one hundred and thirty years of age when he stood before
Pharaoh, then 430 — (25 + 60 + 130) = 215, which leaves only two hundred and fifteen
for the years of exile, bondage, and oppression. Hither, therefore, Stephen, following the
LXX. version of Exod. xii. 40, which inserts “in the land of Canaan” after “‘in the land of
Egypt, designed his four hundred years to embrace the same period as Panl’s four hundred
and thirty indicate—a view supported. by Josephus (Ant., Il. xv. 2), or he followed Gen,


47


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a ea a oe


xv. 13, and understood the four hundred to refer to the Egyptian sojourn, bondage, and
oppression, in which case he is again supported by J osephus (Ant., II. ix. 1; Wars, V. ix. 4),
who gives both views, but not by Paul. It would remove all appearance of contrariety if
Gen. xv. 13 signified by “a land not theirs,” Canaan as well as Egypt ; if this cannot be done,
then at the worst Paul and Stephen must be held to have followed different traditions.

Ver.7. They shall come forth and serve Me in this place.—‘“ They shall come hither again”
of Gen. xv. 16 is replaced by “and serve Me in this place,” suggested by rather than borrowed
from Exod. iii. 12, in which the words are “ye shall serve God upon this mountain.”
Stephen, unintentionally mixing up the passages in Genesis and Exodus, may not have been
hindered by the Spirit, because the sentiment he expressed was correct ; or under the Spirit’s
guidance he may have selected the new clause suggested by Exodus to explain the import of
the one in Genesis.

Ver. 8. The covenant of circumcision.—Z.e., of which circumcision was the sign. See
Rom. iv. 11. The twelve patriarchs.—JZ.c., the twelve sons of Jacob as the founders of the
tribes or heads of the families of Israel. The term also applied to Abraham (Heb. vii. 4)
and to David (ii. 29).

Ver. 9. Moved with envy, or jealousy, they, the patriarchs, sold Joseph into Egypt—z.e.. to
be carried thither. Stephen condenses the Genesis narrative.

Ver. 10. The Pharaoh under whom Joseph rose to power was the last of the Hyksos or
Shepherd kings, Apophis, who, not being himself a native Egyptian, might feel disposed to
favour the Hebrew stranger who had in so remarkable a manner interpreted his dreams and
saved the country.

Ver. 11. A dearth over all the land of Egypt and Canaan.—Brugsch, Sayce, and others -
find this dearth in a famine, which, according to an inscription from a nobleman’s tomb at
Hileythia in Southern Egypt, prevailed in the land for several years, and during which the
dead man (Baba), according to the inscription, “distributed corn to the city each year of
famine.” Baba, the nobleman in question, is supposed to have lived shortly before the
establishment of the eighteenth dynasty. Counting four hundred and thirty years back
from B.C. 1325, when Menephtah II. ascended the Egyptian throne, gives the reign of
Apophis as the commencement of the exile according to Stephen, as the date of the promise
according to Paul. (But see above on ver. 6.)

Ver. 14. Threescore and fifteen souls.— So the LXX. in Gen. xlvi. 27; but the Hebrew text
of Gen. xlvi. 27; Exod. i. 5, and Deut. x. 22 gives threescore and ten as the number of souls
that went down into Egypt—.e., the sixty-six of Gen. xlvi. 26 with four (Jacob, Joseph,
Ephraim, and Manasseh) added. The additional five were probably Joseph’s grandsons,
counted by the LXX. as among his sons. Stephen, a Hellenist, most likely followed the
LXX. without deeming it necessary to correct what after all was no mis-statement, if “sons”
be taken in the wider sense of descendants.

Ver. 16. Carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a
sum of money.—Two historical inaccuracies are commonly discovered here: 1. That Jacob
and the fathers were all buried at Sychem, or Shechem, Abraham’s earliest settlement in
Canaan (Gen. xii. 6, 7); whereas Jacob was interred at Hebron (Gen. 1. 13), and only
Joseph’s bones were laid in Sychem (Josh. xxiv. 32), Scripture being silent as to where those
of the other fathers were deposited. 2. That Abraham purchased a sepulchre at Shechem
from the sons of Emmor, or Hamor, for a sum of money, or for a price in silver ; whereas the
tomb Abraham bought was at Hebron, while the seller was Ephron the Hittite (Gen. xxiii. 16)
and Jacob’s purchase was of a field at Shechem (Gen, xxxiii. 19), in which afterwards
Joseph’s bones were interred (Josh. xxiv. 32). As to the first part of Stephen’s statement
that Jacob and the fathers were all carried over into Shechem and laid in a tomb, nothing
can invalidate that. If Stephen must be understood as asserting that all were laid in the
same tomb, that was not so, since Jacob was buried at Hebron and J. oseph at Sychem, unless
it can be shown that Joseph’s bones were subsequently reinterred in the patriarchal vault at
Hebron—a hypothesis not impossible, certainly, but still not capable of proof. If, further
Stephen purposed to affirm that Abraham bought a tomb at Shechem, this can only be
harmonised with Genesis by maintaining that the tomb at Shechem was purchased twice—
once by Abraham and afterwards by Jacob, which is not a likely supposition. The suggestion
that Abraham has been either substituted in the text for Jacob, or inserted in the text which
originally had no nominative to the verb “ purchased,” is rendered inadmissible by all exist-
ing MSS. having Abraham. Yet if Jacob were inserted every difficulty would not vanish
It would still remain impossible to maintain that Jacob was interred at Shechem. Could
Stephen himself be recalled, it might be possible to solve this problem; in his absence it
must be given up, at least till additional data be forthcoming. On the ground of this
unsolved problem it would be rash to challenge the inspiration of either Stephen or Luke

_ Ver. 18. Another king which knew not Joseph.—This was Aahmes, the first monarch of the
eighteenth dynasty, “a prince of great force of character, brave, active energetic, liberal
beloved by his subjects” (Rawlinson, The Story of the Nations—Hgypt, p.152).


148


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.
a a ee ee ee ee ee ey


Ver. 19. Dealt subtilly with our kindred, or race.—With Aahmes the new policy towards
the Israelites may have begun, but the author of the cruel decree appears to have been
Seti L, while Rameses II. was the Pharaoh of the Oppression, and Menephtah II. the Pharaoh
of the Exodus. They cast out.—Pharaoh’s object in the oppression appears to have been to
render the lives of the Israelites so miserable that they would rather cast out their offspring
than see them grow up to experience such woe as themselves endured. If he be read instead
of they, then the well-known decree (Exod. i. 16-22) is that to which Stephen alludes.

Ver. 22. Learned.—Better, trained or instructed.

Ver, 24, Suffer wrong, injured, by beating (Exod. ii. 11). The wrongdoer may have been
one of Pharaoh’s taskmasters. A bas-relief recovered from the Nile Valley exhibits one of
these standing over a gang of slaves, whip in hand, and saying as he lashes them, “ To your
work, O slaves: ye are idle!”

Ver. 25. He supposed should be he was supposing, meaning that was his habitual mood of
mind at this period. Would deliver them should be gives them deliverance or salvation ; the
present tense signifying either that the deliverance was at hand or was beginning with the
blow then struck.

Ver. 29, Madian, or Midian.—In the south-east of the Sinaitic peninsula.

Ver. 30. Mount Sinaii—LHxodus (iii. 1) gives, as the scene of this Divine manifestation,
Horeb, which was probably the name of the range, Sinai being the designation of the
particular peak (Robinson, Eadie), though others regard Sinai as the range and Horeb as
the peak. Whether Sinai, the mountain of the Law, was Jebel Serbal (Burckhardt, Lepsius,
and Ebers), or Ras-es-Sufsafeh (Robinson, Stanley, Porter), or Jebel Musa (Wilson, Sandie),
travellers are not decided. Josephus (Ant., IJ. xi. 1) and Paul (Gal. iv. 25) locate it in
Arabia, which Sayce thinks to a writer of the first century would mean Arabia Petreea.
Wherefore he looks for Sinai not in the peninsula, but among the ranges of Mount ¥eir in
the neighbourhood of Kadesh Barnea (see The Higher Criticism and the Monuments,
pp. 263-373).

In vers. 32 and 33 the order of the Hebrew text is transposed.

Ver. 35. A deliverer, or redeemer, \uTpwryjv.—A latent allusion to the work of Christ.

Ver, 36. After that he had showed should be having done or wrought.

Ver. 37. The Lord your are omitted in best MSS. Like unto me might be rendered as he
raised up me,

Ver. 38. The Church.—The use of éxxAnola—a term employed by the LXX. (Deut. xviii. 16,
xxiii. 1; Psalm xxvi. 12)—for the congregation of Israel warrants the inference that Stephen
at least regarded the Hebrew nation as a church and the new assembly of believers as its
representative under the Christian dispensation. 3

Ver, 41. They made a calf is one word in the original. The calf, or bullock, was selected
in imitation of the Egyptians, who worshipped an ox, Apis at Memphis and Mnevis at
Heliopolis.

Ver. 42. In the book of the prophets.—The quotation is from Amos v. 25-27. The interro-
gation, Have ye offered unto Me? etc., is much used by the higher criticism to prove that the
sacrificial system of the so-styled priest code had no existence in the time of Moses; but the
prophet’s meaning is not that the Israelites did not offer sacrifices to Jehovah in the wilder-
ness, but that, though they did, their hearts ran after their idolatries—the worship of Moloch
and the Star Rephan—so that Jehovah rejected their insincere service.

Ver. 43. The tabernacle of Moloch and the star of your god Remphan.—The Hebrew might
be rendered Siccuth your king and Chiwn (or the shrine of) your images, the star of your god
(R.V.), Siccuth being in this case the name of one idol which the Hebrews worshipped as
their king, and Chiun the name of another, believed to have been the planet Saturn, of which
the name among the Syrians and Arabians was Kéwan. Stephen, however, followed the
LXX., who understood Siccuth as equivalent to “ tabernacle ”—i.e¢., the portable tent in which
the idol’s image was carried—and for “ your king” substituted, with some ancient MSS6.,
Moloch, the idol meant; while for “ Chiun your images” they read “the star of your god
Rephan,” which Kircher believes to be Koptic for Saturn, and Schrader regards as a corrup-
tion from Kewan. That the LXX. failed to intelligibly translate the second Hebrew clause
was of small moment to Stephen. The words, “the star of the god,” showed that God had
given the Israelites up to worship the host of heaven. The substitution of Babylon for
Damascus in the Hebrew and the LXX. is explainable by the fact that Babylon had long
been associated in Jewish history with the exile.

Ver. 44. The tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness was so called because it con-
tained the Ark in which the two tables of the Decalogue were kept (Numb. ix. 15, xvii, 23).

Ver. 45. Our fathers that came after should be simply owr fathers, Jesus is Joshua, as in
Heb. iv. 8. Into (lit. in) the possession of the Gentiles.—Meaning that the Ark was brought
in to remain in the possession of the nations—t.e., in their land. The R.V. reads, “ When they
entered on the possession of the nations ”; lit. “at” or “in” their taking possession of (the


land of) the nations,
149


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
See
Ver. 46. Tabernacle should be “habitation,” permanent abode, like “house” in ver. 47.


Ver. 48. The prophet was Isaiah (Ixvi. 1, 2).

Ver. 52. Which of the prophets, eic., echoed the words of Christ (Matt. v. 12, xxiii. 315
Luke xiii. 34).

Ver. 53. By the disposition of the angels is better rendered in the R.V., as it was ordained
by angels, or as ordinances of angels; lit. unto ordinances of angels. Compare Gal. iii, 19
and Heb. ii. 2.

Ver. 54, Cut to the heart.—See on ver. 33. The word describes a keener pang than
“pricked” in ii, 37. Gnashed on him with their teeth.—Lit. snapped their tecth against
him, like ferocious animals. The phrase only occurs here. The Sanhedrists “ had passed
beyond articulate speech into the inarticulate utterances of animal ferocity ” (Plumptre).

Ver, 58. They stoned Steghen.—-An illegal and tumultuous proceeding, as the Jews at this
time had not the power of inflicting capital punishment without the authority of the Romans
(John xviii. 31); most probably to be explained, like the murder of James (xii. 2), by sup-
posing that it took place in an interregnum, perhaps about A.D. 37, after the removal of
Pilate, and before the arrival of his successor (Renan, Hausrath).

Ver. 60. The words fell asleep suggest the Christian view of death (xiii. 36; 1 Cor. xv. 18,
etc.).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Veeses 1—53.


The Apology of Stephen ; or, a Vindication of Christianity.

I. To whom it was addressed.—1. The Jewish Sanhedrim, consisting of Annas,
Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and perhaps also Gamaliel, Nicodemus, and Joseph of
Arimathea, if the last two had not by this time withdrawn from the conclave.
The court that had already condemned the apostles (v. 27) was little likely to
give a fair hearing to the eloquent deacon. 2. The Jewish people generally.
Through their official representatives, with whom at this moment they were
acting in sympathy and concert. 3. All whom in after ages it might concern.
Though this presumably entered not into Stephen’s, it without doubt formed
part of the Holy Spirit’s mind.

II. In what spirit it was spoken.—1. With affection. Hinted at by the term
“ brethren” with which Stephen saluted his judges and accusers. A sign of
goodness as well as greatness on the part of Stephen that he disowned not
kinship with the truculent adversaries who were then thirsting for his blood.
2. With reverence. Not forgetting the respect due to the elders of his people,
he courteously addressed them as “fathers.” No man ever injures his cause by
rendering honour to whom honour is due.

III. Of what statements it was composed.—l. A historical retrospect. The
drama of Israel’s career was opened out in three successive acts. (1) The age of
the Patriarchs before Moses (vers. 2-16); or the age of the promise, rehearsing
the story of Abraham’s call by the God of Glory first from Mesopotamia (Ur of
the Chaldees) and afterwards from Haran, to go into the Land of Canaan. This
call the patriarch obeyed, only to find that God, who had promised to bestow
Canaan for possession, on himself and on his seed after him, when as yet he had
no child, actually gave him in it none inheritance. Rather God predicted that
before his descendants should come into tl\eir heritage they should be bondmen in
a strange land for four hundred years. At the same time, in pledge that the
promise would be fulfilled and the land kept for its appointed heirs, the God of
glory gave to the patriarch the covenant of circumcision, which was handed on from
sire to son, till in Jacob’s days events began to move in the direction of bringing
together the heirs and the inheritance. Joseph, his father’s favourite son, was sold
into Egypt by his envious brethren, who also by a singular combination of cir-
cumstances some time later, in a season of famine, repaired thither to find the
brother they had evil entreated governor over all the land. At his invitation
Jacob, with his kindred, numbering threescore and fifteen souls, went down into
Egypt, where they died and left behind them children, in what was soon to


150





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.





become for them a house of bondage. With that closed the first act in the
drama. (2) The age of Moses (vers. 17-46); or, the age of the law, sketching
the career of Moses in three periods of forty years. ‘‘ Three generations rolled
over him,” writes Emil Zittel (Die Entstehung der Bibel, p. 40). ‘‘ Three times
he lived through the holy number of forty years ; as son of Egyptian wisdom, as
shepherd of the wilderness, as emancipator of his people.” Of these periods the
first began during the currency of Israel’s oppression, and, embracing the lawgiver’s
birth and education in the house of Pharaoh, ended with his flight into Midian
(vers. 17-29). The second closed with the appearance to him in the Wilderness
of Sinai, of an angel of God, and his subsequent departure into Egypt to lead
forth his people from captivity, which he successfully accomplished (vers. 30-36).
The third opened with the Exodus, included the wilderness wanderings, and
terminated with the entrance into Canaan under Joshua (vers. 37-45). (3) The
Age of the Prophets ; or, the Age of the Temple (vers. 46-53), telling the brief
but simple tale of David’s proposal to find a habitation for the God of Jacob, and ©
ef Solomon’s building Him a house, in which indeed Jehovah was formally
worshipped, while outside His prophets were disobeyed and persecuted. 2. An
implied representation. Of the history of Jesus, which had its obvious parallel
and prefigurement in the just recited career of the nation. (1) Like Joseph
whom his brethren sold for envy, but whom Jehovah delivered and appointed to
be their preserver, Christ—though Stephen leaves this unexpressed—had been
rejected by them, yea even sold into the hands of His enemies and put to death,
raised up by God, exalted to the highest throne in heaven, made Lord of all and
sent to be their Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins.
(2) Like Moses, whom his countrymen understood not and resisted, but who
afterwards led them forth to liberty, Christ had come unto His own, who likewise
knew Him not, but thrust Him from them, and was coming again to offer them
emancipation from sin and death. (3) Like the men who in the wilderness pre-
ferred the tabernacle of Moloch to that Jehovah had caused to be constructed
for them, and like their descendants who desecrated the temple by carrying on
within its sacred precincts, in defiance of the warnings of Jehovah’s prophets,
heathen orgies instead of the legitimate Jehovah worship, so had they defiled,
desecrated, and despised the true tabernacle and temple of Jehovah, even Jesus
of Wazareth, and preferred to Him the lifeless stones of the material edifice, and
the meaningless service of an effete ritual.

I¥. With what arguments it was charged.—l. Against supposing that the true
worship of Jehovah was bound up with the law. This could not be: (1) Because
the God of Glory had appeared unto the father of the nation in Mesopotamia,
before he dwelt in Haran (ver. 2). If a theophany or Divine manifestation be
the basis of all acceptable worship, as the law itself says (Exod, xxii. 24), then
clearly such worship did not originate at Sinai but at Ur of the Chaldees, and
not with Moses but with Abraham. (2) Because the promise of a Messiah,
admittedly the kernel of Mosaism, was given to Abraham when as yet he had no
child and therefore no descendants on whom to enjoin the law (ver. 5). (3) Be-
cause the covenant of circumcision in which all Israelites gloried as of the essence
of their law was not of Moses but of Abraham (ver. 8 ; compare John vii. 22).
(4) Because the presence of God with His people to protect and deliver them,
which was what pious Jews understood by salvation, did not begin with His
coming down to talk with them at Sinai, but had been enjoyed by Joseph in
Egypt (ver. 10), and by Joseph’s father and brethren through him (vers. 14, 15).
2. Against supposing that the true worship of Jehovah was bound up with Moses.
This it could not be: (1) Because when Moses first offered himself to his
countrymen, in Jehovah’s name, as a deliverer, they would not receive him but
thrust him from them (vers, 23-29). (2) Because Moses himself, who had been


151


_CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


4





miraculously called and strengthened to effect their temporal deliverance, had
distinctly pointed them to a greater prophet than himself, even to Jesus, though
Stephen leaves this supplementary thought unspoken (vers. 30-37). (3) Because
though Moses had been the medium of conveying to Israel the “ living oracles,”
or oracles of life received from Jehovah, he could not secure Israel’s obedience to
these, even at the moment when Israel was encamped in Jehovah’s presence
(vers. 38-41). 3. Against supposing that the true worship of Jehovah was bound
up with the temple. This once more was impossible: (1) Because in the wilderness
the tabernacle, which was the shadow of the temple, could not retain the allegi-
ance of the people to Jehovah. Instead of offering to Jehovah slain beasts and
sacrifices at the tabernacle door, they took up the tent of Moloch and carried
about the star of the god Remphan (vers. 42, 43). (2) Because the temple was
never meant to be anything more than an emblem of Jehovah’s true habitation,
as saith the prophet, “The heaven is My throne,” etc. (vers. 46-50). (3) Because
the existence of the temple could not keep Israel’s fathers from resisting the
Holy Ghost and murdering Jehovah’s prophets (vers. 51, 52). 4. Against sup-
posing that the true worship of Jehovah was bound up with them. They had
certainly been honoured above all peoples, had received the law as ordained by—
2.€., a8 it were, at the hands of angels, had listened to the voices of Jehovah’s
prophets showing before the coming of the Righteous One—z.e., of Messiah—and
had enjoyed the gracious influences of the Holy Spirit upon their hearts, and yet
to what had all these gracious privileges led? They had not kept the law |
except in the letter, and not always that; they had not believed in Jehovah’s
prophets but persecuted and killed them, the last and greatest of them having
been the righteous One of whom they had just been the betrayers and murderers ;
and they had not yielded to but resisted the Holy Ghost. Was it not then idle
to assert or suppose that they were the representatives of the true Jehovah-
worship? Such was the spirit of Stephen’s address.

V. To what results it conducted.—l. Yor his hearers. (1) Conviction of guilt.
They were cut to the heart, pierced to the quick, sawn asunder with inward
pain because of inability to deny the truth of Stephen’s charges. (2) Rage
against their prisoner, at whom they snarled and snapped with their teeth like
angry wolves, impatient to devour their prey, because his cutting invective,
penetrating to their consciences, had brought their guilt to remembrance.
2. For himself. A violent death and a martyr’s crown—a large recompense for
a short service ; a brief shame followed by a long fame; a little loss and then
an eternal gain (see on vers. 54-60).

Learn.—1. That an eloquent and able defence is not always followed by a
verdict of acquital. 2. That it does not always conduce to one’s personal safety
to tell the truth. 3. That judges are not always open to the force of sound
reasoning. 4, That opponents defeated in argument are seldom merciful.
5. That the sins of one age are often repeated in the next.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-53. The Speech of Stephen.

J, A masterpiece of sacred elo-
quence.

II. A witness to the truth of Old
Testament history.

III. A testimony to the sustaining
power of religion.

IV. A proof of the reality of divine
inspiration.

152.


“


V. A noble vindication of Jesus
Christ.

VI. A striking anticipation of Paul-
ine universalism.


Nore.—On the Historical Credibility
of this Speech—That this speech was
not really uttered by Stephen, but
freely composed by a late author (Baur,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII.





Zeller Weizsicker, Holtzmann, and
others) has been argued on the follow-
ing grounds: 1. “That it takes so
little notice of the special accusation
against which Stephen defends him-
self” (Baur, Paul, his Life and Work,
vol. i, p. 44). But in this Stephen
only showed how entirely absorbed he
was in vindicating his Master rather
than in excusing himself. Besides,
that his speech should have this appear-
ance is a powerful indirect testimony
to its genuineness, since its composer,
had it not been Stephen, would have
been sure to have avoided this appear-
ance of incongruity. 2. That i con-
tains historical inaccuracies, as, ¢€.Y.,
about the call of Abraham (ver. 2), the
burial of the patriarchs (ver. 16), and
the duration of the Egyptian bondage
(ver. 6). But the so-called inaccuracies
are susceptible of reasonable explana-
tion ; and, even if they were not, could
only be urged against the inspiration
of the speech, and not against its
genuineness. If the composer of the
speech could err, so also might Stephen,
assuming that he was not inspired.
3. That it discovers verbal and material
points of contact with the discourses of
Peter and Paul (Overbeck, Weizsicker,
Supernatural Religion, iii., 145-178) ;
but exactly this is what one should
have expected from Stephen, who was
the contemporary of these men, and
believed the same facts and doctrines
as they did. 4. That it goes far beyond


the standpoint of Paul in teaching the
spirituality of worship (vers. 38, 48),
and seems rather to belong to later
Christian Alexandrinism (Holtzmann) ;
but this is an altogether unwarranted
assertion, since Paul quite as clearly
teaches that God can be rightly wor-
shipped only in the Spirit (xvii.
24; Eph. ii. 21, 22; Phil. iii. 3).
5. That the riotous proceeding against
Stephen renders it ‘improbable there
was any transaction at all before the
Sanhedrim” (Baur, i. 56), This, how-
ever, is simply turning criticism into ~
ridicule ; as if the Jewish Sanhedrim
never overstepped its legitimate powers,
and was always a law-abiding court.
Credat Judeus! 6. That there is
nothing to prevent the supposition that
the historian put this speech into
Stephen’s mouth (Baur, i. 56). But
inasmuch as the speech is admitted
to have ‘‘ well suited the character of
Stephen,” and to be “ correctly stamped
with his declared religious views,” it is
much easier to suppose that Stephen
himself delivered it than that Luke or
another composed it. 7. That there is
difficulty in understanding how the
speech would or could be taken down in
court. But even if Paul did not make
notes of it at the time (Baumgarten),
the memories of some who heard of it
might not be unequal to the task of its
preservation. Examples of remarkable
memories are not wanting either in
ancient or in modern times.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 2—8.


The Progenitor of Israel ; or, the History of Abraham.

I. The honours he received.—l. An overpowering revelation. (1) Of what?
Of the glory of God. “The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham.”
This remarkable expression, ‘‘the God of glory,” which occurs only here in the
New and but once in the Old Testament (Psalm xxix. 3), nevertheless has its roots
in and receives explanation from the latter. Without question it points back to
the transaction at Sinai (Exod. xvi. 7, 10, xxiv. 16), and identifies the divine
Being whose external and symbolic form, an ethereal luminous essence, appeared
in the cloud upon the mountain summit (Exod. xxiv. 17), and afterwards filled
the tabernacle (Exod. xl. 34), as the same who had revealed Himself to the son
of Terah. Whether He appeared in a similar fashion as at Sinai cannot be
decided, although Stephen’s language and sundry notices in Genesis (xv. 17, xvii. 22)
almost warrant an affirmative answer. In any case, it does not seem possible to
reduce this theophany to a mere subjective impression on the patriarch’s mind.


153


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a —— eee


(2) Where? In Mesopotamia, or the region between the two rivers Tigris and
Euphrates; not, however, in the northern district, but in the south, ‘in the
land of the Chaldeans ”—i.e., in Ur (Gen. xv. 7), now identified as Mugheir (see
“ Critical Remarks”), (3) When? “Before he dwelt in Haran,” and whilst his
father was yet alive. The statement of Stephen does not contradict but supple-
ments that of Genesis (xii. 1), which appears to say, but does not necessarily
mean, that the order to depart from his father’s house was only given to the
patriarch in Haran. Haran was not Abraham’s country or land of his nativity,
but the land of the Chaldees was (Gen. xi. 28). 2. Am imperative conmand.
(1) To get out from his land and from his kindred, or, in other words, to become
a pilgrim. Hard as the summons was, it was obediently complied with.
Abraham’s pilgrimage commenced at Ur, and reached its first stage at Haran.
Five years later, on his father’s (Terah’s) death, it entered on its second and final
“stage. (2) To betake himself to a new country, the land of Canaan, wherein
they, his descendants, were then dwelling ; a land which God would show him,
a mitigation of the preceding hardship, since a pilgrim under God’s leading must
always be safe, and can never come to grief. That Abraham yielded obedience
to this command was a signal proof of faith (Heb. xi. 8). 3. A gracious promise.
—(1) Of a land for a possession, the land of Canaan above-mentioned. Broad
acres have ever been a coveted and cherished inheritance. But God, the supreme
owner of the soil, distributes them to whomsoever He will. If this promise was
broken to the hand and foot, it was kept to the heart and spirit (see below).
(2) Of a son for an heir. Offspring, especially among the Hebrews, has ever
been a much-prized blessing. No one man likes to be succeeded by a stranger,
and far less to leave his wealth to aservant. Yet just this was the prospect which
Abraham at the moment had before him (Gen. xv. 2). Like land, children are
the gift of God (Psalm exxvii. 3). (3) Of a nation for descendants. Most men
count themselves happy when they can found a family; but God promised
Abraham that his offspring should ultimately develop into a people (Gen. xiii. 16),
which, after sojourning in a strange land (Egypt) in a state of bondage for four
hundred years, should be emancipated from their thraldom and conducted to their
inheritance. 4. A solemn covenant. One would have thought a promise from
God’s lips would have been sufficient guarantee for the bestowment of the above-
named blessings : and, so far as God’s creature is concerned, that is all he can at
any time expect to receive; but, marvellous condescension ! God has frequently
been pleased to add to His spoken word a visible pledge or seal—in Noah’s case
the rainbow (Gen. ix. 12-17), in Abraham’s circumcision (Gen. xvii. 10-14), the
import of which was that Israel after the flesh should be a separated, purged,
and consecrated people.

II. The virtues he displayed.—l. Faith. He believed in God, credited the
revelation which had been given him, accepted the invitation proffered him,
relied on the promise made to him, and assented to the covenant which had been
struck with him. Had faith been awanting—such faith as is the substance of
things hoped for (Heb. xi. 1) and reposes on God’s word (John iii. 33)—nothing
of a spiritual sort could have followed. 2. Obedience. He promptly, cheerfully,
and faithfully performed that which God had commanded. First, he went out
from Ur along with Terah his father, Sarah his sister-wife, and Lot his nephew
(Gen. xi. 31); and afterwards, when Terah was dead, removing from Haran, he
migrated southwards to Canaan. 3. Putience. Though on arriving in Canaan
it looked as if the promise were about to fail, as if he were to obtain neither the
inheritance nor the heir, yet he quietly adhered to the word which had been
spoken (Rom. iv. 20; Heb. vi. 15). Nor did he abandon hope when God talked
about four hundred years of servitude for his posterity, but calmly rested in
God and waited for the fulfilment of what had been promised. 4. Insight.


154


4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VIL





He could see that Jehovah’s promise was larger than any immediate or earthly
fulfilment could realise—that the seed was One higher than a child of his loins,
even One in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed (John viii. 56),
and that the land was something more desirable than an earthly inheritance like


Canaan, was a better country, even an heavenly (Heb. xi. 10).
III. The rewards he obtained—1. God's promise was fulfilled. He got his


son and heir—“ Abraham begat Isaac.”
family—“ Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.”
(threescore and fifteen souls, ver. 14) multiplied into a nation.
eventually entered on the occupation of the land (ver. 45).


His son’s descendants grew into a
Their households
The nation
2. His own horn was


exalted. He became the ancestor of the Jewish people, the progenitor of the
Messiah, the father of the faithful, the world-renowned pattern of believers.


Learn.—1. The sovereignty of God in dispensing His favours.
3. The certainty that believers will, ultimately,


of man in walking by faith.
inherit the promises.


2. The wisdom


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. The God of Glory.—The
fitness of this designation will appear
when it is considered that—

I. God’s dwelling-place is glorious.
Heaven (Deut. xxvi. 15); eternity
(Isa. lvii. 15); both of which are the
habitation of His holiness and His glory
(Isa. Ixiii. 15); and in both of which
are glory and honour (1 Chron. xvi. 27.

Il. His character is glorious. In
holiness (Exod.xv. 11); in power (Exod.
ayo elsa., Ix 12; 2 Thess. 1. 9);
in grace (Eph. i. 6). Or, summing up
all His attributes His Name is glorious
(1 Chron. xxix. 13; Psalm Ixxii. 19).

III. His works are glorious. The
creation of the material universe
(Psalm xix.1). His providential govern-
ment of earth (Isa. Ixiii. 14; Psalm
exx. 3, exlv. 11; Matt. vi. 13) His
redemption of a lost world (Psalm xeviii.
2; Isa. lii. 10; Eph. i. 3; 2 Tim. i. 9).

IV. His word is glorious. Twice at
least is the gospel so designated (2 Cor.
iv.4; 1 Tim. i. 11).

V. His Church is glorious. The
company of redeemed ones will yet be
presented before Him as a glorious
Church without spot or wrinkle (Eph.
Wao):

a His final appearing will be
glorious. Christ, the image of God,
will one day be manifested in glory
(Col. iii. 4; Titus ii. 13).


Ver. 5. God’s Promises to His People.
I, Often broken in the letter but


kept in the spirit.— As it was with the
promise of Canaan to Abraham.

II. Though long delayed in fulfil-
ment, never cancelled.—As it was
with the promise of a son to Abraham.

ITT. Sometimes denied to the pro-
misees but granted to their children.
—As it was with the inheritance which
Abraham obtained not, though his seed
did.


Vers. 2-5. The History of a Called
Sinner.

I. The divine.—In Abraham’s case
this consists of two parts: first, the
vision; and, secondly, the command.
1. The vision. The God of glory
appeared. Here was (1) the divine
suddenly appearing in the midst of the
human, (2) the true in the midst of the
untrue; (3) the heavenly in the midst
of the earthly; (4) the real in the
midst of the unreal. So is it with
every genuine conversion ; there may
not be the actual vision; there ma;
not be the glory which appeared tc
Abraham in Ur, and to Saul on his
way to Damascus ; but in all cases it
is God breaking in upon man and
man’s idolatry ; the light of the know-
ledge of the glory flashing into a
soul ; the light dispelling the darkness ;
the true dispersing the untrue; the
heavenly supplanting the earthly.
This is conversion. It is God coming
near; coming in! 2. The command.
Get thee out,—go to the land [I shall


155


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee SS eee


point to. It thus consists of two
parts: calling out from, and calling
in to. It is a Divine command, urgent
and explicit.

II. The human.—This consists of
four parts. 1. The obedience. “ He
came out of the land of the Chal-
deans.” He hesitated not, but rose up
and obeyed. 2. The pilgrimage. He
is not led into Canaan at once. 3. The
tribulation. In Abraham’s case it was
considerable. Lot’s worldliness, that
was .a trial; the destruction of Lot’s
family, and of Sodom, that was a
trial; the death of Sarah, that was a
trial. He had many asorrow. 4. The
inheritance at last. Not Babylon, nor
Egypt, but the land flowing with milk
and honey. Thus our whole life here
is one of faith, from first to last. Get
thee out, is God’s message to each
worldling.—H. Bonar, D.D.


Ver. 6. A great Prophecy and its
Fulfilment.

I. The prophecy.—1. That Abraham
should have a seed, when as yet he had
no child. 2. That that seed should
grow into a people, of which no reason-
able prospect existed. 3. That that
people should be enslaved for a period
of four hundred years. 4. That the
nation which enslaved them should be
visited with severe punishment. 5, That
this punishment should result in their
emancipation. 6. That when eman-
cipated they should serve God in the
land of Canaan.

II. The fulfilment.—1l. The seed
predicted appeared when Isaac was
born. 2. The people arose when the
patriarchs began to multiply in the
days of Jacob. 3. The captivity com-
menced to realise itself when the seventy
souls comprising Jacob’s family went
down into Egypt. 4. The punishment
threatened against their oppressors took
the form of a series of plagues upon
the land of Egypt. 5. The emancipa-
tion came to pass when Moses led his
brethren from the house of bondage.
6. The foretold service of Jehovah was
set up when Israel was established in
Canaan.


156


Lessons.—1. The ability of God to
predict and to fulfil. 2. The argument
from fulfilled prophecy in support of
inspiration.


Ver. 8. The Twelve Patriarchs.

I. Descendants of distinguished
men.

II. Not above cherishing sinful
feelings.

III. Perpetrators of a hideous
crime.

IV. Subjects of a great mercy
(ver. 13).


Ver. 2-8. The experiences of a soul
— illustrated in the case of Abraham.

I. A glorious vision.—God. Not
impossible to see God by the eye of
faith. God still, by His Spirit and
through His gospel, reveals Himself to
men’s souls. In this inshining of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ lies the beginning of the soul’s
new life.

II. A hard precept.—“ Get thee out
of thy country,” etc. When God
makes Himself known to a human
soul in the manner above described,
it is for the purpose of detaching that
soul from its earthly surroundings,
separating it from its mundane at-
tachments, leading it forth from its
terrestrial relationships, and causing ié
to start upon a nobler spiritual career

III. A magnificent promise. That
God would conduct him (Abraham) to
another and better land, and bestow
it on himself and his posterity. Simi-
larly, God never enjoins a soul to
enter on a heavenward career without
extending to that soul a like assurance
of help and guidance towards that
ideal state after which it aspires. To
the soul that “comes” God will
“ shew.”

IV. A splendid faith.—“‘ Then came
he out of the land of the Chaldeans.”
Without that response to the divine
precept and promise Abraham had
never set his foot upon the upward
way. Spiritual life on the soul’s side
begins with personal acts of trust and
obedience. The soul that cannot sur-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


EECA CLS. CHAP. VIL.





render to God in hearty confidence and
prompt submission lacks the capability
of being redeemed.

V. A sore disappointment.—Though
Abraham obeyed, God gave him none
inheritance in the land. The reason
was, that God had provided for him
something better. God never intended
to put him off with a few acres of
material soil, but had prepared for
him a city in a better country, even
an heavenly. The disappointment
was required to prepare him for this
city. Neither does God engage that
gracious souls shall not be disappointed


but he does engage that “all things
shall work together for their good,” and
that they shall have an inheritance
among the saints in light (Col. i. 12).
VI. A sufficient consolation. —The
covenant of circumcision which formed
Abraham’s descendants into a people
was a pledge that the land for the
people would not be wanting, but
would arrive in due time. So to
Christian souls is God’s covenant of
grace, signed and sealed by the sacra-
ments of Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper, ample guarantee that the
heavenly inheritance will not fail.


if they seek their inheritance on earth;


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS. —Verses 9—16.


The Last of the Patriarchs ; or, Joseph a type of Christ.

I. The victim of a terrible crime.—Joseph was sold into Egypt, for twenty
pieces of silver (Gen. xxxvii. 28). So was Christ betrayed to the chief priests for
thirty pieces ‘of silver (Matt. xxvi. 15). The former crime was—l. Perpetrated
by Joseph's brethren. And so was Christ’s betrayal by those who were His own.
kinsmen according to the flesh (John i. 11), and in particular by one of His own
disciples (Matt. xxvi. 14). 2. Instigated by fraternal jealousy. Joseph’s brethren
were envious of the place which Joseph had in their father’s affection, and of the
greatness which Joseph’s dreams foreshadowed (Gen. xxxvii. 4, 5). So the real
root of men’s opposition to Christ was His essential goodness and greatness,
which they hated. 3. Followed by unmerited afflictions. These, in excruciating
forms of slander, accusation and imprisoment were all without being deserved,
experienced by Joseph in Egypt (Gen. xxxix.). The like and worse were
without cause, in after years, meted out to Joseph’s antitype Jesus (Matt, xxvi.,
XXvii.).

II. The subject of a marvellous interposition.—God worked in his behalf, and
gave him three things which again had their counterpart in the experience of
Christ. 1. Consolation in his troubles. Such as arises to a good man from the
enjoyment of God’s favour and fellowship (Psalm xci. 15): ‘ God was with him”
(compare Gen. xxxix. 21). The same support was extended to Christ in His
tribulation (John xvi. 32). 2. Deliverance from his troubles. “God delivered
him out of all his afflictions.” So Christ was delivered from death and the
grave. A like favour promised to the righteous (Psalm xxxiv. 19), As Joseph
escaped out of his afflictions in Egypt, so will the Christian be released from his,
if not here, at least hereafter (Rev. vii. 16, 17). 3. Promotion after his troubles.
God “ gave him favour and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and made
him governor over Egypt and all his house (Gen. xli. 40, 41). In like manner
Christ was exalted after His humiliation (ii. 33, v. 31; Phil. ii. 9); and so to
Christians is promised after life’s trials a share in Christ’s throne (2 Tim. ii, 12;
Rev. iiii 21), a crown of life (James i. 12), an exceeding even an eternal weight
of glory (2 Cor. iv. 17).

III. The instrument of a wondrous deliverance.—l. The subjects of this
deliverance were Joseph’s brethren, who had sold him into bondage, with their
families ; and so is Christ’s salvation intended for those who sold Him to death,
and for their children (ii. 39). 2. The nature of this deliverance was a rescue


457


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


nn EEE?


CHAP. VII.


from famine which entailed sore affliction, and might have ended in death—a
type of the peril, spiritual hunger, from which Christ proposed and still proposes
to save men. 3. The terms of this deliverance were free. Joseph exacted no
conditions from his brethren or father beyond this, that they should accept his
kindness and live upon his bounty; and no conditions different does Christ
impose on sinful men.

Learn.—l. That a man’s foes are often those of his own household (Matt.
x. 36). 2. That God never forsakes them that trust in Him (Josh. i. 5; 1 Sam.
xii. 22; Heb. xiii. 5). 3. That all things work together for good to them that


love God (Rom. viii. 28).
their deserts (Psalm citi. 10).


4. That sinful men are seldom requited according to
5. That Old Testament history was full of God


and Christ (ver. 38, x. 43; 1 Cor. x. 4; 1 Peter i. 11).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 9-14. The Portion of Gods
People.

I. Affliction—Of various sorts and
sizes, of differing severity and con-
tinuance (John xvi. 33).

II. Consolation—From God and
Christ, whose companionship the saints
will or may always enjoy (Matt. xxviii.
30; Heb. xiii. 5).

III. Promotion.—Out of their afilic-
tions (Psalm xxxiv. 19) and into places
of honour (1 Sam. ii. 30).

IV. Usefulness.—In their day and
generation, to the Church and to the
world (Matt. v. 14-16).

_ V. Renown.—Their names being
often held in remembrance by posterity
(Psalm exii. 6).

Ver. 9. Egypt a Type of the World.

I. In its attractions.—1. A land of
lucury. “Take thy fill, eat the fat,
and drink the sweet,’ was her seductive
song. The means of subsistence were


inconceivably abundant. The very
soil teemed with life” (Baldwin
Brown). 2. A land of civilisation.


Egypt “ was full of the wisdom of this
world, the wisdom of the understand-
ing, which prostitutes itself eagerly to
the uses of a sensual and earthly life”
({bid.). Such the world is still to them
whose main ambition is learning. 3. 4
land of promise. It promised food,
learning, safety, comfort, honour to
Joseph’s brethren ; and the like attrac-
tions does the world hold out to its
devotees.

II. In its deceptions.—1. A land o7
spiritual barrenness. In all its multi-


158


tudes of gods there was none that
Joseph’s brethren could worship; in
its elaborate ritual nothing to feed the
faith of the chosen family. With a
similar soul dearth is the world struck,
as they who live in it find. 2. A land
of moral deterioration. As all Egypt’s
civilisation could not keep her people
from sinking down to lower depths of
sensuality and vice, in which Israel
must have shared, so neither can the
culture of the present-day world pre-
vent those who have nothing else to
live upon from undergoing a similar
experience. 3. A land of intolerable
bondage. Whereas Joseph’s brethren
expected to find in Egypt shelter,
comfort, and honour, they were not
long settled on its fat soil before
they discovered it to be a house
of galling oppression. A true type
of what the world always proves to
them who try to live for it as well
as in it.

III. In its fortunes.—As old Egypt
was invaded, broken up, and its power
destroyed, and God’s Israel rescued
from its grasp, so will it be with the
present evil world, whose power indeed
has been already broken, and from
whose servitude the children of God
will be eventually delivered (Gal. i. 4).


Ver. 10. God’s Presence with His
People.
I. Real, though unseen.
II. Constant, though not always felt.
III. Beneficent, though not always
believed to be so.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII.





IV. Efficient, though this is often
doubted.


The Pharaohs mentioned in Scripture.

I. Abraham’s Pharaoh (Gen. xii.
14-20).—Probably Amenemhat ITI. of
the twelfth dynasty, B.c. 2300.

II. Joseph’s Pharaoh (Gen. xl.).—
Most likely Apophis, the last of the
shepherd kings, who reigned B.c. 2266-
1700.

III. The Pharaoh who knew not
Joseph (Exod. i. 8).—Aahmes of the
eighteenth dynasty, B.c. 1700.

IV. The Pharaoh who commanded
the first-born to be cast into the river
(Exod. i. 22).—Seti I. of the nineteenth
dynasty, B.c. 1366.

V. The Pharaoh of the oppression,
who sought to slay Moses (Exod. ii. 23).
—Rameses 1]J., B.c. 1350.

VI. The Pharaoh of the Exodus
(Exod. xiv. 5-31).—Menephtah II,
B.c. 1300.

VII. The Pharaoh whose daughter
Solomon married (1 Kings iii. 1).—
Pinetem II., the last of the twenty-
first dynasty, B.c. 1033.

VIII. The Pharaoh who invaded
Judah in the reign of Rehoboam (2
Chron. xii. 2).—Shishak, Sheshank I.,
of the twenty-second dynasty, B.c. 966.

IX. The Pharaoh of Hezekiah’s time
(2 Kings xviii. 21, xix. 9),—Tirhakah,
the Ethiopian, of the twenty-first
dynasty, B.c. 693.

X. The Pharaoh against whom
Josiah warred (2 Kings xxiii. 29, 30;
2 Chron. xxxv. 20-24).—Necho, Naki,
of the twenty-sixth dynasty, B.c. 612.

XI. Pharaoh, the ally of Jehoiakim
and Zedekiah (Jer. xxxvii. 4-7 ; Ezek.
xvii. 15-17).—Hophra, the second suc-
cessor of Necho; Uahabra, or Apries,
B.C. 591.


Ver. 12. Corn in Egypt; or, Good
News from a Far Country.—The
tidings brought to Jacob may be used
to illustrate the good news of the
Gospel. Jacob's tidings were—

L Timely.—Corn in Egypt! This
was heard of when Jacob’s household
was famishing (ver. 11). So Christ,


the Bread of Life, came when the
world was on the eve of perishing. So
the gospel comes to sinners in a desti-
tute and lost condition.

II. Unexpected.—Corn in Egypt!
Though the famine was there as well
asin Canaan. So the salvation of the
gospel arose in a quarter the most un-
looked for, and proceeded forth, as it
were, from the very humanity which
required to be redeemed. So often the
good news reaches sinners in places and
at times where and when they least
anticipate.

III. Joyful.—Corn in Egypt! 1. Noe
in a distant country, but close at hand.
So the gospel is nigh to men, the
word of faith which the apostles
preached, requiring no painful journey
to obtain its provisions but only the
exercise of faith. 2. Not a small supply
but an abundant store. All countries
sought to Egypt for corn. So the
gospel contains ‘enough for each,
enough for all, enough for evermore.”
3. Not on hard conditions but on easy
terms. At least for Joseph’s brethren.
So the gospel’s heavenly corn is with-
out money and without price.

IV. Certain—Corn in Egypt. If
before they started from Hebron
Joseph’s brethren had doubts, when
they arrived in Joseph’s presence
they had none. So will: no one ques-
tion the truthfulness of the gospel news
who will repair to Christ’s presence
in search of a supply for his soul’s
needs.


Ver. 16. Buried in Canaan.—Jacob
in the field of Machpelah (Gen. 1. 13)
and Joseph at Shechem (Josh. xxiv.
32), or the dead hand grasping its
inheritance.

I. An act of filial piety.-—1. On the
part of Joseph towards his father
Jacob in fulfilling his dying request.
2. On the part of the children of Israel
in remembering Joseph’s last injunc-
tion.

II. An act of lively faith—On the
part of both Jacob and Joseph. 1. In
clinging to the inheritance God had
promised them. 2. In predicting the


159


OHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a


return of Israel to Canaan. 3. In
wishing to have their dust laid in its
sacred soil.

III. An act of prophetic meaning.—
It seemed to say that those whose dust
was laid in Canaan’s soil at their own re-
quest anticipated a time when not only
their descendants should come over but
themselves should arise to take posses-
sion of its acres. It was their way of
hinting at a future resurrection.


Ver. 9-19. Joseph's brethren. These
ancient patriarchs are here presented
in three aspects.

I. As perpetrators of a hideous
crime.—The sale of their brother into
bondage in Egypt. The feeling which
gave rise to this unnatural deed was
the seemingly small and harmless one
of envy at their brother's foreshadowed
greatness, combined, as the Genesis
story shows, with jealousy on account
of the paternal favour he enjoyed.
From this they passed to hatred of
their brother's conspicuous goodness,
which silently rebuked their wicked
lives, and constrained him to report
at home their ill behaviour. The next
and final step was easy for those
who were already murderers at heart
(1 John iii, 15), At the first con-
venient opportunity the object of their
envy and hatred was deprived of his
liberty and sold to a company of
Midianite merchants who carried him
down to Egypt. The lesson is to
guard against the entrance of envy
into the heart, since once admitted to
the bosom none can predict to what
enormities it may impel its victims.

II. As sufferers of severe retribu-
tion.—It is not often that Nemesis so


soon overtakes evil doers as it did
them. Hardly had they returned to
their homes than they began to be
pressed by the straits of famine, which
Scripture constantly represents as one
of Gou’s ministers of judgment on
rebellious lands and peoples (2 Sam.
xxiv. 13; Jer. xxix. 18; Ezek. v. 16).
On visiting Egypt in search of corn
they saw their wicked plans defeated.
The dismay which seized their spirits
when they beheld their long dead
brother, as they supposed, seated on
the throne and clothed with imperial
power, is aptly pictured in the Hebrew
narrative which says, that ‘they were
troubled at his presence.” Nor did
vengeance close with them, but was
entailed on their descendants, who, in
after years, were subtilly dealt with,
evil entreated, and finally enslaved in
the land into which their fathers had
sold Joseph.

III. As recipients of undeserved
mercies.—There are few instances in
which mercy is not mixed with judg-
ment. Joseph’s brethren experienced
kindnesses beyond their merits. <Aé
the hand of God who preserved them
alive, when He might have justly left
them to starve for their inhumanity
to their brother. At the hand of
Joseph who treated them with clemency
and rewarded them with love, inviting
them to Egypt and caring for their
wants throughout the years of famine,
when he might have exacted vengeance
for their former cruclty to him. <Aé
the hand of their descendants who car-
ried their dead bodies into Canaan
and buried them in Abraham’s tomb,
when they might have been left to rot
in the sepulchres of Egypt.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17—44.


The Founder of the Nation ; or, the Biography of Moses in Three Chapters.

I. From one to forty (ver. 20-22).—1l. Born in an evil time. When the
oppression of his countrymen was so cruel that either Hebrew parents cast out
their children to perish rather than see them live to experience the bitter servitude
under which themselves had groaned, or Hebrew children were cast out by
Pharaoh’s order to the end that they might not live. This latter interpretation
accords best with the Old Testament narrative (Exod. i. 22). 2. Haposed toa
cruel fate. Brought forth in an hour of sorrow, with no better prospect before
him than either to be strangled by a midwife’s cord or thrown into the river,


160


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.





re


Moses was for three months, on account of his extreme beauty, secretly nourished
in the house of his father Amram; but at length, when concealment was no
longer possible, in an ark of bulrushes, daubed with slime and pitch, he was laid
by his mother in the flags by the Nile side (Exod. ii. 3). The writer to the
Hebrews cites the conduct of Moses’ parents as an instance of faith (Heb. xi. 23).
3. Rescued by a strange providence. By accident it seemed, though in fact by the
overruling hand of God, the daughter of Pharaoh—the very king whose decree
had caused his exposure—-having with her maidens come to the river side to wash,
found him, “took him up” out of the water, and “ nourished him as her own
son ”—+2.¢., adopted him. (See Exod. ii. 5-10.) Josephus says this daughter of
Pharaoh was named Thermuthis. She was the sister of Rameses IT. or daughter
of Seti I. (See “Critical Remarks.”) 4. Educated in a king’s court. Probably
like Rameses himself, Moses was for some years “ left in the house of the women
and of the royal concubines, after the manner of the maidens of the palace”
(Brugsch, Egypt under the Pharaohs, ii. 39), where he received the nurture and
training requisite to fit him for the higher studies and more arduous exercises of
youth and manhood. Tradition speaks of him as having studied “ mathematics,
natural philosophy, engineering, warfare, grammar, and medicine,” while Josephus
(Ant., II. x. 1) places to his credit a successfully conducted campaign against the
Ethiopians. With this accords Stephen’s statement that Moses “‘ was instructed
in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in his words and works”
(ver. 22).

IJ. From forty to eighty (vers. 23-29).—1. A patriotic inspiration. ‘To visit
his brethren, the children of Israel ”—to visit in the sense of sympathising with
and succouring them (compare Luke i. 68, vii. 16 ; Acts xv. 14). Whether special
means were taken under God by Moses or his mother to keep alive the knowledge
of his kinship with the down-trodden Hebrews is not recorded, but, on reaching
man’s estate, the sense of that kinship having asserted itself, he refused any
longer to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter (Heb. xi. 24). 2. A chivalrous
interference. Having paid a visit to the brickfields, with which up to this time
he may have been comparatively unacquainted, he beheld what the monuments
tell us was a frequent scene—one of his brethren suffering wrong or enduring
blows at the taskmaster’s hand ; and, his patriotic blood leaping within his veins,
he warded off the blows, laid the ruthless slave-driver lifeless at his feet, and,
thinking that nobody saw, buried him in the sand (Exod. ii. 12). 3. A mistaken
supposition. He imagined his countrymen would have understood how God had
called him to deliver them, but they did not. The blow that day struck was
premature. The people were not ready to rise, and he was not yet qualified to
lead. Forty years more of suffering for them, and of discipline for him, were
needed before the great bell of liberty would ring in Egypt’s land. Men are
often in a hurry; God never is. Men often strike before the iron is hot; God
never does. 4. Anangry response. The day after, when he would have parted two
of his quarrelling countrymen, saying, ‘Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong
one to another?” (compare Gen. xiii. 8), he that did the wrong thrust him away,
saying, “ Who made thee a ruler and a judge over us? wouldst thou kill me as
thou didst the Egyptian yesterday?” Wrongdoers always resent the interference
of third parties—a clear proof they are in the wrong. 5. A precipitate flight.
Having discovered through the choleric questions of his countrymen that his
offer of himself as a deliverer was premature, and that his deed of yesterday
was known, he saw that thenceforward Egypt would be no place of safety for
him, and accordingly betook himself to Midian (see ‘‘ Critical Remarks”). 6. An
obscure life. There, having met with Jethro the shepherd priest of the land, who
granted him Zipporah to wife, he forgot his early patriotic ambitions in the
humdrum occupation of feeding sheep, and in conjugal felicity (Exod. ii. 16-22),


161


CHAP, VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





III. From eighty to one hundred and twenty (vers. 30-44).—1. A great sight.
(1) When? At the close of the second period of forty years, on the death of
Rameses II. (Exod. ii. 23). At the opening of the third. At the beginning of
the reign of Menephtah II. When the oppression of the people had become
intolerable (Exod. ii. 23). When God’s time, as distinguished from Moses’, had
arrived. (2) Where? In the wilderness of Mount Sinai (see “ Critical Remarks”),
at the back side of the desert, at the mountain of God, even Horeb (Exod. ii. 1).
God delights to reveal Himself to His people in solitudes. (3) What? “An
angel ”—the angel of the Lord, or Jehovah ” (Exod. iii. 2)—‘‘ appeared to him in
a flame of fire in a bush,” which burned and yet was not consumed. (4) How?
Wherein lay the greatness of the sight? In its unexpectedness, in its super-
naturalness, in its impressiveness. 2. A heavenly voice. That of Jehovah, who
(1) revealed His own character as the covenant God of the Hebrew fathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (ver. 32); (2) cautioned Moses against irreverence
before the Holy One, whose presence consecrated the very ground whereon He
stood (ver. 33); (3) announced that He (Jehovah) had beheld and sympathised
with the sufferings and heard the groanings of His people in Egypt (ver. 34) ;
and (4) intimated His intention to deliver them and to despatch Moses into
Egypt for that purpose (ver. 34). 3. dm exalted commission. Considering
(1) by whom it was issued—God, the God of glory (ver. 2) and the God of the
fathers (ver. 32); (2) to whom it was entrusted—the man whom his countrymen
had refused, but whom God had chosen ; (3) through whose hand it was to be
executed, that of the angel who had appeared to him; and (4) for what it was
appointed—that Moses should be to Israel, who had rejected him, both a ruler
and a deliverer, or redeemer, and in both (according to Stephen) a type of Christ.
4. A splendid achievement. (1) As a liberator he (Moses) brought out the
children of Israel from Egypt, having wrought, in his work of emancipation,
which began with the Exodus and ended (so far as Moses was concerned) with
the forty years of wandering, signs, and wonders (compare ii. 22), first in Egypt
(Exod. vii.—xii.), next at the Red Sea (Exod. xiv.), and after that in the
wilderness (Exod. xv., xvi., Xvii., etc.). (2) As a prophet he foretold to them the
coming, in after years, of a prophet like unto, but greater than, himself, even
their Messiah, whom in the person of Jesus they had refused to hear. (3) As a
lawgiver he conferred upon them “living oracles” received by himself from
Jehovah—viz., the whole system of moral and ceremonial precepts composing the
law of Moses, here characterised as “living” to describe not their effect, which
was not always life-giving because of the corruption of men’s hearts (Rom. viii. 3),
but their design, which was to impart life to all by whom they should be obeyed
(Lev. xviii. 5; Rom. vii. 10). (4) As an architect he gave them the tabernacle
of the testimony in the wilderness, which he made according to the pattern he
had seen—in the mount of Sinai (Exod. xxv. 9, 40). 5. A disgraceful requital.
As at the commencement of his illustrious career, so at its close, his country-
men “ thrust him from them,” declined to obey his instructions, but turned back
into Egypt, and (ver. 39) yet Moses, towards the termination of his leadership,
thought less of his people’s thankfulness to himself than of their deplorable in-
gratitude to God (Deut. xxxii. 6).

See in Moses: 1. A pattern of true greatness. 2. An example of life’s
vicissitudes. 3. A type of Jesus Christ.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. The Time of the Promise. none of His sovereign and gracious
I. Fixed by God, as all times are. appointments.
Tf. Remembered by God, who forgets III. Honoured by God, who never


162


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII.





fails to implement a promise He has
made, when the time for its fulfilment
has arrived.


The Increase of Nations.—Occurs as
in Israel.

I. Always in accordance with Divine
providential arrangements (Job xii. 23 ;
Psalm evii. 38).

II. Often in spite of the most adverse
circumstances (Exod. i. 12).

III. Never beyond the limits pre-
scribed by God (Acts xvii. 26).


Vers. 20-39. The Story of Moses.

I. The son of a Hebrew mother..—
No imaginary or legendary character
but a real historical personage. Dis-
tinguished in infancy by remarkable
beauty, which His parents regarded as
an omen of future greatness (Exod. il.
2; Heb. xi. 23). Exposed to a cruel
fate—cast out into the Nile, placed in
an ark of bulrushes by the river’s brink.
Compare the story of Sargina I. of
Babylon. — See below.

Ii. The foundling of an Egyptian
princess.—In the providence of God
this led to the preservation of Moses’
life and his education in such a way as
to fit him for his subsequent calling
and career. The All-wise knows the
best schools in which to train those
whom He intends afterwards to employ
as His instruments.

III. The kinsman of slaves.—The
feeling of nationality cannot easily be
eradicated from the human heart. Out
of this rises love of country, patriotism,
sense of brotherhood. When it first
began to stir in Moses cannot be told ;


at the age of forty it was too strong to


be suppressed (Heb. xi. 24).

IV. The liberator of his people —
Though not exactly in his time, yet
in God’s time, he was honoured to lead
his down-trodden countrymen from the
house of bondage (Heb. xi. 27).

V. The founder of anation.— Having
conducted his followers to Sinai, he
there formed them into a people, with
a regularly organised community, with
laws and statutes for the regulation of
their civil and religious affairs,


VI. The prophet of a new religion.
—He imparted to them the terms on
which alone they could be regarded as
Jehovah’s people, or Jehovah could
consider Himself their God—gave them
the ten commandments and _ the
multifarious ordinances of the cere-
monial or Levitical law.

Note—Legend of the infancy of
Sargina I., of Babylon, who lived about
fifteen or sixteen centuries before the
Christian era—i.e., not long before the
birth of Moses. 1. I am Sargina, the
great king; the king of Agani. 2.
My mother knew not my father: my
family were the rulers of the land.
3. My city was the city of Atzu-pirani,
which is on the banks of the river
Euphrates. 4. My mother conceived
me: in a secret place she brought me
forth. 5. She placed me in an ark of
bulrushes: with bitumen she closed me
up. 6. She threw me into the river,
which did not enter into the ark to
me. 7. The river carried me: to the
dwelling of Akki, the water-carrier, it
brought me. 8. Akki, the water-
carrier, in his goodness of heart lifted
me up from the river. 9. Akki, the
water-carrier, brought me up as his
own son. 10, Akki, the water-carrier,
placed me with a tribe of Foresters.
11. Of this tribe of Foresters, Ishtar
made me king. 12. And for... years
I reigned over them.—Records of the
Past, v. 3, first series.


Ver. 31. The Burning Bush (Exod.
iii. 2).

te e supernatural phenomenon.—
Revealed by two things: (1) the fact
that the bush, though burning, was
not consumed ; and (2) the voice which
proceeded from its midst. ;

II. An impressive spectacle.—It
caused Moses to tremble. Chiefly
(1) Before the Divine presence (ver.
32) and (2) At the Divine communica-
tions (ver. 33).

III. A suggestive symbol.—(1) Of
the holiness of God, which burns
against every manifestation of sin ;
(Heb. xii. 29) (the flame). (2) Of the
imperishability of the Church of God


163


SHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


nea A ee SS So ee


which may be cast into the fire but
cannot be destroyed (Isa. xlii. 2) (the
bush).


Ver. 33. Holy Ground.
I. Where God manifests
presence.
II. Where God reveals His character.
III. Where God makes known His
will.
IV. Where God communes with His
people.
V. Where God is worshipped by
believing hearts.


Ver. 35. The Angel in the Bush.—
That this was no created spirit but the
angel of Jehovah, or Jehovah Himself,
is clearly taught by Stephen, who
besides calling Him the Lord (ver. 31)
represents Him as—

I. Assuming the Divine name.—“ I
am the God of thy fathers” (ver. 32).

II. Claiming Divine worship.—
“Loose the shoes from thy feet”
(ver. 33).

III. Exercising Divine attributes.—
“JT have seen,” “I have heard”
(Omniscience) ; ‘I have come down,”
“T will send” (Omnipotence) (ver. 34).

IV. Speaking Divine words.—Im-
parting living oracles unto Moses
(ver. 38).


Ver. 37. A Prophet like unto Moses.
—See on ili. 22.


Ver. 38. The Church in the Wilder-
ness : a Type of The Christian Church on
Earth.—In respect of —

I. Its origin.—Called out of Egypt,
the then symbol of the world ; redeemed
from the house of bondage which was
emblematical of man’s natural condi-
tion.

II. Its position.—In the wilderness ;
a fitting picture of the spiritually
barren world through which the Church
of Christ has to journey.

III. In its privileges.—Manifold
and high. 1. The divine presence. The
angel of the Lord—which also the
Church of the New Testament enjoys
(Matt. xviii. 20, xxviii. 20). 2. A
divinely qualified teacher, Moses with


164


His





whom the angel spake at Mount
Sinai—which, too, the Christian Church
has in the indwelling Holy Spirit (John
xvi. 13; 1 John ii. 20, 27), and in the
apostles and prophets, pastors and
teachers (1 Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11),
bestowed upon it by its exalted Head.
3. A divine revelation. The “living
oracles” delivered to Moses—which
again the gospel Church possesses in
the words of Christ and His apostles
preserved in the New Testament records
(Heb. v. 12). 4. A divine institution.
——The tabernacle—which once more
has its counterpart in the Christian
sanctuary, congregation, or Church.

IV. In its business——Which was
twofold. 1. Zo witness for Jehovah
in the then world. Israel Jehovah's
witnesses (Isa. xliii. 10) ; the apostles
Christ’s witnesses (v. 32); and Chris-
tians generally expected to be living
epistles of Christ (2 Cor. ili. 3). 2. J'o
overcome its adversaries on the way to
Canaan. So Christians have a con-
stant warfare to maintain against
innumerable foes (Eph. vi. 10-17;
L Tim, vis) 12 42 Dim. its),

V. In its imperfection.—The Church
in the wilderness was guilty of nota
few heinous sins—disobedience to its
leader, Moses, hankering after Egypt,
apostasy from Jehovah ; all which have
their equivalents in the faults of the
people of Christ.

VI. In its discipline—The Church
in the wilderness was chastised for its
sins, first by judicial visitations, such
as the fiery serpents, next by powerful
adversaries like the Moabites and
Midianites, which were raised up against
them, after that by spiritual hardening,
so that they plunged into deeper
idolatry, and lastly by exile and
captivity in Babylon. So the Church
of to-day, either as a whole or in its
individual members, is not left without
chastisement for its shortcomings and
backslidings, its transgressions and
iniquities. It, too, has its providential
visitations by which its numbers are
reduced, its open and secret opponents
by which its progress is hindered, its
seasons of sviritual decline, in which it


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII.





lapses from the faith, its removals into
exile and captivity, where it sighs and
cries for the liberty it once enjoyed.

VII. In its goal.—Canaan, which
in a heavenly form is the destination
- of the New Testament Church.


Vers. 39-43. The Apostasy of Israel.

I. Its occasion—The absence — of
Moses. When the Christian Church
reposes with too much dependence on
its visible leaders it is prone to with-
draw its confidence from its invisible
Head.

II. Its form.—A lapsing into the
idolatry of Egypt, which led to the
people's making, or Aaron making at
their request, an image of the famous
calf or bull worshipped in Egypt, either
the bull Apis at Memphis, or the bull
Mnevis at Heliopolis. How deeply
ingrained in them this calf or bull
worship had been appears from the
circumstance that centuries after their
settlement in Canaan they, in times
of spiritual declension, reverted to it
(1 Kings xii. 28; 2 Kings xi. 29). So
when the New Testament Israel loses
sight of its invisible Head it is prone
to revert to its old sins (2 Peter i 9).

III. Its punishment.—1. Withdrawal
of Divine restraint. Joined to their
idols they were left alone (Hosea iv. 17).
Forsaken by them, God in turn for-
sook them (2 Chron. xv. 2). Having
given up Jehovah He gave up them, so
that they sank into deeper and more
shameless idolatries. Instead of offering
unto Jehovah slain beasts and sacrifi-
ces during the forty years of wilder-
ness wandering as they should have
done, they carried about the tabernacle
of Moloch, a small portable tent in
which was enshrined the image of the
idol and a model of the planet Saturn,
to which, according to Diodorus Siculus,
horrid child sacrifices were offered at
Carthage. So when God, in punish-
ment for sin, withdraws restraining
grace from His people, they commonly
plunge into viler and more heinous
wickedness than they had before com-
mitted, sin being thus avenged by
liberty to sin, 2. Infliction of positive


pains. The Israelites, through that
very tendency to apostatise so early
manifested by them, were ultimately
driven into exile beyond Babylon ;
and so will they who persevere in
forsaking the living God be eventually
punished with perpetual banishment
from His holy presence (Rom. ii. 8;
2 Thess. i. 9).


Ver. 44, The Tabernacle of the Testi-
mony in the Wilderness.

I. An actual historic building.—
Necessary now to insist on this since
the higher critics have imagined and
keep on asserting that the Mosaic


‘tabernacle never had a veritable exist-


ence at all, but was only a fictional
structure, fashioned after the model of
the temple but on a smaller scale, and
projected into the prehistoric wilder-
ness as a convenient free space on
which it might be fictionally erected
without risk of colliding with historical
and well-authenticated facts—which
might be troublesome. But in addition
to the theory of a fictional tabernacle
being attended with numberless in-
superable difficulties—such as, the
unlikelihood of a post-exilic fiction-
monger entering into minute details
of construction like those given in
Exodus; the improbability of a late
author, who had never himself been
in the wilderness, furnishing so ac-
curate a representation of the geo-
graphical situation as archeological
research shows the Mosaic account to
be ; the inconceivability of any honest
writer stating that the tabernacle had
been made by Moses after a pattern
shown to him by Jehovah in the
Mount, when in point of fact it was
never made at all, but only imagined
by the writer himself, who took the
first or second temple for his model;
the falsification of Pentateuchal history
which must ensue if the tabernacle of
Moses never was an actual building ; the
contradiction to statements in the
historical and prophetical books which
must be made if the fiction theory is
correct ; in addition to these the actual
historic character of the tabernacle is


165


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





vouched for by both Stephen and the
writer to the Hebrews (viii. 2, 5,
Lx) 2rd; 6,08), 11,21, ma. 10) Bee
an article by the present writer, en-


titled “The Tabernacle and_ the
Temple” in The Theological Monthly,
April 1891.


II. A divinely sketched building.—
If Moses was the constructor of the
tabernacle (and in this sense may be
styled its architect) its true designer
was God. This\ introduces into the
religion of ancient Israel that which
is so keenly objected to, but without
which no religion can be of permanent
value or saving porer—viz., the super-
natural element. If Christianity is
not “of God” in the highest sense of
that expression, it will not succeed
permanently in binding the consciences
of men.

III. A provisional building.—It was
intended for the temporary accommo-
dation of the Ark during the period of
the wilderness wanderings, and until a
permanent habitation could be secured
for it in the place which Jehovah should
choose. Hence it was in due course
superseded by the Temple of Solomon,
which in turn has been displaced by
the Christian Church.


IV. A symbolic building.—1. Of the
Divine fellowship with Israel. (1) The
Holy of Holies with its Ark of the
Covenant, its Glory burning between
the cherubim, its mercy seat, its tables
of testimony, etc. (Heb. ix. 2-5), was
an emblem of the divine presence, the
divine majesty, the divine character,
and the divine conditions of fellowship
between Jehovah and Israel. (2) The
holy place, with its altar of incense,
its seven-branched candlestick, and its
tables of shew bread, was an emblem
of what that tellowship consisted in—
spiritual acceptance, spiritual illumin-
ation, and spiritual nourishment of the
believing worshipper by Jehovah on
the one side, and on the other spiritual
adoration of God (the incense), spiritual
shining for God (the lamps), and spirit-
ual consecration to God (the loaves).
(3) The outer court, with its altar of
burnt offering and laver, was an emblem
of the only way in which such fellow-
ship with Jehovah could be reached—
viz., by atonement (the altar) and
regeneration (the laver). 2. Of the
Divine fellowship with believers in the
Christian Church. This thought is
elaborated and fully wrought out in
the Epistle to the Hebrews (ix. x).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 45—53.


From Joshua to Jesus ; or, the Downward Course of Israel.

I. Joshua and the conquest.—l. The clearing out of the nations from Canaan.
(1) Effected instrumentally by the swords of Joshua and his warriors. Stephen
does not hint that the extermination of the Canaanites was a horrible impiety ;
this is mostly done by tender-hearted “moderns” who see nothing wrong in
shooting down “inferior races” when they happen to be possessed of desirable
lands. (2) Sanctioned providentially and even commanded verbally by God
Himself (Deut. vii. 1, 2, xxxii. 49), so that Stephen represents the nations as
having been thrust out by God before the face of the fathers of Israel. That God
had a perfect right to eject the degraded Canaanites from their land, and to do
so in whatever way He chose, no one can dispute. That He selected Joshua and
his warriors for this purpose could not render the action wrong on God’s part,
and was ample justification for Joshua. 2. The entering in of Israel into their
possession. This took place under the leadership of Joshua, who in conducting
Israel to Canaan served as an eminent type of Christ. In taking over the soil
the Israelites did nothing different from what has been going on. ever since in
the providence of God. Degenerate nations retire, go down, and become extinct
before or are absorbed in superior peoples who are better able to occupy the land.
3. The establishment in Canaan of Jehovah's worship. Stephen clearly believed
that Moses had made a tabernacle in the wilderness, and that Joshua had fetched


166


Pa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.





it into ee setting it up first at Gilgal (Josh. iv. 18, 19), and latterly at Shiloh
(Josh. xviii. 1, xix. 51). In so doing Israel under Joshua began her national
history well. Had she adhered to Jehovah and His tabernacle her subsequent
fortunes, and perhaps the history of the world, would have been different.

II. David and the monarchy.—Two things noted. 1, Concerning David's
character. That he found favour in the sight of God, and was a man after God’s
own heart (xiii. 22; 1 Sam. xiii. 14), who delighted to do Jehovah’s will
(Psalm xl. 8). This does not imply that David never fell into sin. 2. Con.
cerning David’s request. To be allowed to find a habitation for the God of
Jacob, This request, though denied him, was pronounced good and accepted
as an evidence of his piety (1 Chron. xxii. 7, 8). In David’s days Israel’s
national glory reached its zenith. In the next reign it began to decline,

ITI. Solomon and the temple.—1. The honour conferred upon David’s son. He
was permitted to carry out his father’s project and erect a house for the worship
of Jehovah (1 Kings vi., viii.). A signal honour of which in his latter days he
became unmindful (1 Kings xi. 1-13). Eminent service in and to the Church is
no certain guarantee against apostasy. For the notion that Stephen intended
“to declare that Solomon built the temple without warrant, in place of the
tabernacle ” (Weizsicker), there is not the shadow of foundation. 2. The silence
preserved about his reign. It is significant that Stephen adds nothing more about
David's son; as if he desired to convey the impression that nothing more to
Solomon’s advantage or Israel’s could be said. Possibly this was so. Never-
theless, Nihil nisi bonum de mortuis is an excellent maxim.

IV. Isaiah and Jehovah.—1. Zhe decline in religion after Solomon. Notwith-
standing the magnificence of the temple worship, and perhaps partly because of
its magnificence, it began to degenerate—drifting first into mere external ritual,
and latterly terminating in shameful and shameless idolatry (see Isa. i. 11-15,
ii. 8). 2. The lofty doctrine of the prophets. That Jehovah was not a local
divinity, but the sovereign of the universe; that He could not be confined to
any material edifice, however imposing, since heaven was His throne and the
earth His footstool ; and that He could not be served by any mere bedily per-
formance or visible ceremonial, but only by the true homage of the heart.
3. The evil fortunes of the prophets. The people, stiff-necked and uncircumcised
in heart, resisted the Holy Ghost who spake in them (2 Sam. xxiii. 2; 2 Peter
i. 21), and persecuted them, sometimes even unto death (Matt. xxiii. 29-35).

V. Jesus and His contemporaries.—1. Their exalted privileges. (1) They had
received the law, as iv was ordained by angels, or as the oidinance of angels
(Psalm Ixviii. 17). (2) They had been honoured by the coming to them of the
righteous One (Johni. 11). 2. Their heinous sins. (1) They had not kept the
law (John vii. 19). (2) They had betrayed and murdered the righteous One
ii. 23).

: Tee. The powerlessness of mere external privilege to save. 2. The
heredity that shows itself in sin as well as in piety. 3. The criminality of those
who know the truth, and do not walk in accordance therewith.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Vers. 44-47. Four Old Testament IV. Solomon.—As 1. Builder of the


Typical Persons. Temple. 2. As Prince of Peace.
I. Moses.—As 1. Deliverer. 2. Me-
diator. 3. Lawgiver. Ver. 47. The House and its Dwellers.
II. Joshua.—As 1. Captain. 2. Con- I, The house.—There was on earth
queror. 3. Consolidator. once a house which Jehovah called His
III. David—As 1. Shepherd. 2. own. Though the Most High dwelleth
King. not in temples made with hands, yet


167


CHAP. VII.


He chose for Himself a local habita-
tion, and built for Himself a place of
special abode. For many an age it
was simply a tent, of stakes, and
boards, and curtains ; in after ages it
was a palace, of marble, and gold, and
eedar, and brass; but whether it was
named Jehovah’s tent or Jehovah’s
temple, it was still the place of His
habitation.

II. The dwellers.—They of old were
Israel. To them pertained the house,
and the altar, and the mercy seat, and
the glory.

III. The blessedness.—‘‘ Blessed are
they that dwell in Thy house.” This
blessedness is both negative and posi-
tive. It arises out of that which we
are freed from, and that which we
gain. 1. The negative. On entering
the house of God, we are delivered
from the dangers which beset all who
remain outside. 2. The positive.
(1) Love. Jehovah’s house is specially
the abode of love. It was love that
thought of such a house for us; it was
love that planned it, and love that
built it. It is love too that fills it, and
provides all its excellences. (2) Com-
panionship. It is not into a cell we
enter—a prison, a desert, a place of
isolation. It is into a home, a well-
replenished habitation, a well-peopled
city. Israel’s temple was such, to
which the tribes went up. Much of
life’s happiness is derived from the
fellowship of heart with heart, and the
communion of saints is no small portion
of our joy, even here. Here, on earth,
companionship is imperfect, and is
sometimes a hindrance, a vexation.
Not so hereafter, in the “house not
made with hands,” the city of habita-
tion, the eternal tabernacle. (3) Ser-
vice. “ They serve Him day and night


HOMILETiC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





in His temple.” “His servants shall
serve Him.” It is to serve, as well as
to reign, that we are called. Such
service is, in all its parts, blessedness.
David knew the blessedness of service
in his day. (4) Glory. At present it
is not glory, save in anticipation.—
H. Bonar, D.D.


Vers. 48-50. The
Majesty of God.

I. The throne of His glory.—
Heaven. A throne. 1. Resplendent.—
Filled with His presence. 2. Hxalted.—
High above this world (Psalm ciii. 19).
3. Powerful.—Wielding authority over
all created things.

II. The footstool of His feet.—The
earth. As such: 1. The work of His
hands (Isa. ;xlviii, 13), 2. Under His
rule (Psalm cx. 1). 3. Destined to
share His glory (Isa. lx. 13).

III. The place of His rest.—1l. The
temple which Solomon built, symbolically
(Psalm cxxxii. 14). 2. The universe,
which He himself built, really.

Learn.—1. The reverence due to God
(Eccl. v. 2). 2. The hopefulness of
earth’s future (Isa. Ix. 13). 3. The
spirituality of divine worship (John
iv. 21-24).


Greatness and


Vers. 51-53. A Terrible Indictment.

I. Jehovah’s law broken.—And that
by men who had received it at the
hands of angels.

II. Jehovah’s prophets murdered.—
And that by the men they had come to
instruct.

III. Jehovah’s Son slain.—And
that by those who should have been
His protectors.

IV. Jehovah's Spirit resisted.—
And that by the men who had been
pledged to obey.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 54—60.
The Martyrdom of Stephen ; or, the First Taste of Blood.


I. Stephen’s last look into heaven (ver. 55)—1. Where he stood.


(1) In the


council chamber. Baur was greatly exercised to understand “how Stephen could
have seen the heavens opened in the room in which, doubtless, the sitting of the
Sanhedrim was | eld;” but the eye of faith can see heaven from any spot on earth.
Moses beheld it from the land of Egypt (Heb. xi. 27), Isaiah from the temple


168


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VII.





(Isa. vi. 1), Ezekiel from the banks of the Chebar (Ezek. i. 1), Peter from the house
top (Acts x. 11), John from Patmos (Rev. iv. 1). (2) Confronted by infuriated
foes who gnashed upon him with their teeth. No external circumstances can
dim faith’s eye, or prevent it from looking within the veil. Varied as were
the situations of those just mentioned, all alike gazed on things unseen
(Heb. xi. 1). 2. How he looked. (1) His internal condition. Filled with the
Holy Ghost. As water rises to its level, so does the Holy Spirit of which water
isanemblem. As fire and flame ascend to the skies, so does the Holy Spirit, of
which these are symbols, ever soar heavenward. The Spirit, which is “ God’s
breath in man,” habitually “returns to its (place of) birth” (George Herbert).
The Holy Ghost, descending from above and entering the human soul, in-
stinctively impels it to look above. (2) His external manner. With steadfast
gaze, like that with which the apostles followed the departing Christ (i. 10), he
fixed his eyes upon the scene which unfolded itself before his mental vision.
There is no need to ask whether he saw the sky through the chamber window.
The upward glance was only a symbol of the inward look. 3. What he saw.
(1) The glory of Ged. The luminous symbol of the divine presence which
Abraham beheld in Ur (ver. 2), Moses upon Sinai (Exod. xxxiii. 23), and
Ezekiel at Chebar (Ezek. i. 28), which filled first the tabernacle (Exod. xl. 34),
and afterwards the temple (1 Kings viii. 11), which shone round the shepherds
(Luke ii. 9), and appeared upon the transfiguration mount (Luke ix. 32).
(2) Jesus standing on the right hand of God. As if He had risen to protect
or receive His servant, say some, though it is doubtful whether any special
significance should be attached to Christ’s attitude. The point of importance
is that Stephen, on the eve of martyrdom, enjoyed a vision of the glorified
Christ. Saul (ix. 17), and John (Rev. i. 13), had similar visions, though neither.
of these occurred at death (see ‘‘ Hints on ver. 55”).

II. Stephen’s last testimony for Christ (ver. 56).—1. Introduced by a note of
exclamation. “Behold!” as if he meant to say: “This from a dying man
receive as certain,” or to call attention to its supreme importance as his last word
of testimony that would fall upon their ears. 2. Continued by a startling
declaration. (1) That he was looking into heaven—‘“ TI see the heavens opened,”
those heavens out of which Christ affirmed He had come (John iii, 13; vi. 38),
and into which His disciples had beheld Him depart (i. 11); which heavens, ~
therefore, were a reality, and not merely a fiction of the mind (John xiv. 2), and
nearer to them than they had ever imagined. (2) That in heaven He beheld
Jesus—lI see “ the Son of Man,” referring to Him by this name that there might
be no mistake as to whom he meant—the personage they knew so well, who,
when He stood where Stephen then stood, had called Himself by this designation
(Matt, xxvi. 64)—no mistake as to His identity, and none as to His continued
existence in a bodily form, and therefore none as to His resurrection. (3) That
the Jesus whom he saw was standing on the right hand of God. Perhaps a cir-
cumstance full of comfort for the dying deacon, as if it indicated that Christ had
risen from His throne in holy eagerness, either to support and protect, or to
receive and welcome His courageous servant (but see above), certainly a state-
ment fitted to alarm those who remembered that Jesus of Nazareth had used
similar speech concerning Himself (Mark xiv. 62), and had even spoken about
coming with great power and glory (Mark xiii. 26), fitted to suggest that the Son
of man, whom they had crucified, had already started up, and was on the move
to avenge His death. 3. Interrupted by a fierce demonstration. (1) By an
angry shout, crying out, most likely, that he should be silenced and put to death,
as the people had before cried out against his Master (Matt. xxvii. 23;
John xix. 12), and afterwards against Paul (xxii. 22, 23). (2) By a suggestive
action, stopping their ears, as if they could not listen without holy horror to what


169


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





they regarded as blasphemy. (Compare Zech. vii. 11.) 4. Followed by a
murderous infliction. The assault which ensued was—(1) Sudden. “They rushed
upon him,” under the impulse of blind and unreflecting fury, feeling, perhaps,
with regard to the thought that was in their hearts, that “’twere well it were
done quickly ” (Macbeth, i. 7). (2) Unanimous—* with one accord ”—a striking
contrast to the “one accord” of the disciples (ii. 46), a unity of hate and sin
rather than of love and grace. (3) Violent. “They cast him out of the city,” as the
inhabitants of Nazareth had once done to Christ (Luke iv. 29), ‘and they stoned
him,” as the men of Jerusalem had more than once threatened to do to Christ
(John x. 31, xi. 8). (4) Illegal. At this time the Jews possessed not the power
of inflicting capital punishment. (See “Critical Remarks.”) Yet (5) Deliberate.
“The witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a young man named
Saul.” This accorded with the Hebrew law, which required the accusers to begin
the work of lapidation (Deut. xiii. 10, xvii. 7). Many who shudder at breaking
the letter of the law have no scruples at violating its spirit.

III. Stephen’s last cry for himself (ver. 59).—Uttered—1. With perfect calm-
mess of spirit. Recognising, that his end was come he quietly prepared to
receive the lethal missiles. © cry for mercy from his enemies escaped his lips,
no fluster or fear appeared in his countenance, speech, or manner. With absolute
composure he resigned himself to die—in this furnishing a bright example to
Christians. (Compare the fortitude of Paul, xxi. 13, xxv. 11.) 2. With un-
faltering trust in Christ. Addressing Him as Lord Jesus, Stephen intimated in
the hearing of his executioners his faith in Christ’s divinity (Lord) and ability to
save (Jesus). Such faith has enabled multitudes since Stephen's day to die in
peace. Nothing else will impart the calm which Stephen displayed. 3. With
certain hope of felicity. As Christ, following the example of the Psalmist (Psalm
xxxi. 5), had commended His spirit to the Father’s hand (Luke xxiii. 46), so
Stephen now commends his spirit to the hands of Christ. A proper model for
the dying Christian. So the dying Huss was often heard to repeat the words:
“Into Thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit”; and was followed by his
fellow-martyr Jerome of Prague (Neander’s Church History, vol. ix., pp. 536, 549,
Bohn’s Edition). Since Christ is in glory, the soul that His hands receive must
be blessed indeed.

IV. Stephen’s last prayer for his enemies (ver. 60).—-l. Jts manner. (1)
With reverent humility—‘‘he kneeled down.” As Solomon did when invoking
Jehovah’s presence to come into the temple (2 Chron. vi. 13); as Daniel when
he prayed towards Jerusalem (Dan. vi. 10); as Christ in Gethsemane (Luke
xxii. 41); as Peter when raising Dorcas (ix. 40); as Paul at Miletus (xx. 36)
and at Tyre (xxi. 5). Kneeling most suitable when the soul is charged with
deep emotion. Stephen “stocd when he prayed for himself: he kneeled when
he prayed for his enemies” (7'’rapp). (2) With fervent supplication—“ he cried
with a loud voice,” thus marking the intensity of his desire. Although noise
in devotion is not always to be mistaken for spiritual ardour (1 Kings xix. 28),
and although feeling may sometimes be too deep for utterance (1 Sam. i. 13),
yet as a rule suppliants, who are in earnest, cry aloud and spare not (Psalm exlii.
1; Matt. xx. 31). 2. Jts burden. That the sin of his executioners and
murderers might not be laid to their charge. A prayer modelled after Christ’s
on the Cross (Luke xxiii. 34), Such a prayer as had never been offered till
Christ set the example (contrast the prayer of Zechariah, 2 Chron. xxiv. 21), and
such a prayer as has no parallel outside the Christian Church, though within.
such parallels are not wanting. John Huss, the Bohemian Reformer, when the
order was given to kindle the flames around him, only uttered these words:
“Lord Jesus! I endure with humility this cruel death for Thy sake; and I
pray Thee to pardon all my enemies” (Waddington’s Church History, p. 595).


170


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, VII.





—


3. Its effect. What impression Stephen’s prayer produced upon his enemies
cannot be told, though, it may be surmised, that one at least never forgot it,
and that Augustine’s remark is true, ‘If Stephen had not prayed the Church
would not have possessed Paul.” As to Stephen himself, his devotions caimed
his spirit and enabled him to fall asleep. And what a falling asleep it was!
“He fell asleep among flints and awoke among jewels” (Besser). The same
writer adds: “Stephen means a garland or crown. When his mother uamed
her child so she little thought of an imperishable crown of honour; but
Stephen’s spiritual mother, the Holy Church, honours the first bearer of her
martyr crown by celebrating his memory on the day after Christmas, accord-
ing to the motto ‘ yesterday was Christ born upon the earth, that to-day Stephen
might be born in heaven’ ” (Besser).


‘Foremost and nearest to His throne,

By perfect robes of triumph known,

And likest Him in look and tone
The holy Stephen kneels,

With steadfast gaze, as when the sky

Flew open to his fainting eye,

Which, like a fading lamp flash’d high
Seeing what death conceals.” Keble.


Conclusion.—They who would share with Stephen the glory of wearing that
immortal crown must 1. Look by faith into that opened heaven into which he
gazed ; 2. Contemplate with believing adoration that exalted Christ whom he
beheld ; 3. Testify by their lives, as he did by his, to the Saviour in whom they
trust ; 4. Commit themselves to Christ as he did when they come to die; and
5. Fall asleep as he did, breathing forth forgiveness upon all.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 56. The opened Heavens.

I. For the glory of God to shine
through.

II. For the grace of God to come
through.

Ifl. For the spirit of man to pass
through.—1. By the exercise of faith.
2. In the offering up of prayer. 3.
At the hour of dissolution.


Ver. 58. Changed Stones.—The stones
cast by the world against Christ’s
witnesses are changed.

I. Into monuments of shame for the
enemies of the truth.

II. Into jewels in the crowns of the
glorified martyrs.

III. Into the seed of new life for
the Church of Christ.—Gerok.


The young Man named Saul.

I. His early biography.—l. His
birthplace. Tarsus in Cilicia (ix. 11,
xxi. 39, xxii. 3). 2. His parentage.


The son of a tent-maker, or worker in
hair cloth (xvii. 3). That Paul hada
sister is mentioned by Luke (xxiii. 16);
that he had a brother (2 Cor. viii.
16-24) whom he afterwards converted
to Christianity (Hausrath) is, to say
the least, doubtful. 3. His citizenship.
Roman, obtained by birth (xvi. 37,
xxii, 28). 4. His education. Brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel (xxii. 3,
xxvi. 4). 5. His religion. A pharisee
and the son of'a pharisee (xxii. 3,
xxii, 6, xxvii. Ob; Phil. 1..5: Gal. 1,
14). 6. His nationality. A Hebrew
of the Hebrews (2 Cor. xi. 22; Phil.
iii. 5); of the tribe of Benjamin (Phil.
iii. 5).

II. His first appearance in history.
—1l. An accomplice in murder. “The
witnexses laid down their clothes at his
feet.” 2. A ferocious persecutor. ‘ He
laid waste the Church,” etc. (viii. 3).
3. A commissioned assassin. Breathing
out threatenings and slaughter against
the disciples of the Lord, he asked and


171


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


i LL


obtained letters from the high priest
empowering him to hunt them down
at Damascus (ix. 1).

IIT. His remarkable conversion (see
“ Homiletical Analysis on ix. 1-9”).—
1. His journey to Damascus. 2. His
sudden arrestment. 3. His vision of
the exalted Christ. 4. His complete
and instantaneous surrender.

IV. His subsequent career.—1l. As
a missionary of the cross. His three
journeys, the first with Barnabas
(xiii., xiv.), the second with Silas (xvi.
—xviiil. 22), the third with Timothy
(xviii. 23-xxi. 17). 2. As a founder of
churches. In Asia Minor and on the
shores of Europe. 3. As a writer of
epistles. Certainly four—Romans, 1
and 2 Corinthians and Galatians—
proceeded from his pen; most likely
other eight—Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians,
land 2 Timothy, and Titus—possibly
also Hebrews.

V. His martyr death.—His career.
1. Opened by assisting at the murder
of Stephen, and 2. Closed by himself
being slain.


Ver. 59. Stephen’s Three Crowns.

I. The fair crown of grace with
which the Lord adorned him in his
life and work.

II. The bloody crown of thorns
which he wore after his Saviour in
suffering and death.

III. The heavenly crown of glory
which was reserved in eternity for the
faithful martyr.


Stephen's Prayer for Himself.

I. The doctrines it contained.—
1. The divinity of Christ. 2. The
existence of man’s spirit. 3. Future
immortality. 4. The efficacy of prayer.

II. The spirit it exemplified.—1.
Devout adoration. 2. Humble resig-
nation. 3. Hopeful expectation.

III. The lessons it taught.—1. How
to pray. 2. How to die.


Ver. 60. Stephen’s Prayer for his
Enemies.
I. Sin is always, in the first instance


172


at least, charged to or laid to the
account of its perpetrators.—God can
by no means clear the guilty (Exod.
xxxiv. 7).

II. Sin, however, may in certain
instances not be charged to its per-
petrators. Forgiveness is not im-
possible (Psalm exxx. 4).

III. If sin is not to be charged to its
perpetrator’s account, itis the Lord who
must grant the requisite discharge.—
God alone can forgive sins (Mark ii. 7),
but Christ is God, and Christ by His
death and resurrection has rendered it
possible for sin to be forgiven (Rom.
ili, 25, 26).

IV. The followers of Jesus Christ
may and should pray for the forgive-
ness of sins to others than themselves,
even for their enemies. Christ com-
manded them to do so (Matt. v. 44;
Luke vi. 28), and exemplified His own
command (Luke xxiii, 34).


The Sleep of Stephen.

I. Rested him from his labours
(Rev. xiv. 13).

IT. Released him from his suffer-
ings (Rev. vii. 14).

III. Introduced him to heaven (2
Cor. v. 1).

IV. Crowned him with glory (Rev.
ii. 10).


Vers. 54-60. The First Christian
Martyr.

I. The call of Stephen was to
martyrdom.—Neither he nor the
Church knew the honour which
awaited him. The office of the first
deacons was humble. They were to
“serve tables,” a labour too secular
and secondary for apostles. Stephen
illustrates the truth that the humblest
service leads to the highest. We do
not want so much men for large
places as men to enlarge small places.
What God wanted of Stephen did not
fully appear at the first.

II. Stephen was called because he
was full of the Holy Ghost.—The
power of the Pentecostal baptism was
upon him to a degree so extraordinary
as to have drawn the attention of the


= HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII.





Church. In the brief description of
his gift, the Greek verb expresses a
spiritual state. The gift in him was
not occasional or transient. He was
habitually a man of spiritual power.
The presence of this power in him was
recognised as a qualification for his
official duties. Through the Spirit
(1) he had a message. The character-
istic of his preaching, in distinction
from that of all others of his time,
was, that he carried the Christian
doctrine to a new development. He
went beyond the apostles. They con-
tinued to worship in the temple. They
honoured the ceremonial law. They
did not break with the religious class
in the nation. It had not begun fully
to appear how revolutionary the gospel
-was. Stephen made the break. He
taught that Christianity was a uni-
versal religion. As sin is universal,
redeeming grace is for mankind, This
is biblical universalism—the universal-
ity of guilt and of grace. In his so-
called defence we see the character of
his preaching. He had nothing to say
for himself : he preached Christ. God
knows fis theologians. He chose a
deacon. The reason suggested is, that
to so pre-eminent a degree he was filled
with the Spirit. All true advances of
Christian doctrine have been entrusted
to spiritual men. The qualification
for great teachers, the leaders of
revolutions, the qualifications for all
teachers sent from God, is the gift of
the Holy Ghost. Through the Spirit
(2) Stephen had the power of a holy
face. Those in the council, looking
steadfastly on him, saw his face as it
had been the face of an angel. What
is the characteristic of an angel’s face?
The word suggests softness, purity,
spirituality. We apply the adjective
“ angelic” to womanly sweetness and
grace, but the angels of the Bible are
masculine. Sweetness there may have
been in Stephen, purity there must
have been; but more than these the
council saw, what they associated with
the heavenly messengers who appeared
to Adam and Eve, to Manoah, to
David, to the Prophets—glory, spiritual


power, the ineffable, Divine light. It
riveted them; it awed them. The
baptism of the Spirit is an illumination.
The face of every new-born soul begins
to shine with the light that was never
on sea or land. He is transfigured.
Through the Holy Spirit (3) Stephen
displayed the Divine union of severity
and gentleness. His outbreak was
terrible: ‘ Ye stiff-necked and un-
circumcised in heart and _ ears!”
uttered with that angelic face. The
words might be hastily taken as the
utterance of passion. The expression
of righteous wrath resembles passion ;
but, as Jesus never had more absolute
control of Himself than when He pro-
nounced His great indictments, so at
no point in his argument had Stephen
more absolute control of his soul than
in his final denunciation. This re-
markable association of wrath and love,
as elements of the same emotion, is
superhuman ; it is Divine; it is the
manifestation of the fulness of the
presence of the Holy Ghost. Through
the Spirit (4) Stephen had a vision.
He seemed to have a spiritual intima-
tion. Ho looked up. ‘The earnestness
of his gaze was intense. “ He, being
full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into heaven, and saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing on
the right hand of God.” The vision
was inward. No eye but his saw it.
Through the Spirit (5) Stephen was
sustained. He triumphed over pain.
This power the Spirit gives. Christian
martyrs have sung in the flames, and
called them beds of roses.

III. The effects of the martyrdom.
—Stephen’s death seemed a calamity.
Time alone could show the wisdom of
God's large plan. But He makes no
mistakes. Notice (1) the effect on the
world. He showed the w«rld how a
Christian could die. Observe (2) the
effect upon the Church. In all ages,
persecution has been one of the great-
est providential agencies for the spread
of the gospel. / Again, notice (3) the
effect on the apostles. They remained
in Jerusalem. Their position must
have been of great danger, responsi-


173


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS,








bilility, distress. They did not flee;
they stayed at their posts. The in-
fluence of ‘their constancy upon the
Christians, and also upon their enemies,
must have been very great. Observe
(4) the effect upon the devout Jews.
Of this class were the men who bore
Stephen to his burial. They were not
Christians, but favourably disposed
toward Christianity. The persecution
tested them. At the peril of their lives
they paid the murdered man the rever-
ence of burial. They were led to take
an open stand. We see, finally (5),
the effect on Saul. Upon him the
impression was deep. His reference to
the part he had had in the murder,
when he was in his trance at Damascus,
shows it. One of the goads against
which, from that time, he kicked in
vain, was then buried in his heart.
The immediate result was to infuriate
him. He became exceeding mad. Our
great intellectual changes are uncon-
scious. They are parts of a larger
movement, which is vital. The move-
ment of the life is secret, involuntary,
slow, like the growth of trees, like the
coming on of summer. We argue
against the truth. We triumph in
the debate. But an influence has been
let into our lives which gently lifts us,
loosens us from our old moorings, and
shifts us unconsciously to the opposite
side of the stream. We find ourselves
there. This process of vital movement,
this set of the soul, may have taken
place with Saul. Stephen may have
been, probably he was, his spiritual
father. The truth, which could only
be answered by stones, lived on in-
vulnerable. It took root in him.—
Monday Club Sermons.


The First Christian Martyr.—Stephen
had grown up into Christ in all things.
His energy had been prodigiously
effective. The whole city had been
put into commotion. Bad men were
passionately agreed. This deacon stood
straight across their path. How might
they be rid of him? When it came
to speaking, there was really little
to be said—to them. Need we talk


174


to a storm? Do we choose words
for wolves? It does not appear that
Stephen even hoped to move that
high-priest. As to what he really did
intend, there has been a long debate,
But he was probably speaking to the
future, thinking aloud, building better
than he knew. Providence was taking
care of his speech. It was given him
in that same hour. So the ideas have
no shackles on. The truth has made
him free. With a Gentile largeness
and liberty of interpretation he ex-
pounds the Scriptures. What would
be the effect of such discourse upon
priests and scribes and elders may
readily be anticipated. He has only
to look into their angry eyes. But
while this tempest rages, and in the
midst of it all, there is one still place.
It is the martyr’s own heart. He is
not disturbed. He has no resentments
and no fears. It does not seem far to
heaven, and it was not far. Jesus,
“standing,” risen from the throne, is
ready to aid His friend, to hear his last
words, and to “ receive” his spirit. So
the sufferer “ fell asleep.” One witness
at least there was of these events whose
dreams for many a night they dis-
turbed. Like serpents’ fangs they
stung his conscience. It is probable
that he had already been prominent
among “them of Cilicia” “ disputing
with Stephen.” Perhaps to his hear-
ing of the address before the council
we may owe the extended report pre-
served for us. At any rate, with the
mob he strode from the “stone
chamber” to the city-walls. He was
close enough to the actual violence to
see the face and hear the voice of the
expiring Christian.

I. We can see how bad men are
made to serve the good cause.—A wise
prayer for the devil would be, ‘ Save
me from my friends.” It was the
design of these conspirators to cripple,
and if possible to destroy, the infant
Church. But it is manifest how they
only strengthened and enlarged it.
The people had again seen the contrast
between piety and pretence. In such
a case the charm of real goodness could


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VII,





not but win friends. It is not safe,
indeed, in any case to despise even the
humblest virtue. ‘ Except a corn of
wheat fall into the ground and die, it
abideth alone ; but if it die it bringeth
forth much fruit.” So it proved here.
‘There were men and women who night
and day could only think with tears
how this brave servant of the truth
had been struck down. See, too, how
this crime wrought upon the young
man Saul. So does a bad purpose
blunder and defeat itself. It is like
Pharaoh kindling Moses, like Goliath
summoning David. A pope makes
Luther necessary, and finds Him;
King Charles brings Cromwell out ;
the Georges develop Washington ; and
a prison gives to the world John
Bunyan and hisbook. At every point,
therefore, were the enemies of the
gospel made to aid the gospel. They
excited. popular indignation against
their own cruelty. They secured the
planting in the mind of Saul of germs
of truth “ which, under the influence of
the Holy Ghost, afterwards developed
into the Epistles with which we are now
so familiar.” ‘And the more havoc ”
they made of the Church at Jerusalem
the more quickly was the Church
established in many distant localities.
II. We seldom know at the time
how much good we may be doing.—
Our opportunity often comes when we
are least aware of it. Stephen could
not have failed to see that he was
fighting a “good fight.” It perhaps
occurred to him that his death might
aid the truth more than his life could
havedone. But how little he suspected
the real culmination of his power!
“Tf Stephen had not prayed, the
Church would not have had Paul,”
Augustine said. There was the tre-
mendous circumstance. Such oppor-
tunities we easily fail to meet. They


are not likely to be repeated. If we
have no mind for them, no heart for
them, life creeps on, commonplace,
feeble, small. Stephen made no such
failure. Though quite unconscious of
the sublimity of the hour, he kept on
in duty. That once more proved to be
the path of glory.

IIT. We may also learn that our
visions come when we need them.—
“He saw heaven opened, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God.”
To troubled, weary Christians the fear
will sometimes arise that the Re-
deemer has forgotten them. ‘“ Carest
Thou not that we perish ?” is apt to be
the cry of unbelief in storms and perils.
But in the nick of time comfort comes.
There is “grace to help in time of
need.” Jacob, solitary, absent from
home, laying his head upon a stone
at Jabbok, has a vision of God and
receives the promise.

IV. It is clear that such dying as
Stephen’s is possible only as the fruit
of such living as his.—Thus far in the
brief Christian history death had often
served asa dreadful warning. In utter
darkness Judas, an apostle, had gone
to “his own place.” Ananias and
Sapphira had met their sudden doom,
Now, however, in contrast with such
dismal dying, comes this martyr’s
victory. If we would “die the death
of the righteous,” we must be careful
to live the righteous life. We need
envy no man’s triumph, whether in
death or in life, as if it were luck
instead of labour. ‘“ Do men gather
grapes of thorns?” Whoever meets
occasions, furnishing what is needed,
only discloses the completeness of former
preparations of mind and heart. For
those who have a little of Stephen’s
grace, Stephen’s Lord will lead the way
to Stephen’s victory.—H. A. Hdson,
D.D.


175


CHAP. VIIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a


CHAPTER VIII.


Tur CHURCH PASSES BEYOND THE Bounps or JuD#ZA—MOovING TOWARDS
THE GENTILES.


1. The Fires of Persecution rekindled ; or, Evil overruled for Good (vers. 1-4).
§ 2. Philip the Deacon in Samaria ; or, the Gospel spreading (vers. 5-8).
§ 3. The Accession of Simon Magus; or, the Reception of a doubtful convert


(vers. 9-13).

§ 4, The Mission of Peter and John; or, the Confirmation of the Saints (vers.
14-17, 25%).

§ 5. The Two Simons ; or, the Detection of a Hypocrite (vers. 18-24),

§ 6. The Conversion of the Eunuch; or, the Gospel carried into Ethiopia (vers.


26-40).
CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Consenting.—Compare xxii. 20; Luke xi. 48 ; Rom. i. 32. Luke had probably often
heard this remark from Paul. At that time.—Lit., on that day—viz., of Stephen’s murder,
which had been the signal for an outbreak of hostility against the Christians. All.—Not
to be taken as if none but the Twelve remained in Jerusalem.

Ver. 2. Devout men.—Pious Jews (compare John xix. 38, 39), not Christians, who would
have been designated “ disciples” or “ brethren ” (see on ii. 5).

Ver. 3. Made havoc of.—Or, kept on laying waste; the imperfect denoting continuous
action.

Ver. 4. Went everywhere.—Should be “went about ”—#.e., from place to place (compare
x1, 19):

ae 5. Philip.—Not the apostle, but the deacon (vi. 4). The city of Samaria—according
to the best MSS.—signifies that the capital built by Omri (1 Kings xvi. 24), and renamed
Sebaste by Herod the Great (Jos., Ant., XX. vi. 2), was the place to which Philip went; if
with some MSS. the article before city be omitted, then Samaria would mean the province
of that name, and the city might be Sychar, the Sichem of the Old Testament (John iv. 5).

Ver. 6. The people.—Better, the multitudes—i.e., of the city.

Ver. 7. For unclean spirits, etc.—Should be rendered either “ For from many of those who
had unclean spirits, they—i.e., the spirits—went forth crying with a loud voice,” the genitive
moddGv being dependent on the é& in the verb compare xvi. 39; Matt. x. 14 (De Wette
Meyer); or “For from'many of those having (sc. them—z.e., unclean spirits) unclean spirits
crying with a loud voice went forth (Bengel, Kuinoel). But the best texts (N A B C) read
moAnot é€jpxovro; in which case the verse should be translated ; “for many of those who had
unclean spirits crying with a loud voice went forth”; the writer having probably, when ke
commenced the sentence, intended to say “ were healed,” instead of which he changes the
construction, and sets down “ went forth,” as if the “ unclean spirits ” were the nominative
(Alford, Holtzmann). It has been remarked (Bengel) that in the Acts the term “demons”
is never used of “the possessed,” although in Luke it occurs more, frequently than in the
other gospels; and the inference drawn that after the death of Christ the malady of possession
was weaker (compare 1 John iii. 8; Col. ii. 15; Heb. ii. 14),

Ver. 9, Simon.—Not the Cyprian Jew of that name whom, according to Josephus (Ant.
XX. vii. 2), Felix afterwards employed to persuade Drusilla to leave for him her husband. King
Azizus of Emesa (De Wette, Neander, Hilgenfeld, Alford), but, according to Justin Martyr
(Apol., i. 56; Dial., 120), a Samaritan magician out of Gitthon (Zeller, Holtzmann Zockler).
The people.—Should be, the nation, 76 @6vos, because Simon’s bewitchery was not confined to
the city population.

Ver. 10. The great power of God, in the best MSS., is the power of God which is called
great—t.e., because it is so (Hackett), rather than because it is not so (De Wette). Noticeable
that this was the people’s estimate of Simon, In the term “ Great” has been found either
Gnostic emanation doctrine (Overbeck), or a transliteration of the Samaritan word Magala
Revealer (Klostermann, Wendt). :
_ Ver. 11. Mad ties eee dative ac the ordinary accusative as in xiii. 20; John ii, 20;

om. xvi. 25. Simon’s influence may have reached back to a period shor |
rialtioGodiatis (Joka iy: Saar at e oe an Lore


176


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, VIII.





Ver. 13. Wondered, or was amazed at Philip’s miracles and signs.—Rather, signs and great
powers—i.e., deeds of power, as previously the crowd had been amazed at his (Simon’s)
sorceries (ver. 9).

Ver. 14. Sent.—The mission of the two apostles, Peter and John, is not said to have had
‘as its motive the imparting of the Holy Spirit to the Samaritans (Holtzmann), although this
was undoubtedly a consequence which flowed from their mission.

Ver. 15, Prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost.—Not the ordinary
converting influences of the Spirit, which they must already have received, since they had
believed, but those miraculous endowments which had been conferred upon the Pentecostal
believers (ii. 4).

Ver. 16. As yet He was fallen upon none of them.—Contrast the case of Cornelius and his
household, upon whom the Spirit fell before baptism (x. 4448) ; and compare that of John’s
eis in Ephesus, who were first baptised, and afterwards endowed with the Holy Ghost

xix. 1-6).

Ver. 17. Then laid they, the apostles, their hands on them, and they, the Samaritans,
received the Holy Ghost.—That none but the apostles had the power of imparting the
Spirit, and that this was the reason why the preaching of Philip did not secure this endow-
ment for the Samaritans (Hofmann), cannot be maintained in face of ix. 17 and 1 Tim.
iv. 14. Still less can the non-descent of the’ Holy Ghost in this case be ascribed to a
difference between Philip’s preaching and that of the apostles (Neander). Possibly the
reason lay in this, that as the Samaritans were half-heathen, it was the purpose of the Holy
Ghost to mark their reception into the Church (which their endowment with His miraculous
gifts attested) by a formal act through the hands of the apostles, which would carry with
it all the weight of authorisation. There is no ground for thinking that the Spirit intended
here to institute a new rite corresponding to Confirmation,

Ver. 18. And when Simon saw.—Most likely through hearing the baptised speak with
tongues. He offered them money.— From Simon’s name and proposal arose the expression
* Simony ” for the purchase of spiritual offices. Inde Simonie vocabulum (Bengel).

Ver. 19. To me also.—JZ.ec., “as well as to you”; not ‘“‘as well as to others,” “since no
example of such transfer was known to him” (Hackett). :

Ver. 20. Thy money perish with thee.—Lit., thy silver with thyself be for destruction.
Neither an implication nor a prediction, but a strongly expressed negation. May be pur-
chased.—The verb in Greek being active, the clause should be translated, “ because thou
didst think to acquire,” etc.

Ver. 21. In this matter.—Or, in this word—i.e., doctrine or gospel which we preach
(Olshausen, Neander, Lange, Zockler, Hackett).

Ver. 22. For God the best authorities read Lord, as in ver. 24, signifying the exalted Christ.
If perhaps.—Taken in connection with John xx, 23, these words show “ how completely the
apostles themselves referred the forgiveness of sins to, and left it in the sovereign power of
God, and not to their own delegated power of absolution” (Alford).

Ver. 23. Art in the or wilt become gall or a gall root of bitterness.—As in Rom, iii, 14;
Eph, iv. 31; and Heb. xii. 15. And in the bond or a bond of iniquity.—As in Isa. lviii. 6.

Ver. 24, Pray ye to the Lord for me.—Compare the language of Pharaoh to Moses (Exod.
viii. 28, ix. 28, x. 17).

Ver. 25. The imperfects returned or kept returning, and preached or kept preaching, show
that the evangelistic activity of the home-returning apostles was not confined to isolated
acts of preaching but was continued all along the route.

Ver. 26. For the read an before angel. Towards the south—xard peonuBplay might be
rendered, but not so well, at nvon (compare xxii. 6). Gaza, the modern Guzzeh, was one
of the five cities of the Philistines at the southern boundary of Canaan (Gen. x. 19), about
an hour’s journey from the Mediterranean. Originally belonging to Judah (Josh, xv. 47)
it was subsequently captured by the Philistines (1 Sam. vi. 17; Judges xvi. 1). Gaza “is an
important place still, though no vestige of the ancient city remains. It stands on an isolated
mound one hundred and eighty feet above the sea, from which it is about two miles distant,
and is surrounded by gardens; it is said to have still a population of eighteen thousand ”
(Palestine, by Rev. A. Henderson, M.A., p. 167). Which, better ¢his or it or the same, is
desert ; but whether Gaza (Lekebush) or the road is meant, and whether the clause was
spoken by the angel (Holtzmann, Zickler, Alford, Hackett, and others), or by Luke (Bengel
Olshausen, Winer, De Wette, and others), is doubtful, though perhaps it is more correct to
regard the clause as the angel’s direction to follow the desert or unfrequented road to Gaza.
Robinson (Biblical Researches, ii. 514) mentions several routes from Jerusalem to Gaza, the
most frequented being by Ramleh, another by Bethshemesh, and a third by Hleutheropolis.
A fourth went by Hebron and across the plain, passing through the southern part of Judza,

which in Luke (i. 80) is called “the desert.”

Ver. 27. A man of Ethiopia.—Or an Ethiopian, but whether a native or only a resident
cannot be inferred from this clause, though the former is the more probable. An eunuch.—


N 77


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eats








Not a term of office, but a description of bodily condition (see Tacit., Ann., vi. 31: adempte
virilitatis. Of great authority.—An official or ruler; in this case a courtier and statesman.
According to Oriental custom to employ such persons in high offices of state. Candace.—
Not a personal, but a dynastic name, like Pharaoh and Cesar. Strabo and Dio mention a
queen of Ethiopia of this name in the twenty-second or twenty-third year of the reign of
Augustus Caesar; while Piiny (Vat. Hist., vi. 35), states that a Candace ruled in Ethiopia
in his day. The Ethiopians inhabited the region in the Nile Valley south of Egypt—
Meroe, a fertile island, formed by two branches of the Nile, being a portion of their territory,
The word for treasure, ydéfa, is Persian, and occurs in the LXX. (Hzra v. 17, vi. 1; Esther
iv. 7). To worship.—Heathen proselytes (John xii. 20) as well as foreign Jews were
accustomed to perform pilgrimages to Jerusalem for this purpose. A

Ver. 32. The place, or passage, of the Scripture—i.c., of the Old Testament—which he read,
or was reading, the verb being imperfect, was this.—The citation, from Isa. lili. 7, 8,
follows the LXX., and differs from the Hebrew which gives in the 8th verse—“ By (or, from)
oppression and judgment he was taken away; and as for his generation who among them
considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living?” or “and his life who shall


recount ?” etc. (R.V.). } j va
Ver. 37. Of the A.V. is omitted from the R.V. in accordance with tle best authorities,


& A. B. mt
Ver. 39.—The Alexandrian MS. (A) reads “The Holy Spirit of the Lord fell on the eunuch
but an angel of the Lord caught away Philip.” The other codices read as in the text.


That Philip’s disappearance was not a natural occurrence, such as an impulsive and hasty
withdrawal, but a supernatural removal (compare 1 Kings xviii. 12; 2 Kings ii. 16), effected
by the Spirit, was obviously the view of the historian.

Ver. 40. Azotus.—Or, Ashdod, originally a seat of the Anakim (Josh. xi. 22), became one
of the five chief cities of the Philistines (Josh. xiii. 4; 1 Sam. vi. 17), and the principal
seat of the Dagon worship (1 Sam. v. 1; Mace. x. 83, xi. 4). It was handed over to the
tribe of Judah at the conquest (Josh. xv. 46), but did not continue long in their possession,
and after the exile appeared among Israel’s foes (Neh. iv. 7). It is represented by the
present day Hsdud, a miserable Mohammedan village, two miles south of Jamnia, and half
an hour’s journey from the sea. Philostratus mentions that Apollonius of Tyana was found
one day at noon in Rome before the tribunal of Domitian and at evening in Puteoli.
Cesarea.—Six hundred furlongs distant from Jerusalem, built by Herod the Great on a site
before called Strato’s Tower, named Cesarea Sebaste, and inaugurated with great pomp and
splendour in the twenty-eighth year of his reign, B.c. 12 (Jos., Ant., XV. ix. 6). As the
official residence of the Herodian kings and Roman governors, it soon became the most
important city in Palestine, as well as its chief port. Paul visited Caesarea more than once
(ix. 30, xviii. 22, xxi. 8-16, xxii. 23-35, xxiv.xxvi.), In the third century it became the
seat of a bishopric and of a public school in which afterwards Origen taught. Eusebius
was born in Cesarea in the fourth century. At the present time “ by the sea shore, midway
between the Nahr-er-Zerka and the Nahr-Mef-jir, a vast expanse of ground is covered with
the almost indistinguishable débris of Herod’s once splendid city.”—Picturesgue Palestine,
lii., 126). y


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—4.


The Fires of Persecution rekindled ; or, Evil overruled for Good.

I. The torch that lighted the flame.—This was undoubtedly Stephen’s murder.
Like a spark falling into a powder magazine it kindled a fierce conflagration.
Like the first taste of blood to a tiger, it awoke the dormant appetite for perse-
cution which until now had slumbered in the bosoms of the high-priest and his
confederates. The words ‘“‘on that day” indicate that Stephen’s executioners
proceeded straight from the scene of his martyrdom and commenced their
diabolical work of persecuting Stephen’s friends.

II. The miscreant who carried the torch.—There can be little room for
question that the person to whom this notoriety belonged was Saul, who at that
time was consenting unto Stephen’s death (ver. 1; compare xxii. 20), who, in
fact, had been a prominent actor in carrying out the murder of the good deacon
(vii. 58), and who, though not acting without the authority, or, at least, con-
nivance, of the Sanhedrim, was, on his own confession afterwards made
(xxvi. 9, 10), the moving spirit in this anti-Christian crusade.

III. The fury with which the flame blazed.—tIt entered into every house
where a “disciple” or “brother” resided. It spared neither man nor woman


178


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, VIII.


eee


who bore the hated name of Christian. It stopped not at the spoiling of their
goods, when they had any, but attacked their persons, violently dragging them
from their homes and consigning them to prison (ver. 3, xxvi. 10; compare
Heb. x. 33, 34; James ii. 6,7). How it happened that the apostles were excepted
from this persecution is not explained, and this has been regarded by some
expoy sors (Zeller, Schneckenburger, and others) as a difficulty ; but it need not
be aisumed either that they had dropped into temporary obscurity through
having been eclipsed by the brilliant deacon, or that they were not harassed like
their humbler brethren, though probably the veneration in which they were still
held by the populace in general prevented the Sanhedrim from resorting to
extreme measures against them.

IV. The alarm which the fire created.—It scattered the disciples from the
city ; caused, if not all at least a considerable number, perhaps the majority of
those against whom the persecution was directed, to flee for safety beyond the
bounds of Jerusalem and even of Judea (see xi. 19), This statement, however,
has, like the former, been challenged as improbable (Zeller) on the ground that
so long as the apostles remained in the city it is not likely that all their followers
would flee. And assuredly if all fled, what is stated in ver. 3 about Saul would
be impossible. The probability, therefore, is that “all” in ver. 1 refers princi-
pally to the leading personages in the Christian community like Philip (ver. 5),
or to the breaking up of the Christian congregations and the dispersion of their
members. That the apostles did not retire from their posts in the metropolis,
though they might have done so without sin (Matt. x. 23), was only what might
have been expected. They were men of a different make from what they had
been when they all forsook the Master and fled (Matt. xxvi. 56). That the
Spirit directed them to remain in the city and comfort the persecuted Christians
who were left (Stier) is not improbable, but cannot be proved. That our Lord
before His ascension had commanded them to remain in Jerusalem twelve years,
though supported by ancient tradition (Clem. Alex., Strom. VI. v. 43), is most
likely imagination.

V. The unexpected good in which it resulted.—It led to the extension of the
Church. ‘They that were scattered abroad went about preaching the word.”
Thus it paved the way for the transition of the gospel to the Gentiles. As it
were the missionary activity that was carried on in the Judean provinces and in
Samaria formed a bridge for the passage of the heralds of salvation to cross over
into regions beyond. So the highest good is oftentimes evolved out of the
greatest evil. God can make man’s wrath to praise Him (Psalm Ixxvi. 10) and
cause “all things to work together for good to them that love Him (Rom. viii. 28).

Learn.—1. That one sin commonly leads to another. The murder of Stephen
to the persecution of the Church. 2. That they who will live godly must suffer
persecution. “The servant is not greater than his master.” 3, That it is not
always wrong to flee from persecution. Otherwise Christ would not have coun-
selled His disciples, ‘When persecuted in one city to flee into another” (Matt. x.
23). 4. That more is expected of the Church’s leaders than of their followers.
A higher degree of Christian virtue should be exhibited by them who are set to
rule in the Church. 5. That persecution cannot kill religion. It may destroy
those who are religious, but others will arise in their stead. “The blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the Church ” (Tertullian).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Ver. 1. The Church which was in II. Growing.—Wherever life is


Jerusalem. there must be progress.
I. Living.—A dead Church a mis ~ III. Organised—It had apostles,
nomer, deacons, and private members.


179


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





1V. Persecuted.—This inevitable
if a Church is alive and active.

V. Missionary.—The Church that
does not propagate the faith is dead.


Ver. 2. The Burial of Stephen.

I. The lifeless body.—That of
Stephen. 1. A good man. 2. An
eloquent preacher.
ness. 4, A noble martyr.

II. The devout pali-bearers.—Pious
Jews, perhaps, rather than Christians,
who would probably have been called
“brethren” or “ disciples,” and would
not have been permitted to inter their
fallen leader. That devcut men buried
Stephen testified to: 1. Their own
goodness. 2. Stephen’s innocence.
3. The Sanhedrim’s guilt.

IIT. The solemn interment.—No
doubt. 1. Hastily, without unnecessary
delay ; and 2. Plainly, without osten-
tation or display; but also 3. Reve-
rentially, as was due to the dust of a
saint ; and 4. Hopefully, in anticipation
of a glorious resurrection.

IV. The sorrowful lamentation.—
“ Great.” Because of, either: 1. Its
outward vehemence; 2. Its inward
intensity ; or 3. Its wide prevalence.


Vers. 2, 3. Stephen and Saul.

I. The end of Stephen.—1. In the
world’s eyes sad. 2. In God’s eyes
glorious.

II. The beginning of Saul—1l. In
the world’s eyes glorious. 2. In God’s
eyes sad.

Lesson.—God seeth not as man
seeth.


Ver. 3. The Wolf and his Prey.

I. The wolf—l. His name, Saul.
2. His race, of the tribe of Benjamin
(Gen. xlix. 27). 3. His ferocity,
“* Haling men and women he com-
mitted them to prison.” 4, His dili-
gence, “‘ entering into every house.”

II. His prey.—Christ’s sheep, “the
Church” (xx. 28). 1. A little flock
(Luke xii. 32). 2. A feeble flock
(1 Peter v.10). 3. A purchased flock
(xx. 28).


180


3. A faithful wit-.


Saul and Paul.—The Saul who
made havoc of the Church became the
Paul who said, “ Feed the Church
of God.” Remember well the identity
of the man, if you would understand
fully the import of the doctrine. This
change in the heart and life of Paul
shows—

I. The marvellous power of the
grace of God.—The marvellousness of
this power is not always so conspicuous.
Every operation of grace is beautiful,
but in some cases it is startling and
most sublime. Herein let us magnify
the grace of God. “ By grace are ye
saved through faith ; and that not of
yourselves, it is the gift of God.”
“Ye who sometime were afar off are
made nigh by the blood of Christ.”
“You that were sometimes alienated
and enemies in your mind by wicked
works, yet now hath He reconciled.”
This is the Lord’s doing, and it is
marvellous in our eyes. The occur-
rence of such marvellous instances is
most valuable on two grounds: 1. J¢
inspires hope even for the worst. Pray
on! Hope on! The hardest rocks
have been broken. 2. Jt renews our
sense of the sufficiency of Divine grace.
Great victories gladden nations. Great
conversions make the Church joyful.
This change in the heart and life of
Paul shows—

II. The difference between sancti-
fying human energies and destroying
them.—Saul was undoubtedly cha-
racterised by peculiar energy ; what
will Paul be? You will find that the
Christian apostle retained everynatural
characteristic of the anti-Christian
persecutor. Who so ardent in love,
who so unswerving in service, as the
apostle Paul? Was he an active
sinner, but an indolent saint? How
did he himself bear the treatment
which he had inflicted upon others ?
Hear his words, and feel if they do not
quicken the flow of your blood: “ Are
they ministers of Christ? I am more;
in labours more abundant, in stripes
above measure, in prisons morefrequent,
in deaths oft,” ete. How a man’s sins
come back upon him! How sure is the


~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE “ACTS, CHAP. VIII.





discipline, and how terrible is the judg-
ment of God! Cana man step easily
from the rank of persecutor to the
honour of apostle? Never! Hear
Paul: ‘“ Even this present hour we both
hunger and thirst, and are naked, and
are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling-place ; being reviled, we bless ;
being persecuted, we suffer it; being
defamed, we intreat: we are made as
the filth of the world, and are the off-
scouring of all things,” etc. We feel
in reading such words how inexorable
is the law—“ With what measure ye
mete it shall be measured to you
again.” But notice the energy of the


apostle as being the same as the energy .


ot the persecutor. Christianity does
not destroy our natural temperament.
We become sanctified, not deadened.
l. Christians will differ in the tone and
measure of their service. He who has
had much forgiven will love much.
How does an escaped slave talk about


liberty? So with preachers. The
memory of their past lives will deter-
mine their preaching. Donot bind down
all men to the same style. 2. Zs our
Christian energy equal to the energy
with which we entered wpon the service
of the world? When were you kept
back from gay engagements by wet,
damp, or foggy nights? When did
you complain that you could never go
to the theatre without paying, or tell
the devil that his service was costly ?
In the light of such inquiries let us
examine our Christian temper and
service. This change in the heart and
life of Paul suggests—

III. The possible greatness of the
change which awaits even those who
are now in Christ.—The moral distance
between Saul and Paul is immense, but
what of the spiritual distance between
Paul the warrior and Paul the crowned
saint? It is the distance between
earth and heaven.—J/. Parker, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANAYSIS.—Verses 5—8.


Philip in Samaria ; or, The Gospel Spreading.

I. The preacher.—Philip. Not the apostle, as a late Christian tradition,
mentioned by Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus, in a.p. 198 (Eusebius, ITI. xxxi. 2,
V. xxiv. 1), affirms, since he remained in Jerusalem (ver. 1), but the deacon (vi. 5)
and evangelist (xxi. 8), who by going down to Samaria—1. Supplied the place
and took up the work of Stephen, his martyred colleague. Christ’s servants dying
never want successors. 2. Cownteracted the evil machinations of Stephen's
murderers, and of Saul in particular, who hoped to extinguish the faith to
which as yet he was a stranger and of which he knew not the vitality ; and
3. Evidenced his own confidence in the indestructibility of the gospel, whose
preachers and professors might be imprisoned or slain, but whose glorious
tidings could not be hindered from flying abroad and one day encircling the
earth.

II. The audience.—The inhabitants of the city of Samaria or of Sychar, who
were—1, Nuwmerous, being described as a multitude. 2. Afflicted, containing
many diseased and demonised persons. 3. Deluded, being at the time bewitched
by or amazed at Simon’s sorceries; and still 4. Hager, with one accord giving
heed to Philip, perhaps because of having, in a measure, through Christ’s
preaching ten years before (John iv. 30, 40), been prepared for the reception of
the word.

III. The message.—1. /ts subject. The Christ. Philip entertained his hearers
neither with diatribes against the magician who had so long bewitched them,
nor with denunciations of the Sanhediim who had opened against the followers
of the new faith the fires of persecution, nor with commiserations of themselves
who had so much sickness bodily and mental, in their midst, but with what
should ever be the preacher’s theme (1 Cor. 11. 2), proclamations of the Christ-—
yiz., Jesus—who had suffered on the cross, risen from the grave, and ascended


181]


OHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


into heaven. 2. [ts confirmation. The signs which he did—(1) the works of
healing which he performed on the demonised, the palsied, and the lame, attested
him a teacher come from God (compare John iii. 2); and (2) the cries of the
unclean spirits in coming forth from their victims, not shouts of indignation at
being ejected from their human lodging, but vociferous declarations of the
Messiahship of Jesus or of the truth of the gospel (compare Mark iii. 11 ; Luke
iv. 41), were a practical endorsement of his words.

IV. The result.—Great joy. On account of—1. The glad tidings come to the
city. The introduction of the gospel with its glorious announcements of a
crucified and risen Lord (xiii. 32, 33), of a finished redemption work (John
xvii. 4), and of a peace established between God and man on the basis of that
work (Eph. ii. 14-18), as well as with its sublime possibilities of salvation
(Rom. i. 16), to a heart, to a city, to a country, a cause of rejoicing than which
better can not be imagined (Psalm Ixxxix. 15), 2. The wonderful deliverances
wrought on its inhabitants. The healings done upon the bodies of the citizens of
Samaria or Sychar were emblematic of the higher healings the gospel could, and
in numberless instances did, effect upon their souls. To-day, as in Philip’s time,
the gospel heals all manner of spiritual disease and emancipates souls from the
power of sin and Satan (Col. i. 13), besides indirectly promoting the health of
bodies.

Learn.—1. The true work of a preacher—to proclaim Christ.
prosperity of a city—the prevalence in it of the Gospel.


2. The true


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. The Inhabitants of Samaria.

I. What they heard. Christ pro-
claimed.

II. What they saw. Miracles per-
formed.

III. What they did. 1. Listened
to the word. 2. Studied the miracles.


Vers.5-8. Philip's Mission to Samaria.


I. The conduct of Philip. —He—
1. Went down to Samaria. 2. Preached
Christ to the people. 3. Wrought mira-
cles in the city.


II. The attention of the Samaritans.


3. Rejoiced in the work of Philip.


Ver. 8. Joy in Samaria.—Occasioned
by four things.

I. The Gospel preached in its streets.

II. Healing brought to its inhabit-


—They: 1. Heard Philip preach.
2. Were seriously affected. 3. Gave
heed to what they heard. 4. Believed
what was preached.


III. The effect in the city. —-Great


ants. joy. Because of: 1. Joyful tidings
III. Delusions dispelled from their heard. 2. Wondrous healings ex-

minds, perienced. 3. Numerous conversions
1V. Souls saved from the power of made.


sin and death.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 9—13.


The Accession of Simon Magus ; or, the Reception of a Doubtful Convert.

I. The previous history of Simon Magus.—1. His profession. A sorcerer.
According to Justin Martyr (Apol., I. xxvi. 56) belonging to the Samaritan village
of Gitton. One of those unscrupulous adventurers who by “an advanced know-
ledge of natural philosophy, especially of chemistry,” acquired “a strange power
and influence over men’s minds,” which they “constantly used to further their
own selfish ends” (Spence). Others of the same kidney were Elymas, whom
Paul encountered at the court of Sergius Paulus in Paphos (xiii. 6), and the
vagabond Jews, exorcists. whom he met at Ephesus (xix, 13). To this fraternity


182


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VIII.





belonged Apollonius, of Tyana, who lived in the time of Christ. A zealous
champion of the doctrines of Pythagoras, he was regarded by his contemporaries
as a worker of miracles, and claimed for himself insight into futurity. Josephus
(Ant., XX. vil. 2) mentions another Simon, also of Cyprus, unless he was identical
with the Simon of Samaria, as a magician who persuaded Drusilla to desert her
husband and marry Felix (xxiv. 24). That Simon pitched on Samaria as the
field of his operations may have been due to the circumstance that it contained a
grand heathen temple, which he probably thought would make the city so much
the fitter a scene for his magical incantations (see Stokes on Acts, i. 360, note).
2. His practice. He bewitched or amazed the people with his sorceries, either
imposed on their credulity by sleight of hand, cr dazzled their judgment by feats
performed through superior knowledge. What the arts practised by him were
is not related. Later tradition represents him as having offered to demonstrate
his divinity by flying in the air (Constt. Apost., ii. 14, vi. 9), and as having
boasted that he could turn himself and others into brute beasts, and even
cause statues to speak (Clem. Hom., iv. c. 4; Recog., ii. 9, iii. 6). Whether he
had attempted any such legerdemain in Samaria or not is uncertain; but for
a long time (most likely for a number of years) he had cast a spell over
their minds and secured their attention to his snperstitious and hurtful doctrines.
He is said to have denied the resurrection of the dead, and only pretended
to believe in a future judgment, to have desired to set Gerizim in place of
Jerusalem, and to have allegorically expounded the Old Testament so as to
support his own views. 3. His pretension. He gave out “that himself
was some great one.” Like Theudas, he boasted that he was somebody
(v. 36). According to the Clementine Homilies (ii. 22 gf) he gave himself
out for the Highest Power, from which he distinguished the Creator of the
world as an inferior being, and also claimed to be the Messiah. In this he
showed himself a precursor of Antichrist (2 Thess. ii. 4), Exaltation of self is
both an old (Gen. iii. 5) and a common (Luke xiv. 11) sin, against which men in
general (Jer. ix. 23; Dan. iv. 37), and Christians in particular (Gal. vi. 3), are
earnestly warned. 4. His popularity. To him the whole population “ gave heed
from the least to the greatest, saying, ‘This man is that power of God which is
called great.’” Few things are more incontestable or sad than the gullibility
of mankind. ‘Gullible, however, by fit apparatus, all publics are, and gulled
with the most surprising profit” (Carlyle, Sartor Resartus, p. 68). The remark-
able thing is that almost any sort of tomfoolery, mountebankism, and charlatanry
will do to cheat men. No imposture is too ridiculous to find adherents. No
quack is so vulgar that he cannot draw around him admiring fools. Simon
is reported to have visited Rome in the time of Claudius, and by means of
his jugglery to have established himself so highly in popular favour that the
Senate decreed him divine honours, and a statue on the island of the Tiber
(Justin Martyr, Apol., I. xxvi, 56); and it is not a little remarkable that in the
exact spot indicated by Justin, in 1574, there was dug up a statue with the
inscription “ Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio,” though whether this statue was the ono
‘referred to by Justin, or another to a Sabine deity, critics are not agreed.

II. The circumstances which led to Simon’s conversion.—1l. The preaching of
Philip. It is clear from the narrative that Simon himself must have been
amongst Philip’s listeners, since it is stated that he himself also “‘ believed Philip
preaching good tidings,” etc. (vers. 12, 13). “Faith cometh by hearing”
(Rom. x. 17). Faith that is not based upon the word of God either read or
preached lacks a solid foundation, and will ultimately prove unstable and unreal.
2. The faith of the people. The example of the Samaritans operated contagiously
on Simon. Observing them falling away from himself and rallying round Philip,
he followed in their wake. The event showed he had not been savingly impressed


183


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





igi


by what he saw and heard, but only superficially stirred. Nevertheless the
popular attitude towards Philip appears to have awakened in him something
that resembled faith. A similar phenomenon is not unknown in modern
religious movements, which draw in and sweep along with them many who are
only superficially stirred, not permanently converted. 3. Zhe baptism of the
believers. Both men and women avowed the sincerity of their conversion by
submitting to the initiatory rite of the Christian religion ; and this also must
have had its effect upon Simon, and led him to reflect that a greater power than
that wielded by himself had arrived upon the scene.

TII. The evidence of Simon’s (supposed) conversion.—1l. His profession of
faith. He “believed.” This the first requirement in a disciple. Whatever else
may be demanded of Christians, they must repose personal credit in the testimony
concerning Christ, and personal trust in Christ Himself. 2. His submission to
baptism. In the case of an adult who believes for the first time, this also is
indispensable (Mark xvi. 16; Acts ii. 38), though it does not show Infant
Baptism to be either unscriptural or unreasonable (see onii. 39). 3. His adher-
ence to Philip. ‘‘ He continued with ” the deacon and those associated with him ;
in modern phraseology, he joined the Church, or connected himself with the main
body of believers. This a third mark of conversion. ‘The fellowship of
saints” all Christ’s followers are expected to cultivate. The Christian life (under
certain circumstances) may be successfully maintained in isolation; but in no
case without difficulty. 4. Hes admiration of Philip's miracles. The works of
healing wrought by Philip appeared to convince him that what he only pretended
to wield, and what the people imagined he wielded, was wielded by Philip in
reality—viz., the great power of God. Whether Simon’s conversion was genuine
or not, it had many of the marks of a true work of grace. ote in illustration.
—Philetus, a disciple of Hermogenes the conjurer, coming to a dispute with
St. James the elder, relied much upon his sophistry; but the apostle preached
Christ to him with such powerfulness that Philetus, returning back to his master,
told him, “I went forth a conjurer, but am returned a Christian.”

Learn.—1. That all professors of religion are not true converts. 2. That the
gospel has in it something which attracts even bad men. 3. That nothing can
so effectually deliver men from this present evil world, with its snares and
delusions, as the gospel of Christ. 4. That faith in Christ should ever be accom-
panied by public confession, 5. That the best arguments in proof of Christianity
are the moral and spiritual miracles it performs.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. A Reformed City. Mark i. 13), 2. That it might be


The conversion of the Samaritans
was brought about—

I. By the preaching of the gospel,
the good news of salvation.

Il. With the concurrence of the
people, from the least to the greatest.

III. In spite of the greatest opposi-
tion from the powers of darkness.

IV. With the most satisfactory
results: numerous baptisms of men
and women.


Good Tidings.
I. Concerning God’s kingdom. —
1, That it had come (Matt. iii. 2;


184


entered (Matt. v. 20, vii. 13). 3. That
all who entered it should be saved
(John x. 9),

II. Concerning God’s Son.—1. That
He had been the bringer-in of the king-
dom by His death and resurrection
(i. 3). 2. That to Him alone belong
the keys of the kingdom (Rev. iii. 7).
3. That in His hand are all the bless-
ings of the kingdom (2 Peter i. 3).


Vers.
Samaria.

IT. The obstacles which required to
be overcome.—l. The natural indiffer-


9-13. The Awakening in


+


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ence of the human heart to religion.
This formed the deepest and least
movable barrier. 2. The character of
the ‘people. Half-heathen, ignorant,
diseased, demonised, the population was
hardly likely to be taken up with the
interests of the soul. 3. The presence
in the city of Simon the sorcerer, who
in a manner had pre-engaged their
attention and even captivated their
hearts, from the least of them to the
greatest.

II.. The means which led to its
arising.—l. The miracles and signs
which Philip did, which convinced the
people that a greater power than that
of Simon had arrived upon the field.
2. The preaching of the gospel of the
kingdom and of Jesus Christ. While
these were the means, the Holy Spirit
was the agent.

Ii. The characteristics which at-
tended it.—l. Great excitement. This
was inevitable. 2. Widespread convic-
tion. The whole town seemed to be
turned. 3. WVwmerous baptisms. The
magician himself owned the power of
the truth, and was baptised. 4. Uni-
versal joy. The whole city was in
raptures of delight.


The Kingdom of Darkness and the
Kingdom of Light in Conflict.

I. The two champions.—1. Of the
kingdom of darkness, Simon, the sor-
cerer, an old and experienced warrior
from the army of Satan (ver. 11).


CHAP, VIII.


2. Of the kingdom of light, Philip, the
Christian deacon, a new and untried
soldier from the ranks of the faithful


(vi. 5).
II. The selected battle-field. —
1. Locally, the city of Samaria.


2, Spiritually, the souls of its in-
habitants. As the kingdom of light,
so the kingdom of darkness is within
a man.
III. The trusted weapons. —1. Those
of Simon, sorcery, witchcraft, magic,
legerdemain, sleight-of-hand, and gene-
rally the arts of the conjurer and
wizard. 2. Those of Philip, the gospel
or the good tidings concerning the


- kingdom of Ged and the name of Jesus


Christ.

IV. The varying methods.—1. Simon
relied on the power of delusion, or his
ability to take advantage of human
ignorance and credulity. 2. Philip
reposed his confidence alone in enlighten-
ment and conviction by the pure force
of truth addressed to heart and con-
science.

V. The decisive result.—l. Simon
succeeded for a time in deceiving the
people. 2. Philip in the end won them
for Christ, and even carried captive (to
appearance at least) Simon himself.


Vers. 9, 13, 23. Simon Magus.
I. A successful sorcerer.
II. An insincere professor.
III. A baptised hypocrite.

IV. A detected deceiver.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 14—17.


The Mission of Peter and John ; or, the Confirmation of the Saints,

I. The occasion of this mission.—7he report about Samaria. The good news
could not be kept from spreading. The apostles at headquarters took deep
interest in the progress of the cause which for a moment the persecution had
seemed to overwhelm. When perhaps the outlook appeared blackest, this
information which came to them from Samaria would seem like the breaking
forth of a star upon the dark firmament overhead.

II. The authors of this mission — The Apostles. These had not left Jerusalem,
but remained at their post. Not, as some think, because through Stephen’s
superior brilliancy they had dropped into obscurity, and so in a manner had
become safe from persecution (Stokes), but because, like brave men, they felt it
incumbent on them rather to face the peril than to flee. (See on ver. 1.)

III. The agents of this mission.—Peter and John, who appear to have been
drawn to one another by common affinities and by perceiving each in the other


185


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





the complement of himself, and to have acted in concert after the resurrection
(iii. 1; John xx. 4) as well as before (Matt. xxvii. 1; Luke viii 51). |

IV. The fulfilment of this mission.—1. They went down to Samaria. Ever
ready to “ doe the next thing,” and to execute whatever task was laid upon them,
they proceeded to Samaria. Regarding the instructions of their colleagues as an
expression of the Spirit’s mind, they obeyed. At the same time, their own
wisdom and zeal would without doubt concur in the expediency of the journey.
2. They prayed for the converts. These had not yet received the seal of the Holy
Ghost—i.e., in His miracle-working endowments—though it need not be questioned
they had received the Spirit in His ordinary gracious operations. Accordingly
the two apostles prayed that this further seal of conversion might be given them.
3. They laid their hands upon the converts. The result they expected followed.
The converts received the Holy Ghost, and doubtless (though it is not so stated)
began to speak with tongues and perhaps work miracles of healing, as afterwards
the Spirit-endowed believers in the Christian Church did (1 Cor. xii. 9,10). ‘The
communication of such gifts was of course only symbolically brought about by
the imposition of the apostles’ hands. Their unseen but real bestower was the
glorified Christ. (See ‘“ Critical Remarks.”)

V. The termination of this mission—1. When? After they (the apostles) had
testified and spoken the word of the Lord, Peter and John neglected no oppor-
tunity of either confirming the disciples or making new converts. Neither should
their successors in the ministry. 2. How? They returned to Jerusalem. Not
directly, but preaching by the way to many villages of the Samaritans—thus
bringing on themselves the blessedness of them who sow beside all waters
(Isa. xxxii. 20).

Lessons.—1. The interest which all should take in the spread of the gospel.
2. The true source of spiritual endowments—the Holy Spirit. 3. The unwearied
diligence which Christian preachers should ever show.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 14. Peter and John ; or, the
First Apostolic Delegates.

I. Their relation to the apostolic
college.—I. Not the heads, but ordi-
nary members. If in the Church they
were reputed to be pillars (Gal. ii. 9),
they yet claimed no supremacy over
their colleagues in the apostleship ; not
even though they had received dis-
tinctions above their brethren in the
days before the crucifixion (Mark v. 37,
ix, 2, xiv. 33), and after the resurrec-
tion (John xxi. 15-23). 2. Not the
senders, but the sent. They manifestly
did not regard themselves as invested
with authority to command their
brethren, but viewed the whole body
of the Twelve as of co-ordinate rank.
They did not even think of disputing
the right of the Twelve to appoint
them to such a work as the mission to
Samaria.

II. The reasons for their selection.


186


—Why these and not a different pair—
say Andrew and James—were deputed
to execute this work may with some
degree of probability be surmised.
1. Their personal capabilities were most
likely such as to mark them out as
leaders; and this inference receives
ample confirmation from their writings
which have been preserved in the New
Testament. 2. Their spiritual eaperi-
ence through their close and intimate
fellowship with the Master was mani-
festly such as to qualify them beyond
others for the execution of a delicate
and responsible task like that of visit-
ing and reporting on the great revival
in Samaria. 3. Their close friendship
of many years’ standing fitted them
to act as colleagues on this important
mission. They had long been accus-
tomed to act in concert. 4. Their
individual temperaments, on the one
hand, of energy and impulse, fortitude


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, VIII.





and decision; on the other hand, of
love and gentleness, thoughtfulness and
sympathy, supplied the two elements
that were specially demanded for the
contemplated visitation.

III. The special object of their
mission.—This may be gathered from
the context. 1. Zo inspect and report
upon the awakening in Samaria. To
judge whether it was a genuine work
of grace, or only a temporary excite-
ment. 2. If found genuine, to complete
at by receiving the baptised into Church
fellowship, by laying hands upon them
and praying for their endowment with
the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost.


Vers. 14-18. The First Church Visita-
tion.

I. The occasion.-—I. There is Chris-
tian life to be fostered (ver. 14).
2. There is a want in the Church to be
supplied (ver. 16).

II. The visitors.—1. Peter: apos-


- promise would be falsifi


tolic earnestness and zeal. 2. John:
evangelical tenderness and mildness.

Ill. The functions.—1. Prayer in
the name of the Church (ver. 15).
2. Imposition of hands in the name of
God (ver. 17).

IV. The effects.—1. The strengthen-
ing of the Church (ver. 17). 2. The
sifting of the Church (ver. 18).—
Gerok.


Ver. 17. Receiving the Holy Ghost.

I. A possibility.—Otherwise Peter
would not have promised it (ii. 38).

II. A necessity.—Otherwise Peter
would not have gone to pray for it.

Ill. A certainty.—Otherwise God’s
and Christ’s
prayer for His people |would be un-
answered, and the lives of believers
would be incomplete. |

IV. A mystery. — Otherwise we
should be able to comprehend it, which
we are not.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 18—24.


The Two Simons ; or, the Detection of a Hypocrite.

I. Simon Magus’s proposal. 1. What suggested it. The sight which he beheld.
The coming down of the Holy Ghost upon those on whom the A postle’s hands were
laid. This shows that the recipients of the Holy Ghost must in some external
fashion—probably through speaking with tongues or working miracles—have indi-
cated their possession of the heavenly gift. 2. What accompanied it. An offer of
money. ‘This revealed that Simon had no right conception either of the nature
of the miraculous endowment which had been conferred upon the Samaritan
believers (and perhaps also upon himself) or of the means which had been used
in its bestowment. 38. What composed it. A request that the apostles should
impart to him, not the Holy Ghost, which possibly along with others he may have
received, but the power of conferring the Holy Ghost with His supernatural gifts
upon others. Simon recognised in what Peter and John had effected a power
that transcended his own, and wished to secure it for himself, that by its means
he might stand on a level with the apostles as a thawmaturge and be able to
recover his lost influence with the people.

II. Simon Peter’s Refusal. 1. A terrible denunciation. “Thy money perish
with thee!” Literally, may thy silver with thee be for destruction! (1) The
meaning. Hardly an imprecation, which would not have been becoming in a
follower of Him who said, “‘ Let your communication be ‘Yea, yea ; Nay, nay,’
for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil” (Matt. v. 37), and who taught
His disciples to bless and curse not (Matt. v. 44; Luke vi. 28; Rom. xii. 14).
Scarcely even a prediction that Simon was destined to perdition, since he after-
wards directs Simon how that awful doom might be averted (ver. 22). But most
likely and best, a strong and solemn asseveration that he, Simon, being in sucha
state of mind would certainly share that destruction which would eventually
overtake his money, as all other earthly goods, which in their nature are perish-
able (Ool. ii. 22). “Gold and silver would perish in the end. Equally valueless


187


chap. vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





and perishable would be the life of an unrighteous man. The corruptible nature
of that gold and silver which man prizes so dearly seems to have been ever in
Peter’s mind, and to have entered continually into his arguments” (Spence).
Compare 1 Peter i. 7,18. (2) The reason. ‘‘ Because thou hast thought that
the gift of God might be purchased,” or “to obtain the gift of God with
money.” The proposal revealed that Simon had not apprehended the true nature
of what had taken place. Neither the character of the blessing bestowed—which
was a spiritual influence; nor the author of its bestowment—God, and neither
Peter nor other man ; nor the terms of its bestowment—as a free gift, so that no .
quantity of gold or silver could purchase it. Compare what is said of wisdom
(Job xxviii. 15-19). 2, An alarming declaration. ‘Thou hast neither part nor
lot in this matter.” Concerning which also must be noted: (1) The import of it
—viz., that Simon had no share either in the word or doctrine of the Gospel
which Peter preached, or in the Holy Ghost which God imparted to believers, so
that even if apostolic hands had been laid upon him it was wholly in vain, or in
the Christian community to which all Spirit-endowed believers belong. This was
practically a sentence of excommunication on Simon. It excluded him from the
congregation of believing and regenerated men, because his speech disclosed he
should never have been reckoned with these. (2) The ground of it. “Thy heart is
not right in the sight of of God” or “ before God.” There was more at fault with
Simon than defective understanding. His heart was not straight (compare
2 Kings x. 15, LXX. ; 2 Peter ii. 15), not sincere and upright. Crooked, perverse,
and currupt, it was directed towards not spiritual, but earthly things. It thirsted
not for eternal life but for temporal power, sought not God’s glory, but its own
fame. Though it might seem otherwise in men’s sight, such was its character
in the eyes of God. 3. A solemn exhortation. ‘‘ Repent therefore of this thy
wickedness,” etc. Setting forth (1) An urgent duty. To repent of his wicked-
ness, Since without godly sorrow for past sin moral improvement was impossible.
To turn from his wickedness. This also was implied, inasmuch as no repentance
could be sincere that did not lead to a changed life. To pray God or the Lord
for forgiveness, because even repentance and reformation cannot cancel or atone
for past guilt. And such guilt attached to the wicked thought of the heart quite
as much as to the evil deed of the hand or sinful word of the mouth (Matt.
xv. 19). (2) A fearful uncertainty. “If perhaps the thought of thy heart shall
be forgiven thee.” Peter could have no doubt that “all manner of sin could”
and would be “ forgiven unto men” if they repented and believed (Matt. xii. 31),
but in this case he appeared uncertain whether the special sin committed did not
fall within the category of sins for which no forgiveness can be found either in
this life or in that which is to come (Matt. xii. 31, 32; 1 John v. 16). Peter’s
language shows that the power of absolution conferred on the apostles by Christ
(John xx. 23) was not absolute, and could not be exercised in every or any case
except conditionally on the repentance and faith of the individual absolved.
(3) An appalling argument. Peter justifies his uncertainty as to the possibility
of Simon’s forgiveness by stating that Simon was “ in the gall of bitterness ”—i.e.,
in bitterness, wickedness, hostility, as in gall, “and in the bond of iniquity ”—i.e.,
in unrighteousness as in achain. Not that he would lapse into such a condition
if he did not repent (Stier), but that already he had fallen into and was abiding
in it. The gall of noxious reptiles having been considered by the ancients as the
seat of their venom, Peter, by the selection of this metaphor, virtually said that
Simon was actuated by a spirit of bitter hostility against the Gospel, that the
seat of this bitterness was in his corrupt heart, and that this malignity which his
evil nature cherished held him fast like a chain, or bond.

III. Simon Magus’s entreaty. 1. What was right about it. (1) It was good
that Simon felt alarmed and thought of prayer, rather than magic, as a means of


188


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VIIT.





averting his peril. (2) It was better that he sought the friendly mediation of
Peter to make supplication on his behalf, whereas he might have turned upon
Peter with cursing and violence. (3) It was best that he directed Peter to lay
his prayer before the Lord against whom he had sinned. Even of bad men it is
right to take the most charitable view, and these thoughts suggest hope for
Simon the Magician. 2. What was wrong about it. (1) That he prayed not
himself but merely asked (perhaps mockingly) Peter to pray for him. (2) That
he only wished to elude the threatened punishment of his wickedness, and had no
concern about escaping from the wickedness itself. (3) That he made no men-
tion of feeling sorry for his sin, but only “confessed his fear of punishment, not
horror of guilt” (Bengel). In all which he resembled Pharaoh, who entreated
Moses to intercede with Jehovah for him (Exod. viii. 29, ix. 28, x. 17), and yet
afterwards hardened his heart.

IV. Simon Peter’s silence. It is not said that the apostle complied with the
magician’s request. The inference is that he did not. 1. Wot because it would
have been wrong to pray for another. Intercessory prayer was practised by Old
Testament saints, as Abraham (Gen. xvii. 18, 20, xviii. 23-32), Moses (Exod.
viii. 12, 13, 30, 31), Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 5-12), and Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 20-23) ;
was enjoined upon New Testament disciples by Christ (Matt. v. 44), and is still
enforced upon believers as a duty (Eph. vi. 18; 1 Tim. ii. 1,2; James v. 16;
1 John v. 16). 2. Not because the forgiveness of heinous sin was impossible. If
Simon Magus’s wickedness was outside the reach of pardon Peter did not know
this, else he would not have urged on Magus to pray for forgiveness. But 3. Be-
cause the conditions of true prayer were wanting. Simon was not in a proper
state of mind to be interceded for, being destitute of both repentance and faith.
Peter may have supplicated heaven for his awakening, and perhaps did so in
secret; while Simon continued as he was, Peter could not beseech God for the
granting of his request. Whether the magician ever repented and reformed
cannot be told. Keclcsiastical tradition reports that after his interview with
Peter he went back to his old courses like a dog to his vomit, etc. (2 Peter ii. 22),
and became a bitter opponent of Christianity.

Learn—1. That many who profess to be converted are still in the gall of bitter-
ness and in the bond of iniquity. 2. That heaven’s gifts—whether in providence
or in grace—cannot be purchased for money, but must always be accepted free.
3. That the purchase and sale of spiritualities (usually called Simony) is a hein-
ous sin. 4. That “the heart aye’s the past aye, that makes us right or wrong”
(Burns). 5. That the first thing to be done with sin is to repent of it, and the
second thing to seek its forgiveness. 6. That sinful thoughts and feelings as
much require repentance and forgiveness as sinful words and acts. 7. That if
Peter could read the heart of Magus, much more can God read the hearts of all.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 18. Money.

I. Rightly viewed.—God’s gift to
man. 1. Because the silver and the
gold are Mine saith the Lord (Hag.
ii, 8). 2. Because no man can possess
it except it be given him from above
(John iti. 27 ; Jamesi.17). 3. Because
the ability to earn money comes from
God (Deut. viii. 18). 3. Because God

can recall it at any moment (Job i. 21).
_. II. Wrongly used.— When employed
_to purchase the Holy Ghost, or salva-


tion. 1. Because the Holy Ghost, a
spiritual gift, cannot be purchased by
carnal things. 2. Because the Holy
Ghost, a heavenly gift, cannot be pur-
chased by earthly things. 3. Because
the Holy Ghost, a free gift, cannot be


‘purchased by anything.


Ver. 21. A Heart not Right with
God.

I. When destitute of true faith
(Heb. xi. 6).


189


cHap. vir. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee a) a eae TS TD


II. When anxious to make gain of
godliness (1 Tim. vi. 5).

III. When desirous of purchasing
salvation.

IV. When secretly in love with
sin (Psalm lxvi. 18).

V. When a veiled enemy of Jesus
Christ (xiii. 10).


Ver. 22. The Thoughts of the Heart.
I. Naturally wicked (Gen. vi. 5).
II. Thoroughly understood (Prov.
xv. 11).
III. All forgivable (Matt. xii. 31).
IV. Certainly damnable, if not
repented of (Luke xiii. 3).


Ver. 24. Intercessory Prayer.

J. Commanded (Matt. v. 44; Eph.
vi. 18; 1 Tim. ii. 1; James v. 16).

II. Exemplified. Abraham (Gen. xvii.
18, xix. 23); Moses (Exod. xxxii. 31,
32); David (2 Sam. xxiv. 17); Paul
(Rom. i. 9).

III. Solicited —By Pharaoh (Exod.
viii. 8, 28); Israelites (Numb. xxi. 7) ;
Jeroboam (1 Kings xiii. 6); Hezekiah
(2 Kings xix. 1-4); Zedekiah (Jer.
XXxvii. 3).

IV. Answered.—For Ishmael (Gen.
xvii. 20); Pharaoh (Exod. viii. 12, 13,
30, 31); Miriam (Numb. xii. 13);
Aaron (Deut. ix. 20) ; Peter (xii. 5-12);
etc.

V. Refused.—To Judah (Jer. vii.
16, xi. 14, xiv. 11) and Simon Magus.


Vers. 14-25. The Mistakes of Simon.

I. He sought to purchase spiritual
gifts with money.—Rich men try to
buy the favour of Him whom they have
neglected all their lives by great gifts
to His cause. Poor men try to do it
by some outward service which is not
loving sonship. It is the mistake of
all who cannot understand that God’s
offer is so free. So for penitence,
which is only a motive to return to
God and to receive His pardon, they
substitute some penance which is the
offering of our pains of mind or body
to Him as the condition on which we
ask His grace. It makes but little


190


difference whether it-is in a grosser or
more spiritual form, whether it by the
flagellation of our bodies or the tor-
turing of our souls. God gives pardon ;
He does not sell it. Sin can earn
wages, such as they are, but eternal
life through our Lord Jesus Christ is
the gift of God’s free grace.

II. He sought spiritual gifts that
he might use them for selfish ends.—
For it is impossible not to suppose that
he offered money for money’s worth.
He had been a magician, and accus-
tomed to receive the pay as well as the
praises of the Samaritans. He desired
this apostolic power that by its aid he
might be both exalted and enriched.
Hereagain, although theform of Simon’s
sin is exceptionally gross, the spirit of
it is not unknown even to our modern
world. Simon’s sin is that of those
who look upon the places of the Chris-
tian Church rather as means of support
than as opportunities of ministry. But
there is a subtler form of this same sin
not so easily recognised, nor so easily
brought to condemnation. Conceit
may move men as well as covetousness. -
Ambition may be a motive as strong
as avarice. They make this same
mistake, commit this same sin, who
desire to enjoy the dignities of Chris-
tian leadership in distinction from
simply desiring to do Christian work.
But there is a broader application of
the principle, to those who desire the
benefits of religion without the religion
itself. The world is fuli of men who
wish to have the advantage but not
the responsibility of spiritual gifts.
They would like the peace and joy of
believing, but are not willing to accept
its restraintand control. Aboveall, they
are willing to be saved from the punish- ©
ments of sin, but unwilling to be saved
from the sin itself. They will join the
disciple and be baptised and give their
money, as Simon did, and would like all
that God has to give them except a new
heart ; and the oid heart is not right in
His sight.

III. He sought to substitute the.
spiritual gifts of others for his own
repentance and prayer.—And this was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, VIII.





his last mistake, after he had been
rebuked for the first two, and so was
perhaps the worst and most harmful of
all. Peter had turned on this baptised
sorcerer with sharp rebuke. God’s gift
cannot be purchased. Simon’s money
can find no investment in these spiritual
gifts. Worst of all, he has shown that
his heart is not right in God’s sight ;
that it is full of wicked thoughts.
“ Repent of this thy wickedness,” he
cries to him, “ and pray God if perhaps
the thought of thy heart may be for-
given thee.” There is no sin so great
that true repentance and turning to
God may not cover it. But still the
mind of the disappointed magician does
not take in the remedy proposed and
its necessity. He would rather pray
them to pray God for him than do it
himself. He would rather depend on
them than on the Lord. “ Pray for
me,” he begs. If they would only
pray for him, he might be delivered
from these threatened evils. Nor is
this a mistake confined to the Samari-
tan sorcerer. How many people are
to-day depending on some other person’s
goodness to save them, or some other
person’s prayers to procure their
pardon?—how many who practically
hope for some miraculous saving power
from the intercessions of others, with-
out their own self-abasement before
God, or without making supplication
for themselves. There are husbands
by scores who, having some general
knowledge of the gospel, hope to be
saved somehow by the godly living and
praying of their wives ; children, grown
up to manhood and to womanhood in
Christian homes, who are relying
blindly on the power of their parents
with God to secure for them deliver-
ance from sin and a part in his salva-
tion ;- unrenewed and _ unrepentant
persons in all our congregations who
hope that the Church will somehow
pray them into heaven, if only at the
eleventh hour. Perhaps the Church,
in some of its branches at least, is not
_ altogether blameless for this attitude
on the part of many. Has it not
sometimes encouraged them to ask for


the prayers of God’s people without
emphasising the need that their own
prayers should first be offered up. No
Peter by his prayers, devout and
apostolic though they be, can save a
Simon who does not repent of his sin
and pray for his own pardon and puri-
fying. No Monica can save an Augus-
tine by her prayers till God shall teach
the wayward son himself to cry to
Him for help. There is but one
Mediator between God and man—the
man Christ Jesus; and not even He
makes repentance unnecessary on the
sinner’s part. After all, the mistakes
of Simon were only the outcome of his
mistaken heart. The heart which is
not right in the sight of God cannot
see anything rightly which relates to
God. It does not see itself or Him, or
its relation to Him, as it is, The
right heart feels its need of that which
cannot be procured by money or by its
own good works, but only as the gift
of God. The right heart recognises
that it has no claim upon God’s spiritual
gifts for its own sake, but only that it
may use them in the new spirit it has
received of love to God and love to
man. The right heart will not depend
on any other to make needless for it
sincere repentance and humble prayer.
—Monday Club Sermons.


The Natural Heart.—In meditating
upon the story of the Samaritan im-
postor, and studying our own depraved
nature in it, we may remark—

I. That the natural heart has no
knowledge of Divine things.—We hear
a great deal nowadays of the “ religious
instinct.” It is one of the catchwords
by which men would do away with the
notions of revelation and a new heart.
According to some modern teachings, all
men have a religious instinct, all have
a desire to worship God—nay, all do
worship God in some honest way, which,
as he is a kind God, must be acceptable
to him. On analysis, we shall find
that this, which is. called a religious
instinct, is either the action of a guilty
conscience or of a poetic fancy. But
is this religion? Is this knowing and


191


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


— ee (00 Eee eee


serving God? Is this intelligent action
towards a revealed Maker? Is it a
movement of will and affections toward
a personal Ruler of the universe? Can
such a religion as is found in the
“religious instinct,” as ‘it is called,
satisfy the heart and purify the life?
Has it ever done so? Do we find
people and nations growing stronger
on such diet, more civilised, more
attractive? The religious instinct is
of no higher character than the eating
and drinking instinct, as far as true
religion is concerned. One will lead to
God as readily as the other. ‘They are
both of the earth, earthy. Men are
cut off from God by sin, and they can
return only by the use of Divine means.
Nothing in themselves can be of any
avail. The chasm must be bridged
from the Divine side. Acceptance of
what God has done is salvation. What
we do only helps us downward in sin.
That which Simon brought out into
full relief by reason of his position and
boldness was simply the common
character of the natural man. Divine
things are treated with low, earthly
affections, and, of course, as low, earthly
things. Simon in trying to buy God’s
power was no worse than the many
who try to appease God’s anger with a
penance or a gift. The one tries to
buy God’s power, the other tries to
buy God’s pardon.

II. Note, in the second place, that
man’s wickedness before God is in the
condition of his heart.—Look at the
words used in Simon’s case: “Thy
heart is not right before God.” And
then again, ‘Repent of this thy
wickedness, and pray the Lord if per-
haps the thought of thy heart shall be
forgiven thee.” Men have accustomed
themselves to posit sin in overt acts,
and have failed to explore the pollution
of their hearts. Our Lord in the
Sermon on the Mount endeavours to
correct this fatal error, and shows that
the seat of murder and other gross
offences is in the heart. He, as a holy
God, can receive none to Himself except
as the unholy heart is renewed. This
fundamental truth is what the poets


192


and philosophers ignore. They would
reform man on the basis of the old
evilheart. They would make the outer
circles of life pure, and leave the core
rotten. If, however, they say that the
heart of man is pure, how then did it
ever produce such universal impurity
in life? For surely the life must come
from the heart. But some will say,
“We believe the heart must be re-
newed, but why cannot man renew it
himself? What is renewal except
turning the heart from one object of
affection to another, from wrong to
right, from the false to the true?”
In reply, we make our third remark

on our text—

III. That only God’s power can re-
new the heart.—We accept the defini-
tion that renewal is a turning from
wrong to right, from the false to the
true. But when the affections are in
the wrong and the false, how can
their own influence take them out?
How can love destroy itself? Now,
the heart is this love, this love for evil.
How can it change itself to love for
good? Where is the first impetus to
come from when that which forms the
force of the life is fixed upon evil?
Do you take refuge in the thought
that there is some element of good in
the heart, and that this at last accom-
plishes the renewal? Then why does
it not always accomplishit? What is
there to make exceptional cases? Any
exceptional case destroys your theory,
for Nature always works in the same
way, and if the good element would
produce renewal in one heart, it
certainly would in all. But, besides
that, how could the good element in
the heart overcome the bad unless it
had a majority? And if it had a
majority, how came the heart ever. to
go wrong? No; the theory will not
bear examination. The evil heart
cannot renew itself. God alone can
do that.

IV. The hope of man is in prayer.
—‘* Pray the Lord,” said Peter, “if
perhaps the thought of thy heart shall
be forgiven thee.” Prayer must have
penitence as its spirit (“‘ Repent there-


ra
OMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VIII.


a ew te
fore of this thy wickedness, and pray road to pardon and to God, we see in
the Lord”). It must have a deep Peter's injunction what the road is.


conviction of personal sin. Though It is prayer to God. The heart needs
Simon apparently did not take the His forgiving grace.—ZH. Crosby, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 26—A40.


The Conversion of the Eunuch ; or, the Gospel carried into Ethiopia.

I. Occasioned by Providence.—The preparatory steps which led to this
remarkable occurrence were seven. 1. The Hunuch’s adhesion to the Hebrew
faith. An Ethiopian from the upper valley of the Nile, a eunuch of great
authority under Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians (Ethiopia being at this time
ruled by female sovereigns, of whom Candace was the official title), who had
charge of all her treasure, who was her Finance Minister—five clauses descriptive
of his extraction, his condition, his dignity, his time, and his office—he had in
measure at least renounced his original heathen superstitions, having, like so
many others about that period, come to realise their inability to satisfy the
wants of the soul. It has been supposed indeed that he was a Jew who had
risen to eminence in Ethiopia, as Moses had done in Egypt, Daniel in Babylon,
and Mordecai in Shushan (Stokes), chiefly on the ground that had he been a
heathen, Cornelius could not have been designated the first Gentile convert. As
an argument, however, this is scarcely convincing, since in the Eunuch’s case
no question arose about terms of admission to the Palestinian Church, while if
as stated he was a circumcised pagan, his case was sufficiently distinguished from
that of Cornelius, who was certainly an uncircumcised Gentile. The probability,
therefore, is that he was an African who, having embraced the Jewish faith, was
attached to the temple as a proselyte (compare x. 2, xiii. 16), but whether of the
gate (Alford, Renan) or of righteousness (Plumptre) cannot be determined. Neither
can it be ascertained how he had been led to such an act of renunciation and ac-
ceptance as this his proselyte relation to Judaism implied. Jews, it is known, had
for centuries been settled in Ethiopia; and the Greek or Septuagint translation
of the Scriptures was qt this time widely diffused throughout the world. 2. The
Eunuch’s pilgrimage to Jerusalem to worship. It was the custom for proselytes
as well as for foreign Jews to undertake such pilgrimages in order to attend the
great annual religious festivals at Jerusalem (ii. 10; John xii. 20); and the
Treasurer of Meroé had manifestly been in the Jewish capital, observing one or
other of these feasts; most likely a Pentecost, which was usually attended by
the largest numbers. That he had done so had no doubt been of God’s ordering.
3. The Eunuch’s homeward journey through the desert. What particular motive
the African statesman had for selecting the desert route to Gaza, vid Bethlehem
and Hebron, in preference to any of the other roads, as for instance that which
led through Ramleh or that which ran by Bethshemesh, cannot be conjectured ;
but it need not be questioned that God’s object in directing him to the choice he
made was to secure the quietude necessary for conversation with the messenger
of heaven who was about to be despatched to join him. 4. The Hunuch’s meet-
ing with Philip at the moment of his need. According to the story, while his
chariot, “(a mode of locomotion at all times almost unknown to Syria and
Palestine” (Renan), rolled along upon its homeward way, the distinguished
traveller, following a custom then quite common, occupied himself in reading.
The book which engaged his attention was that of Esaias the prophet. It is not
necessary to suppose (Stier) that he had only for the first time procured a copy
of the Scriptures when in the Jewish capital. It is more likely that he had long
possessed one, but that, having heard in Jerusalem about the death and resurrec-
tion of Jesus, he may have been examining the prophecies to ascertain how far


oO 193


“


CHAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


aan


these had been fulfilled in Christ’s person and work (Hackett). Anyhow, he had
just arrived at a passage in the narrative for which he felt the need of an
interpreter when he encountered Philip, whom, the moment before, he could
hardly have expected to find in a solitude like that through which he was
passing. But this also was of the Lord. 5. The Hunuch’s occupation at the
moment of Philip's appearance. Not merely reading but reading aloud, which
furnished Philip with an opportunity and an excuse for striking in with a query
—“ Understandest thou what thou readest?”—which perhaps he could not
otherwise so readily have done. 6. The Spirit's direction to Philip to approach
the Eunuch. Although Philip had been sent to the desert road from Samaria—
not from Jerusalem (Zeller)—by an angel, he had not been instructed by the
angel as to what was the object of his journey. Even when the opulent African
appeared, he could not be certain that his mission related to a personage so
great without further instructions. These, however, were conveyed to him by
a special inspiration : ‘“‘ The Spirit said to him, Go near and join thyself to this
chariot ” ; and with that, of course, all hesitation vanished. It is worth observ-
that this is “the first mention in the Acts of that inner prompting of the Spirit
which is referred to again, probably in xiii. 2, but certainly in x. 19, xvi. 6, 7”
(Alford). Such inward guidance is not unknown to Christians yet. 7. The
Eunuch’s request to Philip to ascend his chariot. Had the Eunuch resented
Philip’s inquiry, which from a worldly or at least modern point of view was not
remarkably polite, there had been no conversation and no conversion; but
being anxious to understand, and perhaps solicitous about salvation, and
obviously humble withal, the distinguished official did not discern any lack of
courtesy in Philip’s question, or, if he did, he passed it over, and, like one willing
to be taught, invited Philip to ascend and sit beside him. And so the providential
chain was complete.

II. Effected by the word.—lIf, as already suggested, the Eunuch’s conversion
from heathenism to Judaism was brought about by a believing study of the
Old Testament Scriptures, through the same instrumentality was he now to be
led over from Judaism to Christianity. 1. By the word read. Orheard, Salva-
tion is not a magical or supernatural transformation to be effected on the soui
without intelligent co-operation on its part, but an inward moral and spiritual
renewal which can be carried through solely by means of the truth. In accord-
ance with this the Eunuch was engaged in reading the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah when Philip met him. Modern critics, on what seems to the present
writer altogether insufficient grounds, have decided that the passage named was
not penned by the son of Amos but by an unknown prophet who lived towards
the close of the exile; but it is obvious that this was not the view taken either
by the Ethiopian treasurer who was groping his way out of heathen darkness,
or by Philip the Christian deacon, who at the moment was under the special
guidance of the Holy Ghost, or by Luke the evangelist, whom the Holy Ghost
employed to record the incident. 2. By the word understood. Mere reading
without intelligent apprehension can effect nothing. Hence the question of the
deacon was directed towards ascertaining whether the Eunuch comprehended
the import of what his eye followed and his tongue uttered; and on learning
that he did not, immediately the deacon undertook the office of expounding to
him the sense of the sacred text. The Eunuch could indeed perceive that the
prophet spoke of a suffering servant of Jehovah; what was not apparent was
whether that suffering servant should be identified with the prophet himself
or with another. That he was neither, but, as the newer critical school asserts,
the people of Israel, did not occur to either the Eunuch or the Deacon. Both
sought him in an individual, and that individual Philip told his distinguished
scholar was Jesus, whose death was foreshadowed in the prophet’s language,


194


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. VIII.


which pointed out—(1) the meekness of it on Christ’s part—“ He was led as a
sheep to the slaughter,” etc.; (2) the iniquity of it on the part of those by
whom it was compassed—‘“‘ In His humiliation His judgment was taken away,”
meaning that ‘“ through oppression and a judicial sentence he was taken away ”
—i.e., the rights of justice and humanity were denied Him, or in other words He
was judicially murdered; (3) the fruitfulness of it in the number of spiritual
descendants secured by means of it to Christ—“‘ Who shall declare His generation?”
or “ Who shall count the number of His posterity ?”—a translation which the
Hebrew will support, though another rendering makes it equivalent to the
preceding thought—“ who shall declare the wickedness of His contemporaries ?”
and (4) the triumph of it, inasmuch as through it His life was taken away from
the earth, not merely by a violent death, but by exaltation to heaven—“ for His
life is taken from the earth” (Luke’s translation is from the LXX., and every
clause in ver. 33 has been debated by interpreters; but as all the above render-
ings are possible, they may be used as representing the course of evangelical
instruction through which Philip put the Eunuch). 3. By the word believed.
As salvation comes not by reading or hearing where understanding is wanting,
so neither does it result from understanding where faith does not ensue. The
truth concerning Jesus must be accepted as correct, in so far as it is a testimony,
and relied on by the heart’s trust in so far as it is a means of salvation. Faith
in Scripture is always more than intellectual assent. It involves as well cordial
reliance on Him of whom the testimony speaks. This faith was unquestionably
exhibited by the Eunuch.

III. Accompanied by confession.—The particular mode in which the Eunuch
avowed his acceptance of Christianity was by submitting to the rite of baptism,
concerning which four things may be noticed. 1. The place where the rite was
performed. Not otherwise indicated than by the circumstance that in its
immediate vicinity was “a certain water,” it cannot now be identified, although
Eusebius and Jerome have decided for Bethsur (Josh. xv. 58; Neh. iii. 16), near
Hebron, about twenty miles south of Jerusalem, and two from Hebron, against
which stands no improbability ; but rather for which may be urged that a
fountain named Ain-Hdh-Dhirweh rises near the town, which still retains the
old name in a slightly altered form, Beit-Sur. Other sites have been selected, as
Ain-Haniych, about five miles south of Jerusalem, and a Wady in the plain near
Tell-el-Hasy. 2. The talk before the rite was performed. Drawing attention to
the water by the wayside, the Eunuch expressed a wish to be baptised, from
which it has been inferred that Philip must have enlightened him concerning
the nature and necessity of baptism. Of this, however, he may have learnt in
Jerusalem. Philip’s reply must have been something like that contained in
ver. 37, though by the best MSS. this is omitted. Yet, if spurious, the insertion
must have been as old as Irenzus, who cites the words without misgiving.
Meyer thinks they have been culled from some baptismal liturgy, to show that
the Eunuch was not baptised without a formal profession of his faith (see “ Hints
on ver. 37”). 3. The mode in which the rite was performed. It is commonly
asserted that the words “and they went down both into the water” imply that
the Eunuch was immersed ; but if “into the water” signifies that the Eunuch
was immersed then as Philip went down into the water, in company with the
Eunuch, Philip also must have been immersed ; while if Philip could have gone
down into the water without being immersed, it is obvious that the Eunuch
could have done the same. The impromptu character of the baptism suggests
something simpler than immersion, most likely sprinkling or pouring. 4. What
happened after the rite was performed. The Alexandrian text reads, “‘ And the
Holy Spirit of the Lord fell on the Eunuch,” which may have been inserted to
harmonise the incident with theological requirements (see i. 5), or with what was


195


cHap. vol. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


—— ee ann





supposed to have usually occurred after baptism (ii. 38); but the Samaritans
were not endowed with the Holy Ghost immediately after baptism (ver. 16), and
the gracious indwelling of the Spirit in the heart of a believer is not necessarily
connected with baptism (Eph. i. 13). What did occur was that Philip was
miraculously caught away by the Spirit of the Lord from the Eunuch’s side, as
Old Testament prophets had often been supernaturally rapt from the eyes of
beholders (1 Kings xviii. 12; 2 Kings ii. 16), as Paul afterwards was caught up
into the third heaven (2 Cor. xii. 2, 4), and as the then living believers will be
caught up to meet the Lord in the air at His second coming (1 Thess. iv. 17).
By that (mysterious) departure the Eunuch’s faith could scarcely fail to be
confirmed (Bengel), unless indeed it was a purely natural, though sudden and
impulsive withdrawal on the part of Philip (Zeller, Hackett, Plumptre, Olshausen,
Meyer), in which case its effect upon the Kunuch would rather seem to have been
disturbing. But the appended statement that Philip was found at Azotus, or
Ashdod, one of the principal cities of the Philistines near the sea-coast, rather
points toa miraculous removal (Bengel, Alford, Stier, Spence, Lechler, Holtzmann,
Zockler).

IV. Followed by joy.—Though the Eunuch no more beheld the evangelist
he went on his way rejoicing, thus showing that the change which had passed
upon him was independent of the agent by whose mediation it had been effected.
The causes of the chamberlain’s rejoicing may be set down as four. 1. He had
found the true object of worship. This in a manner he had known before,
inasmuch as the object of his journey to Jerusalem had been to worship Jehovah,
but since meeting with Philip he had learnt that Jehovah had revealed Himself
in Jesus Christ, “the image of the invisible God ” (Col. i. 15), “ the brightness
of His Father’s glory and the express image of His person” (Heb. i. 3), as the
supreme and sole object of adoration. 2. He had found the key to the Bible.
Before he encountered Philip the Bible which he read had been a dark book to
him; after his conversation with Philip he discovered that he had obtained a
light which enabled him to peruse its prophecies with understanding. ‘The
golden key to the Psalter” says Bishop Alexander, “lies in the pierced
hand.” The same key unlocks the mysteries of the law and the prophets.
“‘ Moses wrote of Me,” said Christ (John v. 46); and of the prophets Peter
affirms ‘The Spirit of Christ was in them” (1 Peteri. 11). 3. He had found a
personal Saviour. The faith professed by the Eunuch was more than a bare
intellectual assent to the truths propounded by Philip. It was a heart reception
of Jesus whom Philip had set forth as the Redeemer. It was a trust which
reposed on His death as a true atonement for sin, and looked to His resurrection
as the source of spiritual life for his soul. It was a faith that might have said
“T am crucified with Christ,” ete. (Gal. ii. 20). A faith which enabled him to
rejoice in Christ Jesus (Phil. iti. 3) as his Saviour and friend. 4. He had found
a blessed gospel for his countrymen. On his upward journey to Jerusalem he was
only treasurer of Candace, the Queen of the Ethiopians ; on his downward way
he had become a treasurer of the King of kings, and was bearing to his
benighted countrymen, in the name of that King, riches more precious than all
the wealth of Ethiopia, the joyful tidings that for them, too, had arrived a day
of salvation, and a heavenly Saviour who could, and would, rescue them from
sin and misery, if only they put their trust in Him. Tradition preserves the
Eunuch’s name as Indich, and credits him with being the first to preach the
gospel in Ethiopia, even converting Queen Candace, after which he departed to
India and taught in Ceylon.

Learn.—1. That earnest seekers after God will eventually be guided into the
truth concerning God. 2. That the best companion for an anxious inquirer
after God and salvation is the Bible, 3. That nothing is so effective for conver-


196


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





CHAP. VIII.
sion work as the story of the death and resurrection of Christ. 4. That Old
Testament Scripture was intended to point the way to Christ. 5. That the


ordinance of baptism should not be neglected by professed disciples of Jesus


Christ.
as well as by immersion.
salvation.


6. That the mode of Christian baptism may be by sprinkling or pouring
7. That no joy can be compared vw the joy of


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 26. Angels.

I. Their nature.—Spiritual intelli-
gences (Psalm civ. 4),

II. Their number.—Practically be-
yond reckoning ‘(Psalm Ixvii. 17;
Heb. xii. 22; Rev. v. 11).

III. Their dignity.—Superior to man
(Psalm viii. 5; 2 Peter ii. 11), they


stand in God’s presence (Psalm lxviii. .


7; Zech. vi. 5; Rev. v. 11; Matt. xviii.
10).

ty. Their character.—1. Holy (Dan.
iv. 13,17; Matt. xxv. 31; Rev. xiv. 10).
2. Reverential (Isa. vi. 2). 3. Obe-
dient (Isa. vi. 2; Matt. vi. 10).
4. Powerful (Psalm ciii. 20; 2 Thess.
iT).

x Their employment.—1. Wor-
shipping God (Neh. ix. 6); Psalm
exlviii. 2; Lukcii. 13; Rev. iv. 8). 2.
Doing God’s will (Psalm ciii. 21; Matt.
vi.10). 3. Studying thomanifold wisdom
of God (Eph. iii. 10; 1 Peter i. 12).
4, Rejoicing in the conversion of sinners
(Luke xv. 10). 5. Ministering to the
heirs of salvation (Heb. i. 14), as, for
instance (to mention only cases that
oecur in the Acts), to the disciples at
Christ’s ascension (i. 10, 11), to Peter
and John (v. 19), to Philip (viii. 26), to
Cornelius (x. 7), to Peter (xii. 8), to
the Church in the destruction of Herod
(xii. 23), to Paul on ship board
(xxvil. 23).


Ver. 27. The Heavenly Treasure.

I. Where it was found. On a
solitary way through the desert.

II. The chest that contained it.
The Scripture with its dark sayings
and seals.

II. The key which opened it.
preaching of Philip.

IV. The jewel which sparkled to


The


him. Christ who died for our sins and ©


rose again for our justification,


V. The seal of possession. Granted
to him by baptism.

VI. The joy which it occasioned.
That of forgiveness and salvation.—


Adapted from Gerok.


Ver. 28. Bible Reading.—A duty.

I. Divinely commanded. — Even
Christians forget this; but see Deut.
vis xvi. 19, xxxte Dh Fosh1.783
John v. 39; 2 Peteri. 19.

II. Greatly neglected.—Not by the
unbelieving world only, but also by the
professed followers of Christ.

III. Highly profitable.—Imparting
light, strength, and joy to such as
practise it (Psalm xix. 11; Prov. vi.
23; Rom. xv. 4; 2 Tim. iii. 16).


Ver. 30. Three Questions about the
Bible.

I. Readest thou what thou hast ?—
1. Thow hast the Bible, which is the
word of God, and worthy of being read.
2. It was given thee to be read, and
cannot be neglected without sin. 3. Jf
not read it will one day testify against
thee.

II. Understandest thou what thou
readest ?—1. It supposes that we read
the Bible—which is good. 2. It dis-
closes to us our natural blindness—
which is better. 3. It excites us to seek
the true interpreter and guide—which
is best.

III. Obeyest thou what thou under-
standest ?—1. What is not understood
cannot be obeyed. An extenuation of
the sins of the heathen and the ignorant.
2. What is understood is designed to be
obeyed. Hence arises the responsibility
of the enlightened. 3. Jf what is
understood is not obeyed, it will entail
upon the disobedient both loss and guilt.
No duty can be neglected without
inflieting hurt upon the disobedient as


197


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





well as exposing him to punishment.—
Adapted from Gerok.


Vers. 28-31. Four Marvels.

I. A courtier reads.—Here deplore
the sad neglect of education on the
part of many and the little attention
paid to books even by not a few great
men,

II. A courtier reads the Bikle.—
Comment upon the melancholy want
of religious sentiments in mankind and
the inattention paid to the Bible.

III. A courtier owns himself
ignorant of his subject—A good sign
and a happy omen of coming enlighten-
ment and progress wherever it appears,
but one seldom present in those who
fill exalted stations in life.

IV. A courtier applies to a minister
of Christ for information and follows
his counsel. The right thing to be
done by such as require instruction,
but an example too seldom followed.—
Adapted from a well-known incident.


Vers. 32, 33. The Sufferings of Jesus.

I. Foretold in Scripture.—The hope
and consolation of Israel.

II. Realised in history.—The atone-
ment for a world’s sin.

III. Preached in the Gospel.—The
greatest moral force on earth.

IV. Believed in by a sinner.—The
source of his individual salvation.


Ver. 39. The Ethiopian Eunuch.

I. The character he bore—1l. A
professor of true religion. 2. A man
of sincere devotion. 3. A devout lover
of the Scriptures.

II. The change he experienced.—
1. Ministerial in its agent. 2. Per-
sonal in its principle. 3. Practical in
its influence,

III. The happiness he obtained.—A.
joy of—l. Heartfelt gratitude. 2.
Gracious experience. 3. Glorious an-
ticipation.

Lessons.—1. Religion not confined
to any class or condition. 2. The
insufficiency of a form of godliness
without its power. 3. The influence
of piety upon its subjects,

198


The Joyful Traveller on his way
Home.

I. Where did his joy come from ?—
He had not brought it with him. It
came from what he heard from Philip,
or rather from what he read in Isaiah.
But how did that statement bring him
joy? It told him of a Sin-bearer,—
long-predicted, come at length. What
he read was as blessed as it was true.

II. Where should our joy come
from?—From the same testimony to
the same finished work. The sinner
is not happy. His sin comes between
him and joy. That burden must be
removed ere he can taste of joy; and
it can only be removed by approaching
the cross. Why is there so little joy
among Christians? 1. Not because
God does not wish them to have it. It
is not forbidden fruit. 2. Wot because
joy dishonours Him. Gloom dishonours
God; joy honours Him. 3. Wot be-
cause joy is not safe for us to have.
True joy is the safest of all things.
It makes a man stedfast and earnest.
4. Not because God’s sovereignty inter-
poses. 5. Not because joy was not
meant for these days. 6. Not because
it unnerves us for work. ‘The joy of
the Lord is our strength.” It is joy
Srom God; joy in God; it is THE JOY oF
Gop. To all this we are called. That
which we possess is full of joy. The
present favour and love of God. That
which we hope for is full of joy.—d.
Bonar, D.D.


Vers. 26-39. Zhe Hunuch from
Ethiopia ; or, Words to Seekers after God.

I. God must be sought where He
has graciously been pleased to reveal
Himself.—The Eunuch understood this,
and sought Jehovah. 1. In the
temple at Jerusalem, and, 2. In the
sacred Scriptures. And in like man-
ner seekers after God to day must seek
Him in Christ, who is the image of
the invisible God (2 Cor. iv. 4; Col. i.
15), or, first, in the Scriptures which
testify of Christ (John v. 39), and
second, in the Christian sanctuary,
where believers speak of Christ
(1 Cor, i. 2),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





II. Seekers after God are never un-
observed by Him whom they seek.—
As Jehovah saw the Eunuch start upon
his journey to Jerusalem and again
upon his homeward track, and knew
exactly all that was in his heart and
what he more particularly required,
so does He still behold from heaven
every soul that is inquiring after Him,
whether within or without the pale of
Christendom (Prov. xv. 3; Jer. xxxii.
19; Heb. iv. 13).

III. It is certain that they who seek
God with their whole hearts will ulti-
mately find Him.—That, on the word
of Jehovah (Jer. xxix. 13), and of
Jesus (Matt. vii. 7). As Jehovah’s
angel (ver. 26), servant (ver. 26), and
Spirit (ver. 29) were all set in motion to
secure that the rich treasurer should not
fail in his quest, so will God by the same
Spirit, and if not by the same minister
by the same truth which he taught,
and if not by visible angels by the
same providence meet the earnest soul
who is longing after Him (Isa. Ixiv. 5;
Matt. v. 4).

IV. When seekers have found God
they should make public acknowledg-
ment of the same.—Not hiding their
joy in their bosoms, but giving it free
expression, letting it be known, not
only for the honour of God, but for the
encouragement of souls in a similar
' seeking condition.


Vers. 27-29. Philip and the Hunuch ;
or, Meetings on the Highway of Life.
Such meetings are—

I. Often accidental.—At least to
appearance. When Philip arose and
went from Samaria, and the Eunuch
se this face toward Ethiopia, neither
had the least idea of encountering each
other. Many meetings are, of course,
purposed at least by one of the parties,
as, ¢g., that of Melchisedek and the
King of Sodom with Abraham (Gen.
xiv. 17, 18), that of Joseph with his
father (Gen. xlvi. 29), that of Moses
with Jethro (Exod. xviii. 1-7), that of
Saul with Samuel (1 Sam. xiii. 10), and
that of the Roman Christians with
Paul (xxviii. 15); but probably an


CHAY. VIIl.





equal number are undesigned, like
that of Elijah and Obadiah (1 Kings
xvi. 7), that of Paul and Aquila
(xviii. 2), and others.

II. Frequently at most unlikely
times and places.—Probably the last
place in the world that either Philip or
the Eunuch would have expected to meet
each other would be the desert road to
Gaza. Had intimation been conveyed
to them beforehand that they were to
cross each other’s paths, it is barely
likely that either would have pitched
upon the Judean wilderness for the spot,
or after the breaking up of the Jewish
festival for the time. But the unex-


_pected is that which mostly hap-


pens, so little prescient is man of the
future.

III. Always providentially ar-
ranged.—“It is not in man that
walketh to direct his steps” (Jer.
x. 23). “Man’s goings are of the
Lord” (Prov. xx. 24). This was sig-
nally illustrated in the experiences of
both Philip and the Eunuch, who were
brought together not by chance but by
heavenly guidance.

IV. Sometimes fraught with mo-
mentous consequences.—As was the
meeting of Philip and the Eunuch, to
the former of whom it presented a
glorious opportunity of preaching the
gospel, and of leading a soul into the
light, and to the latter an equally
glorious opportunity of finding that
which he sought, the pearl of great
price, even Jesus, and with Him the
salvation of his soul.

Lesson.—Be on the outlook for life’s
chances, study their significance, and
endeavour to use them for heaven’s
purposes.


Vers. 26-40. Philip the Deacon ; or,
the Characteristics of a good Evangelist.
—These may be summed up in the
motto, semper paratus, or, always
ready. Ready—

I. To go where God sends, whether
the order comes through a natural or
a supernatural channel, whether
through a vision, as with Paul (xvi. 9),
or through an angel, as with Philip.

199


OHAP. VIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a a


‘‘Here am I, send me” (Isa. vi. 8),
should be his constant attitude.

II. To listen to the promptings of
God’s Spirit, which will come to him
as they came to Philip and again to
Paul (xvi. 7), if only he train himself
to recognise them and discipline himself
to follow them. It is the Holy
Spirit’s province to lead the people of
God (Rom. viii. 14), and He never
fails to guide them who hearken to
His counsels.

III. To take advantage of every
opportunity of preaching, or teaching,
the gospel that Providence may open,
as did Philip when he met the
Eunuch, and as did Paul in Ephesus
(1 Cor. xvi. 9). The good evange-
list will lie in wait for such
(2 Tim. iv. 2).

IV. To expound whatever portion
of Scripture is presented to him, which
will require him to be a diligent
student of the word of God, as Paul
counselled Timothy to be (1 Tim. iv.
13-15). Ignorance of Scripture ab-
solutely inexcusable in one whose office
it is to instruct others.

V. To direct inquiring souls to
Jesus Christ, who is the central theme
of Scripture and to: bring souls to
whom is the end of all preaching. The
minister or evangelist that does not
know how to point anxious inquirers
to Christ has mistaken his calling.

VI. To assist young converts in
making public confession of their faith,
as Philip did, when he administered
the rite of baptism to the Eunuch,
whose faith might otherwise have
wanted confirmation and eventually
declined.

VII. To hide himself behind his
Master, as Philip was taught to do,
when he was suddenly caught away by
the Spirit so that the Eunuch saw him
no more. Evangelists are only instru-
ments in conversion; the sole agent is
the Spirit. Hence the glory of any
conversion belongs not to the evangelist
but to the Spirit. Nor does the
convert longer need the instrument,
while he must never be parted from
the Spirit.

200


Philip and the Ethiopian.
I, Certain characteristics of his


work.—1. His implicit obedience to
the Spirit. The angel said, “‘ Arise and
go.” He arose and went. His faith


must have been severely tested. He
was preaching in a city already deeply
roused. A revival was in progress.
The joy of the new converts was spread-
ing the spiritual fire. The people of
Samaria were in just the condition to
receive the gospel, and it seemed as if
he was the one appointed messenger to
proclaim it to them. The angel that
commanded him to go from the revived
city into the desert did not disclose the
object of his journey. But Philip knew
whence the message came, and without
question into the desert he went. But
some things concerning that guidance
may be noted. It is always in perfect


accord with the, Scriptures. Philip
might well be prompt. His work was
greater than that of theangel. 2. His
eagerness to impart the gospel. Those


who love souls as Christ did, find
opportunities to tell them of Christ’s
salvation. Whatever openings we see,
we must press into. They are abun--
dant. No one lives where souls are
still unsaved, where God does not open
a way for him to carry the gospel.
Take the first step, and God will point
out the next. 3. His usable know-
ledge of the Scriptures. Philip had
made no immediate preparation for
that lesson, but he knew what was in
it. He had prepared himself for such
emergencies, both by experience and
study. He seized the heart of it, and
opened its meaning to his hearer.
This scholar felt that his teacher was
in earnest, and in earnest for him.
The teacher’s heart was kindled with
the presence of the Lord. This is living,
potent teaching. The great central
theme of it is Jesus Christ, the Saviour
of sinners. It is most effective, even
with the indifferent and unbelieving.
‘There are many graces and virtues and
duties taught in the Bible as essential
to Christian character, but the entire
revelation of God is pervaded by one
life. As the human body has arteries,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. VIII.





veins, muscles, and other organs, but
all dependent on the heart’s blood,
which supplies the life, so the mighty
complex system of revealed truth has
for its centre Christ.

II. Some of the Christian labourer’s
rewards as illustrated in this lesson.
—l. He finds a heart prepared to
receive the truth. He hungered for a
new convert. Wecannot always judge
who are most likely to receive the
truth. Sometimes the message is new
to an old man who has heard preaching
all his life, and to the earnest teacher
on the watch for all opportunities is
given the inestimable privilege of lead-
ing him to Christ. Philip expected
immediate results. It was not his
purpose to sow the seed and be content
toleaveit. He led the Eunuch on from
willingness to learn to eagerness to be
a recognised disciple of Jesus. He
found the way to his pupil’s conscience
and heart. Such a reward is Divine.
We never forget the triumphs of such
moments. The pathway of those who
turn many to righteousness will be as


the shining light in their memories..


2. He found new evidence of being a
co-worker with God. His interest was
quickening in one soul; but he was
only one link in the chain of God’s
mighty purpose to save that soul. The
angel, the Holy Spirit, the messenger
called aside from a great work, were
all intent on one individual. Only
occasionally is the curtain lifted for us
to view the operations of God’s provi-
dence to save men; but He has
provided for every inquirer complete
satisfaction, and for every faithful
worker sufficient help. Whatareward
is the evidence that God makes the
efforts of His faithful servant effective !
What a fact is always revealed to the
unconverted soul in this lesson! God
is not willing that any should perish.
He has here for once shown His work-
ing while the sinner is seeking. His
angel is sent on an errand to earth for
the sake of one man. His minister is
called away from a revival into the
desert. A special word from the Holy
Spirit directs that minister on his


errand. All this is to show to one
soul that Jesus has already died to
save him. 3. Philip secured a witness
for the gospel. That which he was so
eager to make known would now be
proclaimed by another also ; for, when

a miracle of healing had been wrought |
in the Eunuch, of course he wanted to
confess who had healed him. He who
believes he is accepted by Christ, will,
of course, want to receive baptism and
unite with the followers of Christ.
There was no presumption in this. It
was not a profession of his religion,
but a confession of his faith. To lead
another soul into real fellowship with


- this great company is a heavenly re-


ward. They who strive for it prize it
above earthly joys. 4. Philip filled a
life with joy. The Eunuch went on his
way rejoicing. That great desire of his
heart was satisfied. But, wherever
Philip goes, he leaves a trail of joy
behind him. Samaria rejoices in his
presence: so did also the desert. He
left happy hearts, at peace with God,
wherever he went. Could there bea
higher reward than this?—Monday
Club Sermons.


Vers. 27-40. Philip and the Ethio-
pian.

I. Philip’s ready response.—We
know not the exact kind of call which
brought him from Samaria way—
possibly angelic and supernatural ; but
as the word may mean any messenger,
the message may have come from a
vision of the night, or by the voice of
a friend, or by the inward and yet
real compulsion of a spiritual convic-
tion. At any rate Philip knows, as any
level-headed Christian man may know,
what duty is and where it lies. And
he had, what many of us lack, the
grace of promptitude in Christian
service. Why go to Africa? 1. Be-
cause the marching orders say ‘ Go.”
2. And secondarily, because it pays
to obey orders—scientifically, archzo-
logically, commercially, socially, histori-
cally, and spiritually. Such spon-
taneous, willing response as Philip’s to
this call into desolave Gaza is an index


201


CHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





of the healthy, unselfish character of
his Christian life. This promptitude
of response is not only self-registering
as to the quality and quantity of the
obedience that is in us, but it is a
tremendous advertisement to all
lookers-on of the vitality and joy of
the gospel itself. To move towards
duty-doing with halting
children drag themselves to school in
June days, is to lose the zest of service
and its reflex influence of soul cheer.
II. God always matches an obe-
dience with an opportunity.—This
incident is a concrete illustration of
the Divine oversight which is constantly
mating wings and air, fins and water,
in a world of providence and design,
and teaches us that when God sends
a call he also blazes a path for our
feet—a fact of Christian philosophy
which the acts of all Christian apostles,
ancient and modern, have verified for
nineteen centuries. You speak, after
long hesitation and fear, to a friend
upon the theme of personal religion,
and lo! you find him waiting for your
word and ripe for your wish. You
walk out upon an unfrequented path
of Christian endeavour, and discover
that the way was already trodden by
unseen feet before you. Philip is
called into the desert with no apparent
purpose. The way is lonely and the
country is desolate—when behold! a
royal traveller approaches, troubled
over the great question of the ages—
what to do with Jesus of Nazareth.
Here is Philip's opportunity. He
takes it, and an arrow of light is sent
into upper Egypt from this bow, drawn,
as we say, at a venture. Obedience is
the pivotal thing ; God takes care of
the rest. This factor of providence
in Christian service must not be over-
looked, for it will inspire us with
courage and a sense of companionship
as we go upon out-of-the-way pilgrim-
ages and take up heavy burdens.
With this lesson of Divine plan in life
and all its ministries, every Divine call
will have such large possibility as to
warrant no delay or selfish balancing
of accounts for the triumphs of the


202


steps, as_


desert. We never know along what
road God’s providences are coming, the
way of the desert or the way of the
cross, in the desolate border town or in
“ Jerusalem the Golden,” and therefore
we must travel all roads.

III. This scene illustrates also the
part which the incidental experiences
of life play in the interpretation of
the truth—We dwell much upon the
light which, in the Leyden pastor’s
phrase, shall break forth from the
word itself. The truth does grow
clearer the longer we look, and multi-
plies itself as the stars do in the night
sky, as every student of God’s Book
may testify; but to the rank and file
of Christian disciples the sidelights of
others’ experiences are more illumi-
nating than their own insight. The
Ethiopian was in darkness with the
roll of prophecy open before him, until
Philip poured the light of his own
eyes, and the hopes of his own heart,
upon this strange vision of Isaiah,
when suddenly a meaningless chapter
in a familiar prophet glows with “ the
light, which lighteth every man that
cometh into the world.” Thus we all
grow in knowledge and in grace, more
than we think, through the experiences
of our neighbours and the insights of
our friends. The chance conversations,
the familiar conference and prayer
meeting, the Bible class, the passing
comment, the public providence and
the personal sorrow, are all commen-
tators upon the eternal truths. Be-
sides, these incidental helps are
unexpected and therefore the most
winsome and abiding. We venture to
think that Philip here on the highway
was more influential with this stranger
than he would have been the preceding
Sabbath in the synagogue at Jerusalem.
He found his man off guard and natural,
as a pastor may find his people in
their daily perplexities, or the teacher
her scholar in his out-of-door natural-
ness.

IV. The teachable temper with
which this Ethiopian faces new truth.
—He hears strange news in Jerusalem,
news which blights the most cherished


ras


hop*s of an ancient race. Suspension
of judgment, a patient waiting for
hght, and an earnest spirit of search,
these are the characteristics of this
treasurer of Candace—characteristics
which we need in the nineteenth
century as in the first: for each
generation has to travel a new path
and solve a new problem, and the
Ethiopian, rather than the Pharisee,
is the type of the world’s hope.—
Wiliam H. Davis.


Vers. 26-46. The Conversion of the
Ethicpian Eunuch.

I. Notice the method of the Holy
Spirit with the evangelist Philip.

II. We turn now to the Spirit’s
method with the Ethiopian Eunuch,
for further illustration of our subject.
—Here, then, you see the first step in
the dealing of the Holy Spirit with the
Ethiopian Eunuch. It was to reveal
to him the vanity of earthly good as a
means of support for the soul; it was
to bring the conviction of need, guilt
and peril; it was to make him dis-
contented with himself and the world,
and to fill his heart with longings for
the favour of God and the forgiveness
of sin. To this vague yearning for
good God has added a deep sense of
personal sin, and has led him to the
sincere use ef means in prayer and the
study of His revealed word. In the
same way does the Spirit of God now
and ever incline sinners to act.

III. Consider the harmony of these
two methods of influence in their final


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. VIII.





adjustment.—As the obedient Christian
stands: waiting on the highway, and as
the anxious heathen comes on in his
chariot reading the prophet Isaiah, the
well-timed plan of God approaches its
consummation. The preacher had
been brought there to find his audience,
the convicted sinner had been brought
there to hear. This subject of the
conversion of the Ethiopian eunuch
imparts several practical lessons.

1. We see by tt how important it is
that Christians should yield prompt
obedience to the impulses of the Spirit
of God, and especially to those which
impel them to present Christ to the
impenitent. 2. This lesson shows us
the importance of personal guidance for
the inquiring and anxious mind.—Had
the eunuch turned from Philip or
failed to hear the word of counsel from
his lips, he would have lost the saving
grace of God. 3. Our subject also shows
us the simplicity of saving faith.
“ Believe with thy whole heart,” was
Philip’s word, and the Eunuch answered,
“T believe that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God.” Here is the touchstone
of all sinccredesire. What doth hinder ?
Nothing but your will stands in the
way, and it is your duty to bend that
will in an instant submission before
God. Mark the blessedness of faith
and the joy of pardoned sins as here
displayed! See the Eunuch on his
way rejoicing with a joy that just
begins, and that will go on increasing
through eternal ages!—P. Rk. Booth,
DD.


203


CHAP. IX.. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


gee Rr a ae


CHAPTER IX.


PREPARATIONS FOR A GENTILE Mission—THE CALLING oF A NEw APOoSs?LE.


A. The Conversion of Saul.


§ 1. The Miracle near Damascus; or, the Arrest of the Persecutor (vers. 1-9),

§ 2. The Mission of Ananias ; or, the Baptism of Saul (vers. 10-19).

§ 3. Saul at Damascus ; or, the Persecutor turned Preacher (vers. 20-25).

§ 4. Saul’s First Visit to Jerusalem ; or, his Discipleship confirmed (vers. 26-31).


B. The Wanderings of Peter.


§ 5. With the Saints at Lydda; or, the Healing of Eneas (vers. 32-35).
§ 6. Among the Disciples at Joppa ; or, the Raising of Dorcas (vers. 36-43).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. And should be but directing attention once more to Saul. Breathing out.—
Breathing in better renders the verb éumvéwy, threatening and slaughter describing the
atmosphere inhaled. That Saul, a Pharisee of the straitest sect (xxvi. 5), went unto the high-
priest, a Sadducee, revealed the intensity of his rage. Whether the high-priest in question
was Annas or Caiaphas, deposed in A.D. 35 (Meyer) or 36 (Olshausen), Jonathan A.D. 36-37,
Ananus’s son, his successor, or Theophilus, who followed his brother in A.D. 37-38, depends
on the year of Saul’s conversion, which is uncertain.

Ver. 2. The letters asked were not commendatory epistles merely, but legal warrants for
search and apprehension. Damascus.—In Hebrew, Dammesek; in Assyrian, Dimaski and
Dimaska; in Arabic, Dimeschk-esch-Schdm, or shortly, esch-Scham. The oldest existing city
in the world, the ancient capital of Syria, 145 miles north-east of Jerusalem, then contained
a large number of Jews, many of whom were fugitives from persecution (viii. 1-4). Paul’s
route uncertain (see “ Homiletical Analysis”). To or wnto the synagogues meant, of course,
their presiding officers (Luke viii. 49), and perhaps the elders or presbyters associated with
them (Luke vii. 3). Of this, rather the way.—J.e., of the Christian profession, faith, manner
of life, etc. Compare xvi. 17, xviii. 25, xix. 9-23, xxii. 4, xxiv. 14-22. This name given by
the early Christians to themselves, in remembrance, doubtless, of Christ’s words, “I am the
Way,”

Ver. 38. He came near should be it came to pass, about noon (xxii. 6), that he drew nigh, a
Hebraistic form of expression. A light from (dé) should be a light out of (éx) heaven.—
This was the “glory” of Jesus (xxii. 6).

Ver. 4. He fell—Probably from the animal on which he rode. Compare xxii. 7. xxvi. 14
represents his companions as having all fallen at the same time.

Ver. 5. Lord.—Could not as yet have had in Paul’s lips its full significance. Some MSS.
write, ‘“‘of Nazareth,” or “the Nazarene,” after Jesus. The clause, 2¢ is hard for thee, etc.,
has been inserted here from xxvi. 14.

Ver. 6. All codices begin this verse with But rise, as in xxvi. 16. The preceding words,
“and he trembling and astonished,” etc., have also found their way into the text from the
later accounts. ;

Ver. 7. Stood speechless, dumb through terror, contradicts not the statement (xxvi. 14)
that Saul’s companions all fell to the ground, nor is the phrase hearing a, or the voice or
sound, inconsistent with the declaration (xxii. 9) that they heard (in the sense of understood)
not the voice of Him that spake unto him.

Ver. 8. And when his eyes were opened, by the lifting up of his eyelids which had shut
themselves before the dazzling light, he saw no man, not “from whom the voice came”
(Bengel), but none of his companions, or nothing (R.V.), he was blind. This blindness, while
not like that of Elymas (xlii. 11), a punishment, and not intended to symbolise his ante-
cedent spiritual blindness (Calvin, Grotius, Bengel), nevertheless reminds one of the dumb-
ness inflicted on Zacharias (Luke i. 20, 22).

Ver. 10. That Ananias (see on v. 1) was one of the Seventy is an unsupported conjecture ;
that he was a “devout” man Saul afterwards asserts (xxii. 12); that he had previously heard
of Saul he himself declares (ver 13). Luke styles him a disciple, but leaves unrecorded whether
his conversion occurred before or after Pentecost. Not the Ananias mentioned by Josephus


204


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, IX.


a a


(Ant., XX. ii. 4) as a Jewish merchant, who converted Izates, King of Adiabene, to the
faith of Israel.

Ver. 11. The street which is called Straight.—This name is still borne by a street in
Damascus, which runs westward from the East gate, dividing the Christian from the Jewish
quarter. (See Pictwresque Palestine, vol. ii., p. 175.) “The houses of Ananias and of Judas
are still shown” (Jbid., p. 179). “The ‘street that is called Straight,’ near the Jewish
quarter, still merits its ancient name, as it traverses the entire city in a right line”
(Wanderings in the Holy Land, by Adelia Gates, chap. xy.). Tarsus.—First mention of Saul’s
birthplace. See on ver. 30.

Ver. 12. In a vision is omitted in the best MSS. Putting his hand on him should be laying
the hand, or hands, on him, in token of the benefit about to be conferred. Compare vi. 6, and
contrast xii. 1, where a similar phrase denotes the infliction of injury.

Ver. 13, I have heard.— Perhaps through letters received from Christians at J erusalem, or
through statements made by Saul’s companions.

Ver. 15. A chosen vessel.—Lit. @ vessel of choice. A common Hebrew idiom. Kings.—
Paul witnessed before the governors of Cyprus (xiii. 7), Achaia (xviii. 12), and Judea
(xxiv. 10, xxv. 6); before Herod Agrippa (xxvi. 12), and probably before Nero (2 Tim. i. 16).

Ver. 16. I will show him may signify either by revelation (De Wette), or more likely by
experience (Benge).

Ver. 17, And Ananias .. . said.—Ananias’s address is more fully reported in xxii. 12-16.
Brother.—Not by nationality merely (ii. 29, xxi, 1, xxviii. 17), but by grace.

Ver. 18, As it had been, but not in reality. Scales.—Compare ii. 3, vi. 15. Luke would no
doubt derive this information about the sensation Saul experienced from the apostle himself.

Ver. 19. Certain days.—Those which followed immediately on his recovery of sight were
spent in interconrse with the disciples, but not in learning from them the gospel he after-
wards preached (Gal. i. 12).

Ver. 20. And straightway he preached Christ.—Not after his return from Arabia
(Plumptre), but after his conversion and during or at the end of the certain days. Paul’s
preaching at this stage was not of an apostolic or missionary character, but merely an argu-
mentative setting forth of the Divinity and Messiahship of Christ.

Ver. 22, The visit to Arabia (Gal. i, 17) is best inserted here (Holtzmann, Zéckler)
During it Saul increased the more in strength, and on returning to Damascus confounded the
Jews there by his preaching.

Ver. 23. Some interpreters (Neander, Meyer, Hackett) find room for the Arabian visit in
the many days of this verse.

Ver. 24. The gates were watched by means of a garrison of soldiers (2 Cor. xi. 32). The
impression made upon Paul’s mind by this, the earliest of his persecutions, may be gathered
from his allusion to it long after in his letter to the Corinthians.

Ver. 25. The should be his disciples, Saul having already drawn around himself a body of
converts. Let him down by a wall in a basket should be let him donmn through the wall—i.e.,
through the window of a house upon or overhanging the wall (2 Cor. xi. 33), lowering him in
a basket. That Saul’s friends used a basket accorded with the present customs of the
country. “It is the sort of vehicle which people employ there now, if they would lower a
man into a well or raise him into the upper story of a house ” ( Hackett).

Ver. 27. Barnabas (iv. 36) appears here as the patron of Saul, whom he takes by the hand
(not literally, but metaphorically), and introduces to the apostles.

Vers. 28, 29, should read: And he was with them going in and going out—i.ec., publicly and
privately,—at Jerusalem preaching boldly in the name of the Lord. Saul stayed in Jerusalem
not more than fifteen days (Gal. i. 18).

Ver. 29. Grecians, or Greek-speaking Jews.—These were addressed by Saul probably because
he himself was a foreign Jew, or because they may have been present in large numbers in
the metropolis attending a feast, but chiefly (might it not he?) because they belonged to the
synagogues or synagogue which murdered Stephen (vi. 9). They went about to kill him. —
Compare xxii. 17-21, in which the motive for his withdrawing from Jerusalem is represented
not as the murderous designs of the Jews, but a vision in the temple. But the two accounts
are by no means inconsistent.

Ver. 30. Casarea.—See on viii. 40. Tarsus.—Upon the monuments of Shalmanezer IT.,
about the middle of the ninth century B.¢., Tarzi (Schrader). The capital of Cilicia
(xxi. 39). Founded, according to tradition, by Sennacherib (705-681 B.c.). After the fall of
the Assyrian empire it became, under Persian supremacy, the seat of the Syennesian princes
of Cilicia. In Alexander’s time it was the residence of a Persian satrap, and in that of the
Diadochi, an important place of the Seleucid. Under the old Cesars Cilicia was conjoined
with Syria; but Hadrian restored it to the dignity of an independent province with Tarsus
as its chief town. In the time of Saul Tarsus was the seat of one of the most celebrated
schools of philosophy and philology. ‘Strabo, a contemporary of Saul’s, names a whole
series of famous teachers out of Tarsus, who all belonged to the first half of the first Christian


205


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
aa a eae a ea ES RE TS TSE GIES ESP eS


century, and says : ‘So great zeal for philosophy, and for the circle of all other sciences, have
the inhabitants of this town that they have surpassed even Athens and Alexandria, and,
indeed, every other place where schools of philosophy and learning exist’” (Langhans,
Biblische Geschichte und Literatur, ii. 704).

Ver. 32. Lydda.—The Old Testament Lod (Neh. vii. 37, xi. 35 ; 1 Chron. viii. 12), now called
Ludd. Described by Josephus (Ant., XX. vi. 2) as a village “ not less than a city in largeness.”
Named Lydda in 1 Macc. xi. 84. After the destruction of Jerusalem it is often mentioned.
Besides being the seat of a Christian community, it possessed for some time, like Jabne close
by, a Rabbinical school. (See Riehm’s Handwérterbuch des Biblischen Aliertums: art.
Lod.) ’

Ver, 35. Saron, or Sharon, the Plain, meant the north half of the flat end lying along the
Mediterranean shore, from Lydda in the south to Carmel in the north. ‘The whole goodly
plain of Sharon is visible—from Mount Carmel on the north down to Lydda, from the eastern
hills to the blue sea, now bathed in gold—a wilderness of weeds and thorn brakes, and yet
a very paradise of colour and ever varying beauty ” (Picturesque Palestine, iii., 146).

Ver. 36. Joppa, or Japho (Jon. i. 3), in Assyrian inscriptions Ja-ap-pu; at the present day,
Jaffa or Jafa, meaning “the beautiful,” or, according to another derivation, “the height.”
A seaport of great antiquity, twelve miles north-west of Lydda, originally allotted to Dan
(Josh. xix. 46). Here was landed the timber for the temple in Solomon’s time (2 Chron.
ii. 16), and in Ezra’s (iii. 7). Here Jonah embarked to go to Tarshish (Jon. i. 3), and here
Peter received the messengers of Cornelius (x. 5). Tabitha’s tomb is still shown. It is
popularly identified with the Sebil of Abfi Nabfit, who was governor of Joppa at the com-
mencement of the present century. Close to it was discovered, by M. C. Clermont Ganneau,
in 1874, the ancient cemetery of Jaffa, containing many rock-cut tombs, the circle of earth
including them being known as Ard Dabitha, the land of Dabitha (Picturesque Palestine,
iii., 143). Herr Schick thinks Tabitha was most likely buried in this cemetery (Palestine
Exploration Fund, Quarterly Statement, January 1894, p. 14). Tabitha.—A Chaldee term
signifying “Gazelle.” Its Greek equivalent, Dorcas, occurs in Xen., Anabd., I. v. 2. Whether
this amiable lady was a widow or a virgin does not appear from the context. The exact
site of ber house is now lost (Herr Schick, as above, p. 14).

Ver. 43. Simon a tanner.—‘‘ The Latin monastery in Joppa is said to occupy the site of
Simon’s house, but a little Mohammedan mosque or sanctuary by the seaside claims to be
the house itself” (Picturesque Palestine, iii., 142). “The house itself is a comparatively
modern building, with no pretensions to interest or antiquity.” “It is close on the seashore,
the waves beating against the low wall of its courtyard” (Stanley, Sinai and Palestine,
p. 274), Herr Schick thinks the modern building may stand not far from the real site
(Palestine Exploration Fund, Quarterly Statement, January 1894, p. 14). Peter, by taking
up his abode with a brother Christian who was a tanner—the trade being commonly regarded
as unclean—took a long step towards ceremonial freedom. The Tiibingen critics find one
proof for their tendency theory in the name Simon, which was borne both by the apostle and
the tanner, as if such a coincidence could not be historical, and another in the correspondence
between the story of Dorcas, on the one hand, and those of Lydia (xvi. 15) and Hutychus
(xx. 9-12), on the other, for these two require to be combined to constitute an exact Pauline
parallel to the Petrine episode.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—9.


The Miracle near Damascus ; or, the Conversion of Saul. ;

I. Saul’s journey to Damascus.—1. The odject of it, To persecute the followers
of Christ, to harry the disciples of the Crucified not out of Palestine merely, but
out of the world as well, and with this end in view to bring any of “the way,”
i.e., of the New Religion (see “Critical Remarks”), he might find, whether men
or women, bound to Jerusalem. 2. The spirit of it. More than breathing out,
Saul was breathing in threatenings and slaughter, inhaling persecution and
murder as his soul’s and body’s atmosphere, feeding upon blood and carnage,
stuffing himself full of rage and violence, which might be ready for disgorging
upon the unhappy victims of his diabolical crusade, which was meant to be
thoroughgoing, sparing neither sex nor age, and sticking at nothing short of
imprisonment and death. 3. The authorisation of it. Saul carried with him
letters from the Jewish high-priest (Annas, or Caiaphas, Jonathan, or Theo-
philus ; see “ Critical Remarks”), commending him to the rulers of the various
synagogues in Damascus, and empowering him (with their help) to search out


206


i HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, IX.





and seize any Nazarenes who might have attached themselves to these places of
worship, and to fetch them bound to Jerusalem. The historic credibility of this
statement has been vindicated by recalling the circumstance that on the death
of Tiberius, in a.D. 37, Damascus passed from the hands of the Romans into those
of Hareth, of Petra, who, in order to keep the Jews quiet, made concessions to
their autonomy, and every concession was simply a permission to commit further
religious violences (Renan, Zhe Apostles, p. 155). 4. The prospect of it. No
emissary of the Inquisition—no Thomas de Torquemada of Spain—ever had a
better chance of success. If brilliant reputation, ardent zeal, absolute power,
best wishes of friends and contemporaries who were all seized with a passion of
hatred against the Christians, could have furthered Saul’s expedition, these
without exception stood upon his side. 5. The prosecution of it. Imagination
can easily picture the setting forth from Jerusalem of the Hebrew Claverhouse
and his companions, all of them mounted, as the old masters have represented,
upon high-mettled and richly caparisoned steeds. The route pursued may have
led either by Bethel to Neapolis, then across the Jordan near Scythopolis, thence
to Gadara, and on through the Hauran to Damascus; or along the base of
Tabor, through the Jordan a few miles above Tiberias, then up by Cesarea
Philippi, and on to Damascus (Conybeare and Howson, vol. i., 81).

II. Saul’s experience near Damascus.—1. His inward cogitations. Though
not recorded by Luke, nor afterwards mentioned by Saul himself, these, it has
been supposed, were of such sort as unconsciously to prepare for the sudden and
unexpected transformation that took place within the persecutor’s soul. Stephen’s
earnest discourse, to which he most likely listened, setting forth the transitory
character of the temple worship and its true fulfilment in the person and work
of Jesus of Nazareth, must, it is said, have secretly poured a flood of light upon
his understanding, from which he could never again escape, and upon which he
probably often, and almost unconsciously to himself, pondered ; while Stephen’s
death which he witnessed, and Stephen’s prayers which he heard, more than
probably helped to drive his half-formed intellectual convictions inward upon his
heart and conscience. Indeed, proceed those who hold this view, it is hardly too
much to say, that already in the interior of Saul’s soul the spiritual revolution
had begun, in the shape of acute intellectual and heart impulses which almost
unconsciously urged him to recognise that truth and right were on the side of
the followers of Jesus, and which he could not resist without a painful sense of
doing violence to conscience. A certain countenance is given to this representa-
tion by the words addressed to Saul by Christ: “It is hard for thee to kick
against the goads”; and there seems no good reason for refusing to recognise in
it a measure of truth, provided it is not pressed so far as to deny the objective
reality of Christ’s appearance to the persecutor; but after all it is doubtful if
this was the view taken by Saul himself of the mode of his conversion (compare
Weizsicker, i. 90). 2. His outward arrestment. (1) The locality where this
occurred was the vicinity of the city. The view of Damascus as seen by one
approaching it from the south is described by travellers as of surpassing beauty.
“Tt is true that in the apostle’s day there were no cupolas and no minarets.
Justinian had not built St. Sophia, and the caliphs had erected no mosques; but
the white buildings of the city gleamed then, as they do now, in the centre
of a verdant inexhaustible paradise. The Syrian gardens, with their low walls
and waterwheels, and careless mixture of fruits and flowers, were the same then
as they are now. The same figures would be seen in the green approaches to the
town, camels and mules, horses and asses, with Syrian peasants, and Arabs from
beyond Palmyra” (The Life and Epistles of Paul, by Conybeare and Howson,
i, 85, 86). (2) The time of this arrestment was midday (xxi. 6, xxvi. 13).
“The birds were silent in the trees, the hush of noon was in the city, the


207


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: THE ACTS.





sun was burning fiercely in the sky, the persecutor’s companions were
enjoying the cool refreshment of the shade after their journey; and
his eyes rested with satisfaction on those walls which were the end
of his mission, and contained the victims of his righteous zeal” (Conybeare
and Howson, i, 86). (3) The manner of his arrestment was sudden as a
flash of lightning. So shall the coming of the Son of man be (Luke xvii. 24).
(4) The instrument was “a light out of heaven” (ver 3), “from heaven a great
light ” (xxii. 6), “a light from heaven above the brightness of the sun” (xxvi. 13)
—no mere flash of lightning, but a shining forth of the Divine glory which en-
compassed the exalted Saviour (ver. 17). (5) The agent was Christ. Saul
himself believed this. 3. His interview with Christ. (1) That Saul actually
beheld the glorified Redeemer may be inferred from Luke’s statement that Saul’s
companions saw no man (ver. 7), and is expressly declared by Ananias (ver. 17,
xxii. 14), Barnabas (ver. 27), and Saul himself (1 Cor. ix. 1, xv. 8). It is quite
conceivable also that while the dazzling radiance of supernal glory struck Saul’s
companions at once to the earth, Saul himself may have looked into the light
and seen the form of the Redeemer before he fell prostrate on the ground
(compare Rev. i. 17). A certain measure of support is obtained for this view
from the circumstance that Saul appears in after life to have suffered from
weakness or dimness of eyesight (see xiii. 9, xxiii. 1; Gal. iv. 13-35, vi. 11).
(2) That Saul heard Christ’s voice addressing him in articulate speech is with
equal emphasis contained in Luke’s narrative, and in Paul’s after recitals, and is
not inconsistent with the fact that Saul’s companions only heard a sound but
could not distinguish words (compare John xii. 29). (3) That Saul carried on a
conversation with the Risen Redeemer all the accounts affirm. Addressed with a
twice repeated “Saul! Saul!” expressive of earnestness, and a penetrating
question, indicative of solicitude, ‘‘ Why persecutest thou Me?” he responded
with an inquiry, ‘‘ Who art Thou, Lord?” which half revealed his suspicion that
his interlocutor was Stephen’s Lord (vii. 59, 60); and was in turn assured that
his suspicion was correct, that the speaker who interrogated him was Jesus of
Nazareth, whom he persecuted, after which he was directed to rise and go into
the city, where it would be told him what he should do. 4. His actual conversion.
Indicated in the narrative by his rising from the earth and entering into the city
in obedience to Christ’s command (ver. 8), it is more distinctly set forth by the
question, “‘ Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do?” (borrowed from chap. xxii. 10),
which signalised his surrender—instantaneous, swift, clear, decided, complete,
final—to Jesus as his Lord, It meant the shattering of all his former views as a
Pharisee, concerning not worldly ambition alone, but the grounds of acceptance
and justification before God. It lifted self out of the seat and centre of authority
in all his after life, and substituted Christ instcad. In this experience lies the
essence of conversion.

III. Saul’s entrance into Damascus.—1. Helpless. Different from the fashion
in which he had expected to pass beneath the gateway of the city, he was led by
the hands of his companions, who must have been astonished at, and perplexed by
the change which had come upon their leader. 2. Blind. Whereas he had
purposed to ferret out with searching glance the hated followers of Jesus he had
been so dazzled by the glory that his eyesight was gone, he saw neither man nor
thing. 3. Humbled. He had intended to root out the Christians from the city,
now he must obtain a lodging with one of these (ver. 11). No thoughts now of
letters for the high-priest. 4. Saddened. The three days of sightless existence
in which he neither ate nor drank were emblematic of his spiritual condition.
“‘Only one other space of three days’ duration can be mentioned of equal im-
portance in the history of the world.” . . . (Conybeare and Howson, i., 90).

Learn.—1. That no soul is beyond the reach of converting grace. 2. That


208


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IX.





Christ is often found of them who seek Him not. 3. That Christ observes
everything that transpires on the earth. 4. That Christ regards persecution
of His followers as equivalent to persecution of Himself. 5. That no conversion
is complete which does not place the soul entirely at Christ’s command. 6. That
the things of the Spirit are not discernible by natural men. 7. That Divine
grace is sovereign in the selection of its objects.


Note.—On the Credibility of the Story of Paul’s Conversion.

I. It is not denied by any school of critics that such a man as Paul lived in
the opening years of the Christian era, or that he was converted, meaning by this
that from being a furious and fanatical Pharisee he suddenly became a follower
of Christ and a preacher of the Gospel he had previously opposed.

II. There is nothing & priori impossible, except on the assumption that the
supernatural is impossible, in the account given by Luke in the present narra-
tive, that what converted Paul was a manifestation to him on the Damascus road
of the risen and glorified Christ—a manifestation not internal but external, not
to his mind’s eye but to his bodily sight. .

III. The account given by Luke is confirmed, first, by two statements that are
represented as having fallen from Paul’s own lips in public addresses given by
him to his countrymen in Jerusalem (xxii. 6-11), and to Festus and Agrippa in
Ceesarea (xxvi. 12-18) ; and secondly, by three shorter but substantially equivalent
statements that occur in two of his acknowledged epistles (1 Cor. ix. 1, xv. 8;
Gal. i. 16). Even if the speeches in the Acts should be ascribed to Luke, no one
can doubt that the allusions in the letters are to the Damascus miracle.

IV. The alleged contradictions in the various accounts are not sufficient to
invalidate their united testimony.—Accepting these contradictions in their
strongest form, allowing them to be wholly irreconcilable—which, however, théy
are not—what do they amount to¥ These—l. That ix. 4 represents Saul as the
only one that fell to the earth, with which xxii. 7 agrees, whereas xxvi. 14 says
that all fell—i.e., Saul’s companions as well as himself. 2. That according to ix. 7
the men who journeyed with Saul heard a@ voice, which according to xxii. 9 they
heard not. 3. That in ix. 15, 17, Saul’s call to be an apostle is made known
first by Christ to Ananias, and then by Ananias to Saul, while in xxvi. 16-18 it is
communicated directly to Saul by Christ Himself. For the solution of these
tremendous (!) difficulties the Critical Remarks and Homiletical Analysis may be
consulted. But, conceding for a moment that they could not be satisfactorily
removed, is it not simply ridiculous to assert that unimportant variations such as
these, which do not in the smallest degree affect the central fact which is
affirmed in every one of the narratives, are sufficient to relegate the whole story
to the category of legend? On similar principles every history book on earth
might be reduced to a collection of fables.

V. The explanations of the Damascus occurrence which have been offered are
so palpably inadequate that it may be seriously questioned if those who put them
forth believe them. 1. The natwral explanations of the older rationalists and of
their present-day followers need only to be mentioned to be set aside. That
Christ never died at all but only swooned away on the cross and revived in the
sepulchre (Paulus), or if He died continued twenty-seven years on the earth after
His resurrection (Bahrdt), and afterwards appeared to Saul, is an interesting
speculation of no value whatever as a contribution to theology or Biblical exposi-
tion. Scarcely more worthy of consideration is the modern hallucination (Renan),
that Saul, when “‘in a state of great excitement,” partly “ through the fatigue of
his journey,” partly through “ dangerous fever accompanied by delirium,” partly
through “ remorse as he approached the city where he was to commit the most
signal of his misdeeds,” was suddenly overtaken by a thunderstorm which


P 209


.


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





frightened and converted him. 2. The vision theory of modern critics, more
especially of the Tiibingen School (Baur, Zeller, Overbeck, Pileiderer, Hausrath,
Weizsicker, and others), that Saul’s mental conflict with himself concerning the
truth of Christianity, his growing conviction that his pharisaic views of religion
were wrong, and that the doctrines of the Christians he was persecuting were
right, combined perhaps with the remembrance of Stephen’s dying utterances and
the impressions made upon him by the martyr’s apology—that all these things so
wrought upon Saul’s mind as to raise it into an ecstatic condition which caused
it to project its own subjective conceptions outside of itself, so as to make them
appear objective realities, when in point of fact they were only images of the
mind—this theory is open to serious objection. (1) It is difficult to perceive how
a mental vision should have struck the Apostle with bodily blindness. (2) It is
more difficult to understand how a vision projected from within could have
effected the complete revolution of Paul’s character and life implied in his con-
version, or how this vision could be said to have caused his conversion, and not
rather his conversion to have caused the vision. (3) It is most difficult to
realise how a clear-headed man like Paul should have continued, after the excite-
ment had passed, to represent as an outward objective reality what he must have
known, on reflection, to be only an inward imagination, or how he could have
placed this experience on a level with the ‘“ seeings” of the other apostles, and of
the five hundred brethren, unless indeed he was sure that they also had seen
Christ only in vision,


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Damascus.

I. The oldest city in the world.—Its
origin lost in remote antiquity. Known
to have been in existence in the days of
Abraham. “In the midst of an oasis
of verdure rise the shining crenellated
walls of a city that was old in the time
of Abraham, the steward of whose
house was one of its citizens ; old when
the pyramids were young, old in the
dawn of history, and whose beginning
no man knoweth with certainty.”—
Wanderings in the Holy Land, by
Adelia Gates, chap. xvi.

JI. A city of surpassing beauty.—
“Tt is one of the few towns of antiquity
that have never lost their own splen-
dour andrenown. By Oriental writers
it is named “ The pearl of the Orient,
the beautiful as Eden, the fragrant
Paradise, the plumage of the Paradise
cock, the coloured neck of the ring
dove, the neck band of beauty, the gate
of the Caaba, the eye of the East, the
Eden of the Moslem” (Dr. Wolff in
Riehm’s Handworterbuch des Biblischen
Altertums, art. Damascus). “ It bursts
upon the view of a traveller like a
vision of Paradise.” ‘' The Damascenes


210


believe that the Garden of Eden was
located there, and that the clay of
which Adam was formed was taken
from the banks of the Abana.” When
Mohammed saw the city and gardens
below in all their enchanting beauty,
he turned away saying, ‘“ Man can have
but one Paradise, my Paradise is fixed
above.” Buckle, the historian, who
“beheld the city from the same place
only a fortnight before his death in
1862, exclaimed, ‘This is indeed
worth all the toil and danger it has
cost me to come here” (Picturesque
Palestine, ii., 143, 144). “There may
be other views in the world more
beautiful ; there can hardly be another
at once so beautiful and instructive”
(Stanley’s Sinai and Palestine, p. 414i).
‘“‘ Damascus occupies one of those sites.
which nature seems to have intended
for a perennial city ; its beauty stands
unrivalled, its richness has passed into
a proverb, and its supply of water is
unlimited, making fountains sparkle in
every dwelling.”—Dr. J. L. Porter.
III. A historically interesting city.
—1. The probable birthplace of Abra-
ham’s servant (Gen. xv. 2). 2. The


<i HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IX.





limit of Abraham’s pursuit of the
Eastern Kings (Gen. xiv. 15). 3. A
city visited by Elisha (2 Kings viii. 7).
4, Paul’s journey tc Damascus and the
incidents connected therewith (ix.).
5. Paul’s subsequent visit to the city
(Gal. i. 17).


Ver. 2. The Way.—This designation
of the Christian religion appropriate,
because the Christian religion—

I. Originated with Him who called
Himself “ the Way ” (John xiv. 6).

II. Describes the way of truth, duty,
life, and salvation for all who embrace
it.


III. Is the only religion whose |


claim to do so infallibly can be esta-
blished.


Ver. 4. Christ's Question to Paul.

I, Revealed to Saul Christ s intimate
knowledge of Himself.—Of His name,
and doings, and intentions. The doc-
trine of Christ’s Omniscience.

II. Intimated to Saul Christ’s per-
sonal existence in heaven.—The doc-
trine of Christ’s resurrection.

III. Announced to Saul Christ's
sympathy with His persecuted
followers.—The doctrine of Christ's
union with His people.





Vers. 5, 6. The Soul's Questions and
Christ's Answers.

I. The soul’s questions.—1. Who art
Thou, Lord? (1) Necessary. Impossi-
ble to be evaded by any to whom Christ
presents Himself. (2) Important.
More momentous inquiry cannot be
imagined than whether Christ is what
He claims to be. (3) Urgent. Can-
not be settled too soon. Danger in
delay ; advantage in an early decision,
provided that be right. (4) Vital.
Carrying with it eternal issues of good
or evil, life or death. 2. Lord! what
wilt thow have me todo? The question
of one who has decided (1) That Christ
is in His person divine, and in His
office the Saviour of the world. Both
implied in addressing Christ as ‘‘ Lord.”
(2) That religion is for him a personal


matter of highest interest and imme-
diate concern. This thought conveyed
by the pronoun me. (3) That salva-
tion can only be found by placing the
soul under Christ’s direction. Sug-
gested by Saul’s asking Christ what he
should do to obtain forgiveness for the
past and hope for the future.

II. Christ’s answers.—1. J am Jesus
whom thow persecutest: it is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks. That is
to say, to the sincere seeker Christ
reveals (1) His name, office, and work—
all expressed in the designation Jesus,
or Saviour. (2) His evil treatment at
the hands of unbelieving and sinful
men, who in opposing His cause and
harassing His people are guilty of per-
secuting Himself. (3) His secret ally
in every honest heart that will con-
sider His claims, the existence «f which
inward advocate makes it difficult and
dangerous for earnest souls to stand
aloof and refuse to yield submission to
His grace. 2. Arise and go into the
city, and it shall be told thee what thou
must do. Which signifies—(1) That no
truly awakened soul will be left with-
out Divine direction as to the way of
peace. (2) That such direction has
in every instance been beforehand
provided. The office performed by
Ananias is now discharged by ministers
or the word. (3) That the direction of
the word—which is, repent, believe,
and be baptised (ii. 38)—if humbly
followed will infallibly conduct to
peace,


Ver. 6. Conversion as illustrated by
that of Paul.

I. Its nature.—l. There is deep
contrition. Knows that he has sinned,
and that his sin is aggravated. His
conscience is awakened. 2. There is
spiritual illumination. With regard to
himself and to the Saviour. 3, There
is earnest self-surrender. Would go
anywhere, would do anything. 4. There
is a singular transformation, A new
creature.

II. Its causes.—1. The agent is God.
An act of His omnipotence. 2. The
instrument is truth. The truth in the


211


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee eeeeeSeSFSFSSSSS _— OO


Bible somehow becomes the truth in
the heart. 3. The influence of love.
Faith working by love.

III. Its rules.—1. As to its subjects
it is sovereign. There must be reasons
for the selection, but we do not know
them. 2. As to its mode it is invin-
cible. The power of the Spirit may
be resisted, but cannot be overcome.


3. As to its time it may be sudden.


In one sense it is always sudden ; in
some cases it is remarkably sudden.
4. As to its circumstances it is variable.
Sometimes violent, sometimes gentle.
5. There is no need for despair of the
conversion of any.—G. Brooks.


Ver. 8. And Saul arose from the
Earth.—* Saul rose another man: he
had fallen in death, he rose in life ; he
had fallen in the midst of things tem-
poral, he rose in the awful conscious-
ness of things eternal ; he had fallen a


proud, intolerant, persecuting Jew, he
rose a humble, broken-hearted, peni-
tent Christian.”—Farrar, The Life and
Work of St. Paul, p. 199.


The Conversion of Paul.

J. Remarkable as the conversion—
1. Of a young man (vii. 56). 2. Of a
self-righteous Pharisee (xxiii. 6, xxvi.
5. 3. Of a brilliant scholar (Gal. i. 11).
4, Of a blood-thirsty persecutor (1 Tim.
i. 13).

ID More remarkable, as the bringing
over to Christianity of one who proved
himself—1. An incomparable type of
Christian character. ‘‘ Christianity got
the opportunity in him of showing the
world the whole force that was in it”
(Stalker), 2. A great thinker which
Christianity ‘‘specially needed at the
moment” (Ibid.). 3. The most allus-
trious missionary the Church has ever
produced or the world has ever seen.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 10—19.


The Mission of Ananias; or, the Baptism of Saul.

The missioner.—l. His name. Ananias, like Annas, the Greek form of
Hananiah, or “Gracious is Jehovah,” borne by the high-priest (iv. 6) and the
false disciple (ver. 1), as well as by himself. In his case only did the character
of its bearer correspond with its import. 2. His residence. Damascus (see on
ver. 2, “ Hints”) ; but whether a native or a fugitive who had found shelter there
cannot be determined. 3. His standing. Not one of the Seventy. A devout
man—i.e., a pious Jew (xxii. 12), who waited for the consolation of Israel, he was
also a Christian disciple who had found the Messias, the date of his conversion
being unknown, though tradition reports that he afterwards became bishop of
Damascus and a martyr, 4. His character. (1) Of good report among the
Jews (xxii. 12). “A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches” (Prov.
xxii. 1). (2) Intelligent, not only wise unto salvation, but keeping himself ac-
quainted with all that concerned the welfare of the Church (ver. 13). (3) Timid,
disposed to shrink from meeting such a ravening wolf as rumour affirmed Saul to
be (ver. 14). Brave men often shrink from danger. Yet (4) Courageous, and
ready to obey when he clearly understood the Lord’s will (ver. 17). Veniat,
veniat verbum Domini, said one, et submittemus et sexcenta si nobis essent colla ;
let but the Lord’s word come, and we will submit to him six hundred necks if
we had them (Trapp). And (5) Sympathetic, uttering words of kindly cheer the
moment he entered Saul’s presence (ver. 17). 5. His calling. Having in a
vision been summoned by Christ, as Samuel formerly had been by Jehovah
(1 Sam. iii. 4), and having answered as Samuel did, “ Here am I, Lord,” he was
further instructed about the mission on which he was forthwith to be sent.
Pure romance is Renan’s idea that Paul, having often heard of Ananias, and “ of
the miraculous powers of new believers over maladies,” sent for him, under the
conviction that the imposition of his hands would cure him of his disease (The
Apostles, p. 161).


212


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CILAP. 1X.





II. The mission.—1. Jts purport. 1. To repair to Saul’s presence without
delay. A formidable task for a Damascus Christian ; like thrusting one’s head
into a lions’ den or a wolves’ lair. Yet that Christ intended this commission
to be carried out Ananias must have gathered from the particularity of the
instructions given, in which were, first, an order to be prompt, Arise; next, a
specification of the street in which Saul would be found, the street called
Straight, and of the house in which he lodged, that of Judas; and lastly, the
condition of mind and body in which he would be found, as to his mind in the
act of prayer and in a state of expectancy, as to his body enfeebled and blind.
2. To put hands upon Saul’s eyes, and so restore his sight. Such an act, if not
required for the strengthening of Ananias’s faith, would serve to deepen Saul’s
humility in that he should be ministered to by one of the very Christians he had
_ purposed to murder, while it would help him to connect the restoration of his
sight with Christ, whose ambassador Ananias was (ver. 12), and thus be an
assurance to him that Christ had put away his sin and received him into favour.
2. Its occasion. (1) Saul’s need of such assurance of Christ’s grace and mercy,
which was the need that every darkened understanding has to be illumined,
every troubled heart has to be appeased, and every unpardoned soul has to be
forgiven ; while over and above it was the need which arises from the pressure
of all these unappeased wants upon an anguish-laden spirit. (2) Saul’s prepared-
ness for the reception of these heavenly blessings, which was shown by two
things—the prayers he was pouring forth (ver. 11) and the vision he had seen
(ver. 12). (3) Saul’s selection by Christ to be a chosen vessel to bear His name
before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel (ver. 15). This Christ
told Ananias was the crowning reason why his mission could not be set aside or
even delayed. 3. Jts execution. At first timidly reluctant, as Moses of old had
been reluctant to undertake the task of bearding Pharaoh in his palace
(Exod. iii. 11), Ananias at last carried through the business entrusted to
him, (1) promptly, hesitating nothing after Christ had removed his fears ;
(2) faithfully, implementing it to the letter; (3) tenderly, saluting the quondam
persecutor as Brother Saul; and (4) successfully, laying his hands upon Saul’s
sightless orbs, so that immediately “there fell from his eyes as it had been
scales,” ‘“‘ he received sight ”—it is preposterous to say that Saul’s blindness was
only nervous, and that on hearing Ananias’s words Saul believed himself cured
(Renan: Zhe Apostles, p. 161)—his soul was “ filled with the Holy Ghost,” “ he
arose” from the dust of despair, “he was baptised,” he partook of food, and
recovered strength.

Learn.—1. That souls once truly awakened are sooner or later conducted into
spiritual peace. 2. That the best occupation for an awakened soul is to keep
calling upon God and Christ in prayer. 3. That Christ can always find suitable
agents to execute His commissions on earth. 4. That the highest honour Christ
can put upon a person is to make him a bearer of Christ’s name before his
fellow-men. 5. That those who run on Christ’s errands should cultivate a spirit
of love. 6. That Christ’s people should rejoice when they have an opportunity
of returning good for evil. 7. That those who come to Jesus Christ enter into
light. 8. That the greatest of men may be helped to salvation by the least.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 10. The Two Ananiases. TI. Ananias of Damascus.—l. A

J. Ananias of Jerusalem.—1l: An _ sincere disciple. 2. A messenger of
insincere disciple. 2. A tool of Satan. Christ. 3. A servant of righteous-
3. A minister of nnrightecusness. 4.A ness. 4. An example to Christ’s fol-
warning to evil-doers, lowers.


213


CHAP. IX.


~


Vers. 10-17. The Two Visions of
Christ.

I. Ananias’s vision resembled Saul’s
in being—1l. A supernatural presenta-
tion to the soul’s eye of the glorified
Son of man. 2. Such a presentation
that Ananias could recognise and
answer the voice of Christ when it
addressed him. 3. Such a presentation
that when the vision passed the soul’s
ordinary conciousness retained a re-
collection of what had transpired in
the vision.

II. Saul’s vision differed from that
of Ananias in this respect, that over
and above the revelation of Christ to
the soul’s eye, there was a distinct
manifestation of the Saviour’s glorified
form to the bodily eye (compare xxii.
14). That Saul afterwards regarded
Christ’s appearance to him on the
Damascus road as something more and
higher than, and essentially distinct
from the “visions and revelations of
the Lord” subsequently enjoyed by
him, as a phenomenon the same in
kind with the appearances of the Forty
Days, he showed by—1. Claiming, on
the ground of it, an apostleship equal in
validity with that of the Twelve (1 Cor.
ix. 1, xv. 8, 9),—a “sight of Christ ”
beiag the specific warranty of apostle-
ship, as distinguished from prophethood,
of which “ receiving visions” was the
seal, 2. Basing on the reality of it the
doctrine of a resurrection of the body
(1 Cor. xv. 14), which he could not
have done on a mere vision, since
persons who have not risen might
appear in vision (Mark ix. 4; Acts
V1.9).


Ver. 11. Behold! he prayeth.—Note
four points :—

I. Prayer addressed to Jesus Christ
fe one of the first indications of a new

e.

IJ. Prayer, as a first symptom of
the religious life, is always the result
of a spiritual vision of the Son of
man.

ITI. Prayer which is the first utter-
ance of a new-born soul is never un-
observed by Christ,


214


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





IV. Neither is it ever left un-
answered by Him.


A Strange Sight—Saul of Tarsus
praying !

I. A persecutor of the Christians
calling on the Lord of Christians.

II. A self-righteous Pharisee sup-
plicating Heaven’s mercy.

III. A learned Rabbi confessing his
ideas of religion had been wrong.


Vers. 13,14, 17. Ananias’s Theology.
I. The divinity of Jesus.—Lord.
II. The personality of the Spirit.
III. The brotherhood of believers.
IV. The Sanctity of Christians.—
Saints.
V. The essence of religion.—Call-
ing on the name of Christ.


The Ideal Minister or Missionary.

I. His fundamental qualification.—
He must be ‘‘a chosen vessel.” Chosen :
1. To be a vessel of Divine grace, to be
a recipient of heavenly mercy (Rom.
ix. 23)—7.e., he must be a sincere con-
vert to the faith he seeks to preach.
2. To be a vessel of heavenly truth
(2 Cor. iv. 7), since many sincere con-
verts have small knowledge of the
Glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ.

II. His lofty commission.—To bear
—l. The grandest theme. Christ’s
name. 2. Before the widest audience.
Jews and Gentles, kings and sub-
jects, princes and peasants—i.e., before
humanity.

III. His severe trials—“TI will
show him how great things he must
suffer.” Few ministers or missionaries
have been or are called upon to endure
such hardships as the Apostle (2 Cor.
xi. 23-27); yet should none enter on
the office who are not prepared (with
Christ’s aid) to endure hardness as
good soldiers of Jesus Christ.

IV. His strong encouragement.—


“For My Name’s sake.” 1. The
highest name (Phil. ii. 9). 2. The
worthiest name (Rev. v. 9, 12).


3. The most powerful name (Phil.
iv. 13). The most enduring name
(Psalm |xxii. 17), ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IX.





Vers. 1-18. Doctrinal and Practical
Lessons. 1. Jesus is supreme Lord and
King in His own right and in the
majesty of His power and the glory of
His grace, while His enemies indulge
their hatred and devise wicked schemes
against Him. 2. In the conversion of
Saul we have a striking illustration of
the sovereignty of Divine grace in the
salvation of the chief of sinners, saving
them sometimes in the heat and
fanaticism of their folly and guilt.
How different the entrance of Saul
into Damascus from his intentions and
expectations! How was he humbled,
and yet exalted in moral quality!
3. All the features of the scene show


a complete and perfect design on the
part of the Lord. Ananias, quite un-
expectedly to himself, is made an
instrument in the scheme of infinite
wisdom, power, and love. The very
house and street where Saul was
fasting, meditating, and praying, and
also all his exercises of mind and heart,
were accurately and exactly known to
the sovereign and governing Jesus.
4, The resources of Jesus the Lord are
infinitely abundant for every emer-
gency. He is the same yesterday, and
to-day, and for ever. He can at any
moment turn the wrath of men to His
own praise. He is mighty to save.—
C. H. Read, D.D.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 19—25.


Saul at Damascus ; or, the Persecutor turned Preacher.

I. The preaching of the preacher.—l. When it began. After “ certain days ”
spent with the disciples at Damascus, but whether immediately after these days
(Conybeare and Howson, Hackett, Neander, Meyer, Spence), or after his three
years’ retirement in Arabia from which he returned to Damascus (Plumptre,
Farrar), is uncertain. “ Straightway” (ver. 20) appears to favour the former
supposition. 2. How long it continued. First, till he departed for Arabia (Gal.
i, 17), which journey is variously located in Luke’s narrative : before the middle of
ver. 19 (Pearson); before ver. 20 (Michaelis, Plumptre, Farrar); in the middle
of ver. 22 or before it (Alford, Zockler); at ver. 23, during the “‘ many days ”
(Neander, Meyer, Lechler, Hackett); between ver. 25 and ver. 26 (Olshausen,
Ebrard). Next after he returned from Arabia and before he fled to Jerusalem
(ver. 26). 3. Where it was conducted. In the Damascus synagogues which his
unbelieving countrymen frequented, and with which the disciples had not yet
entirely broken. His zeal for the salvation of his kinsmen according to the
flesh led him, in the first instance, to seek a hearing from them (compare John
i. 41). Besides, it was indispensable that they who knew him best should be
able to judge of his conversion, Saul had no idea of being “ a disciple secretly
for fear of the Jews” (John xix. 38). 4. The thesis it maintained. That Christ
or Jesus whom their rulers had crucified was the Son of God. Probably his
preaching at this stage (7.e., before his Arabian sojourn) consisted of little more
than a proclamation of the new-found truth which God had revealed in his soul
(Gal. i. 16), and the Damascus vision had burnt in upon his understanding.
Afterwards, on returning from Arabia with matured and arranged thoughts, he
advanced beyond proclamation to demonstration (ver. 22). 5. The vigour it
displayed. If it began timidly, mildly, and half apologetically, it gradually
waxed bold, fervid, and confident. The more he attained himself to a clear
understanding and firm grasp of the new doctrine of Jesus which had been
flashed in upon his intellect, heart, and conscience, of the ground on which it
rested, and the significance it imported, the more courageously did he push his
way into the citadel of his hearers’ souls. 6. The effect it produced. (1) It filled
all who heard him with amazement. And no wonder! Who ever heard before
of a conversion so sudden, violent, and unlikely? A Pharisee become a Nazarene !
A persecutor turned preacher! And that, too, like a clap of thunder! And for


215


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
SS a aL ST


so little cause—because, as he alleged, he had seen a vision, or (as his opponents
would say) he had been dazzled and frightened by a flash of lightning. No doubt
the wiseacres laughed, ridiculed, shook their solemn heads, and called him
Fanatic! (2) 1t confounded all their previous notions about both the Scriptures
and Jesus. If this new doctrine of the hare-brained Rabbi was correct, then they
had completely misunderstood the teaching of their sacred books, and been guilty of
a hideous crime—two charges (ignorance of God’s word and murder of God’s Son)
under which the Jews could hardly be expected to sit with comfort. (3) It
kindled in their hearts hostile and even murderous designs (ver. 23). It woke
up against him the same demon of persecution that had sent Stephen to his death.
Possibly Saul was not surprised at this. It was what his new Master had
suffered, and what he himself had been preparing for his new Master’s friends.

II. The peril of the preacher.—l. The plot of his enemies. (1) Its deadly
purpose—to kill him. Nothing short of his blood would satisfy them. They
must have been convinced that Saul was lost to them for ever, that he was no
insincere convert, but a recruit to the side of Christianity who would never come
back; they must have had a high appreciation of his ability and worth as a
religious controversialist and propagandist when they could not afford to permit
him to transfer his services to the other side; they must have been poorly off for
arguments to answer his preaching when they felt themselves obliged so soon to
resort to the persuasive weapons of fire and steel. (2) Its unsleeping vigilance.
Night and day they watched the city gates, with the help of a Roman garrison
(2 Cor. xi. 32), to apprehend him (compare xxili. 21). So the wicked sleep not
except they have done mischief (Prov. iv. 16), while “ their feet are swift to shed
blood” (Rom. iii. 15). 2. The observation of Paul. He was not so absorbed in
preaching as not to become aware of what was going on. Saul, from the first to
the last of his career, was a remarkably wide-awake person, who always knew
the machinations of his adversaries, and understood the right thing todo. In
this case he got to hear about the wicked devices of his foes. 3. The stratagem of
his friends. Who says that Christians are incapable imbeciles? Under cover
of the darkness (having taken him into one of their houses on the city wall), his
disciples let him down from the window in a basket (see 2 Cor. xi. 33). “‘ This
nightly journey in a basket down over the town wall, whilst underneath perhaps
the Jewish spies were waiting to apprehend him and drag him off to be stoned,”
says Hausrath (Der Apostel Paulus, p. 139), “remained with him constantly as ~
a frightful recollection which twenty years after he depicted in a more lively
manner than all the other sufferings recounted by him, more especially even than
the stoning which he once endured, or than the shipwreck in which he was tossed
about a night and a day upon the deep.” Having eluded the lines of his would-
be captors, he escaped not to Arabia (see Hausrath), but towards Jerusalem,
where he abode fifteen days with Peter (Gal. i. 18).

Lessons.—1. When a man preaches or sceks to propagate the faith he once
sought to destroy, there is good reason to conclude he is converted. 2. Sudden
conversions, though not impossible, are often difficult to understand. 3. If the
Scriptures be authority, Jesus of Nazareth was both Israel’s Messiah and the
world’s Redeemer. 4. Zealous preachers of Jesus Christ, if not now murdered,
are commonly disliked by the world. 5, God’s eye is always upon His faithful
servants to watch over them, especially when the eyes of their enemies are
watching against them.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 22. Paul's increase in strength. acquaintance with the Scriptures
I. Whence it came.—l. From the (1 Johnii. 14), 3. From practice in
indwelling Spirit (Eph. iii. 16). 2. From preaching.
216


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IX.





II. In what it resulted.—In more III. Spiritual pride of one’s own


efficient service. heart.
III. What it proved.—tThe reality IV. Contempt of the Church and
of his conversion. the ordinary means of Grace.—Gerok.
Ver. 25, Paul's Escape from Damascus.
Ver. 23. A New Convert’s Danger. I. A disappointment to his foes.
I. Hatred and persecution of the II. A kindness to his friends.
world (ver. 23). IIT. A mercy to himself.
II. Distrust on the part of believers . IV. A blessing to the Church and
(ver. 26). the world.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 26-30.


Sauls First Visit to Jerusalem ; or, his Discipleship confirmed.

I. Saul’s object in visiting Jerusalem (ver. 26).—1. To associate himself with
the disciples there, and thus obtain recognition of his standing as a member of the
Church. The instinct which impels a disciple to seek after the communion of
saints is healthy as well as right ; that which leads a believer to dissociate him-
self from other believers, and to cultivate piety apart, isas unsound as it is wrong,
and as hurtful to the individual himself as it is contrary to the mind of Christ
(Luke xxii. 32) and the teaching of Christ’s apostles (Col. iii. 16; Heb. x. 25;
James v. 16; 1 John i. 7). 2. Zo make the acquaintance of Peter (Gal. i. 18).
Though implying a recognition of Peter's tacitly allowed supremacy in the
Church at Jerusalem, this cannot be cited as an acknowledgment of his primacy,
since on a second visit fourteen years later (Gal, ii. 1) Saul (then called Paul)
recognises James (the Lord’s brother), Cephas, and John equally with Peter as
pillars in the Church (Gal ii. 9).

II. Saul’s reception by the disciples at Jerusalem.—l. His sincerity was sus-
pected. Not by one or two of the more timid of the community, but by all. Not
by the ordinary membership, but by its leaders, or at least by Peter and James,
since the rest of the apostles appear to have at this time been absent from Jerusalem
(Gal. i. 19). Nor was their suspicion of him unreasonable. His conversion, of
which they had doubtless heard, must have seemed to them beforehand unlikely.
Then its miraculous and sudden character must have struck them at least as a
reason for caution in accepting it as genuine. And if the larger portion of the
three years passed since that occurrence had been spent in retirement in Arabia,
their lack of trustworthy information about his manner of life in the interval
must be held as having justified their want of forwardness in taking him to their
bosoms. ‘The sudden appearance of Voltaire in a circle of Christians, claiming
to be one cf them, would have been something like this return of Saul to
Jerusalem as a professed disciple” (Hackett). 2. His conversion was attested.
(1) To whom? To the apostles, or rather to Peter and James, the latter of
whom Luke includes among the apostles, using the term in a less strict way than
that in which it is commonly employed. LHither, as above suggested, the other
apostles were absent from Jerusalem, or Saul attended no public meeting of the
disciples. (2) By whom? Barnabas, the Levite of Cyprus, who may have been
a former acquaintance of Saul’s—a not unlikely supposition, since Saul’s early
occupation as a tent-maker may have brought him into trade relations with the
Cyprus farmer, and who apparently had personal knowledge obtained in some
way not stated, both of Saul’s conversion and of his evangelistic labours at
Damascus. (3) How? By declaring how Christ had appeared to him in the
way to Damascus, and by certifying that he had preached boldly in Christ’s
name at Damascus. No one in Jerusalem could have spoken a more powerful


217


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





word for Saul than the Brother of Consolation, and none could have spoken a
better word than that uttered by him.

III. Saul’s evangelistic activity in Jerusalem.—1l. The nature of it.
(1) Preaching boldly—not defiantly or vehemently, but confidently and
courageously—in the name of the Lord Jesus ; and all who preach in or about
Christ’s name should, and might, exhibit the same mental and _ spiritual
characteristics. (2) Disputing against the Grecian Jews, the party with whom
Stephen had argued, and at whose hands he met his death (vi. 9-12), and who
were probably most zealous in opposing him. 2. The continuance of it. Only
fifteen days (Gal. i. 18), the exercise of his ministry having been—not abandoned
for want of success or forsaken through weariness, or love of novelty, but—cut
short by the murderous designs of his hearers. Whether these listened to him
longer than they did to Stephen cannot be told.

IV. Saul’s precipitate flight from Jerusalem.—1. Dictated by prudence. “A
prudent man foreseeth the evil and hideth himself” (Proy. xxii. 3). No man is
required to make a martyr of himself even for religion, unless he cannot avoid
doing so without sin. 2. Approved by Christ. This must be inferred from
Christ’s own dictum (Matt. x. 23). What applied to the Twelve held good of
the thirteenth apostle. 3. Assisted by his friends. His brethren in the faith,
realising how valuable a coadjutor had been sent them, “ took steps” to have him
conveyed to Cesarea (see on vill. 40 ‘‘ Critical Remarks ”), and sent forth to Tarsus,
his native city (see ‘‘ Critical Remarks”). 4. Rejoiced in by the whole Church of
Christ since. What would the Church not have lost had Saul been cut off in the
beginning of his glorious career? A heavier blow to Christianity would his fall
then have been than his conversion was to Judaism !

Learn.—l. That sudden and more especially violent conversions are always
more or less open to suspicion. 2. That there are times when the services of a
Christian brother are invaluable. 3. That the soundest evidence of sincerity
in religion is patient and courageous perseverance in well doing. 4. That”
Christianity can hold the field against all opponents. 5. That Christ’s servants
can hardly expect to be better treated than their Master.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 8-23. The Progress of Saul’s
Conversion.

I. The first impression.—The deep
feeling of spiritual inability (ver. 8).

II. The first signs of life.-—“ Behold
he prayeth ” (ver. 11).

III. The first testimony. — That
Christ is the Son of God (ver. 20).

IV. The first experience.—The cross
for the sake of Christ (ver. 23).--
Jasper in Lange.


Ver. 27. What the Name of Jesus is
to a Preacher.

I. His theme.

II. His authority.
III. His power.

IV. His aim.

V. His protection,

VI. His reward,


218


Ver. 29. “They went about to slay
him.”—What the Church and the
world would have lost had this plot suc-
ceeded.

I. The Church would have lost—
1, The brightest example of Christianity.
2. The greatest missionary. 3. The
most eloquent preacher. And—4. The
most influential writer that has ever
appeared within her borders.

II. The world would have lost—
1. Its foremost pioneer of civilisation.
2. Its noblest philanthropist. 3. Its
most gifted teacher. 4, Its most in-
fluential personality.


Vers. 20-30. The Marks of True
Conversion.
$0) Joyful confession of Christ (ver.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IX.





II. Willing endurance of the world’s
enmity (ver. 23).

III. Humble intercourse with be-
lievers (ver. 26).

IV. Godly conduct in the service
of the Lord (ver. 28)—Leonhard and
Spiegel in Lange).


Vers. 26-30. The Qualifications,
Work, and Reward of a True Minister,as
exemplified in the case of Paul.

I. His qualifications.—Declared not
by Paul himself, but by Barnabas.
1. A personal interview with Christ.
Paul had seen the Lord in the way ;
and the man who has not had personal
dealings in his own soul with Jesus
Christ may be an eloquent and even
thoughtful lecturer on religion as he
understands it, but is not a true
minister. 2. A direct message from
Christ. Christ had spoken to Paul, and
therefore Paul had somewhat to com-~
municate to the world. The true
business of the preacher is to communi-
cate not his own but Christ’s thoughts
to his fellow-men. 3. A proved fitness
to speak for Christ. Paul had shown
himself to possess this by his experi-
ment at Damascus; and Christian
Churches are specially cautioned against
‘making those bishops, presbyters, or
preachers who are not “apt to teach”
(1 Tim. iii. 2).

II. His work.—l. Generally and
chiefly to preach, to proclaim the main
facts and doctrines of the Gospel of
Christ. 2. Particularly and specially
to confirm and defend the Gospel against
all objectors and objections. In other
words, he should be both an evangelist
and an apologist.

III. His reward.—Not his ultimate
and final, but his present and im-
mediate recompense. 1. The opposition
of the world. Here typified by the
hostility of the Jews, who first at-
tempted to silence and then to murder
Paul. 2. The sympathy of his brethren.
If at first regarded with suspicion, the
true minister will eventually secure
the kindly regards and hearty co-oper-
ation first of the Barnabases and then
of the Peters, and lastly, of the Johns


and Jameses, etc., among the brethren.
3. The protection of God. The Almighty
arm will be his shield and buckler till
his work is done. No weapon forged
against him will prosper. The devices
of his enemies will be outwitted and
their counsels turned to folly.


Vers. 19-30. Saul Preaching Christ.

I. For this work he had long
preparation.— Were the Book of Acts
our only source of information, we
should conclude that the beginning of
Paul’s work as a preacher followed
close upon the end of his career as a
persecutor. The interval between his
persecuting and his preaching would
seem to have been only the three days
of his blindness at Damascus. We
should then be obliged to explain, as
best we might, how he so suddenly
gained his wonderful insight into
Christian truth in its relations to
Judaism. We should have to seek,
and should seek in vain, a reasonable
explanation of the great revolution in
his moral sentiments. The work of
the Spirit in regeneration may be
instantaneous, but the readjustments
of character and convictions are always
slow and progressive. Happily, we
have another resource. In the Epistle
to the Galatians Paul wrote: “ But
when it pleased God to reveal His Son
in me that I might preach Him among
the heathen, immediately I conferred
not with flesh and blood ... but I
went into Arabia, and returned again
to Damascus.” His preaching was
preceded, we may believe, by three
years of study and reflection in the
solitude of Arabia. St. Paul is not,
therefore, to be cited as an instance of
a man one day ignorant of Christian:
truth, and the next day, by means
entirely supernatural, the wisest ex-
ponent of it. The world, in its love of
the wonderful, is too ready to believe
in such men. His knowledge of Christ
and of Christian truth was in part a
revelation, but in part also the result
of patient thought and of piety pro-
longed through studious years. God
never works needless miracles. Every


219


CHAP. IX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





view of Christian truth and duty
which Paul attained had a _ long
history behind it, stretching back
through those years of meditation in
Arabia.

II. His conviction that Jesus is the
Son of God was reached in the face
of the greatest obstacles—As a
Pharisee burning with zeal for the law
and its traditions, he looked upon
Christ as a dangerous innovator, and
upon Christian doctrine as heretical
and revolutionary. Salvation by the
law-method he advocated with all his
heart. That there was any other
righteousness than obedience to a
ceremonial law he did not for a
moment imagine or allow. The sin-
cerity of his intensely religious nature
made it the more improbable that his
convictions would ever be changed.
The sect of the Nazarenes was un-
noticed or despised. To him, as to
them, the cross was a stumbling-block.
No natural bias in favour of Christian
truth, then, no motive of self-interest,
no social influence, drew him into the
number of Christ’s disciples. No
greater or more improbable change in
character and purpose is conceivable
than that by which Saul the inquisitor,
hurrying men and women to prison
and persecuting to the death believers
in the Christian way, became the
apostle of the cross, ‘‘ determined to
know nothing save Jesus Christ and
Him crucified.” How, then, were
these obstacles removed? His own
explanation always was, “Christ was
seen by me also. . It pleased God
to reveal His Son in me.” In this
glorious revelation lay the power which
revolutionised his moral sentiments,
levelled all obstacles, and brought him
to an undying faith in the crucified
and risen Son of God.

III. The value of Paul’s testimony
that Jesus is the son of God is further en-
hanced by the motive which prompted
him to give it Human testimony is to
be measured by the motive to its utter-
ance. And it might be said that he was
an impostor, bearing witness to a lie,
and setting up claims which he knew


220


to be false. But, whenever men have
reflected that imposture always reacts
upon him who tries it, that false claims
demoralise him who makes them, and
have seen in St. Paul’s life, not a
spiritual declension, but a steady pro-
gress in holiness, they have been both
unable and unwilling to call him an
impostor. Besides, the motive to im-
posture is wanting. Review the list
of selfish motives which impel men to
make false claims, and not one of them
can be applied to him. It was not
pride of intellect; for, with supreme
self-denial, Paul resolved to count as
nothing all other learning than the
knowledge of Christ and of His cross.
The love of Christ constrained Him.
This was the motive. The grateful
desire to make some return for Christ’s
love to him impelled Paul to labour, to
preach, to suffer, ‘in His name.”

IV. The spiritual power of St.
Paul’s life greatly augments the value
of his testimony.—Never was there a
more powerful life. Or, if we were
to admit that St. Paul’s power rested
in his natural gifts; if we were to
enumerate the elements of a strong
character—sobriety, sagacity, impartial
judgment, courage, hopefulness, and
whatever things enter into a powerful
personality—and were to find in these
a sufficient cause for his pre-eminence
as a religious leader—we might then
attach no greater value to his testi-
mony than to that of any other wise
and truthful man. But the fact is
otherwise. Exalt his natural gifts as
we will; say that his own personal
powers made him “a greater preacher
than Chrysostom, a greater reformer
than Luther, a greater theologian than
Thomas Aquinas”—it yet remains
entirely true that the imperishable
power of St. Paul’s life was derived
from Christ. He was consciously
dependent. ‘‘I can do all things
through Christ which strengtheneth
me.”

V, His testimony is comprehensive.
—“In the synagogues he proclaimed
Jesus, that He is the Son of God.” A
review of the ministry of St. Paul is


ff PrOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. IX.





fruitful of practical lessons. 1. He
has set before us the superiority of the
Christian religion to morality. 2. He
has shown us that men may exalt the
character of Christ. 3. His ministry
rebukes all half-hearted service of the
Master.—Monday Club Sermons.


Saul Preaching Christ.

I. There is a public confession of
Christ, an unofficial preaching of Him,
incumbent upon every one who is con-
verted by His grace.—Saul is a noble
example of this generous testimony for
Christ. ‘“ Immediately” (R.V.) “he
proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues
that He is the Son of God.” Notice
to this confession—
First, it was prompt. ‘‘ Immediately ”
he entered upon it. There was no
unnecessary hesitation, no dalliance
with duty, no waiting upon frames and
feelings. Love, gratitude, joy, a desire
to retrieve the wrongs of the past, a
yearning to direct others to the
fountain at which his thirst had been
assuaged, Second, it was brave.. He
did not simply enter his name upon the
roll of the disciples. He did not con-
tent himself with speaking privately
to such of his former acquaintances or
associates as he might chance to meet.
In the face of friend and foe he
made public confession of Jesus his
Lord. Third, it was uncompromising.
He did not undertake to strike a
balance between his own convictions
and the prejudices of his hearers, as so
many faint-hearted confessors now do.
He “proclaimed Jesus that He is the
Son of Ged.”

If. A higher and official preaching
of Christ is incumbent upon those, and
those only, who are duly called, quali-
fied, and commissioned to enter upon
it.—This is the preaching which Saul
did after his return from Arabia to
Damascus. A study of his course in
reference to it throws much light upon
the prerequisites to the gospel ministry.
1. It must be preceded by a Divine
call. None may enter upon it without


in reference


such vocation. The call of Saul of
Tarsus was in many respects extra-
ordinary. 2. It must be preceded by
thorough preparation. 3. It must
be preceded by orderly commission.
Saul was commissioned of God to
preach. ;

ILI. The matter, the manner, and
the effects of preaching Christ are the
same in all ages.—They are strikingly
illustrated in the passage which we
study to-day. 1. The matter or sub-
stance of all gospel preaching is the
same. Saul sounds here the key-note of
his whole after-ministry. 2. The man-
ner of all true gospel preaching is the


same, Saul’s ministry at Damascus and


in Jerusalem affords, in these respects, a
faithful representation of his methods
everywhere, and an instructive example
of the manner in which the minister
or teacher should hold forth Christ as
the Son of God and the Saviour of the
world. Saul’s preaching was scriptural.
He confounded the Jews by proving
from the Old-Testament Sc: iptures that
Jesus was Christ. Saul’s preaching
was fearless, He preached “boldly”
both in Damascus and in Jerusalem.
He did not shun to declare the whole
counsel of God. Saul’s preaching was
humble. He “ preached in the name of
the Lord Jesus.” He assumed no author-
ity and asserted no superiority of his
own, 3. The effects of all gospel preach-
ing are the same. The Apostle found
in Damascus and at Jerusalem what he
did everywhere else: ‘To the one we
are the savour of death unto death, and
to the other the savour of life unto life.”
Finally, the fruits of faithful teaching
are gathered after the teacher is gone.
Saul has been “brought down to
Cesarea, and sent away to Tarsus,”
but the Church of God remains; and
this Church, for which he has laboured
and prayed, and which sorely misses
him now that he has gone, nevertheless
‘“‘ has peace, being edified, and walking
in the fear of the Lord and in the com-
fort of the Holy Ghost, is multiplied.”
—T. D. Witherspoon, D.D.


22)


CHAP. 1X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 31—35.


The Miracle at Lydda ; or, the Healing of dineas.

I. The time.—1. Aé the close of the persecution which arose on the death of
Stephen. This must have continued three years, if the present paragraph
chionologically succeeds the preceding. What occasioned the cessation of
hostilities against the Christians can only be conjectured. The excitement raised
by Gaius’s (Caligula’s) order to have his image erected in the temple, about a.p.
39 and 40 (Lardner, De Wette), may have diverted the attention of the Jews for
a season from the apostles and disciples (Jos., Ant., XVIII. viii. 2-9). 2. During
a period of Church rest and prosperity. This inevitably followed on the cessation
of active measures of hostility against the Christians, and continued for a
number of years, say from A.D. 39 to a.pD. 44, when a fresh persecution was
initiated against the Church by Herod Aprippa (xii. 1). During this interreg-
num, the work of preaching, going forward in uninterrupted quiet, caused the
ranks of believers to be largely angmented—the Holy Ghost constantly bearing
witness to the truth. 3. While Peter was on a visitation tour among the saints.
Whether “quarters” (Kuinoel) or “saints” (Bengel, Meyer, Hackett) be
supplied after “all” the sense is the same, that Peter, encouraged presumably
by the peace which prevailed, had undertaken a pilgrimage among the Christians
in all the districts round about for the purpose of confirming them in the faith,
and by evangelising of increasing their number. 4. When he had come to the
town of Lydda. The Lud of the Old Testament (1 Chron. viii. 12; Ezra ii. 33;
Neh. vii. 37, xi. 35) was a village lying between Joppa and Ramleh, on the
ancient line of travel between Jerusalem and Cesarea. It was at the time of
Peter’s visit the seat of a Rabbinic School, and of a Christian community, estab-
lished there probably as the result of Philip’s labours (viii. 40).

IT. The miracle.—1. The patient. Aineas, probably a. Hellenistic Jew, and
most likely a disciple. His name has suggested the question whether the fame
of Virgil’s poem had made the Trojan hero known even in the plains of Palestine
(Plumptre). Besser, interpreting his name as ‘“ Man of Praise,” finds in it a
beautiful suggestion of the joyous singer of God’s grace who was healed at the
Beautiful Gate of the temple (ili. 9). 2. The malady. Palsy. A paralysis in
the limbs, which had rendered the patient bedridden for eight years. A
minuteness of detail characteristic of Luke as a physician (compare iii. 7, ix. 18,
xxviii. 8). 3. The cure. Made whole. (1) Easily ; by a word. (2) Instantly ;
without delay or lengthened process. (3) Completely. He arose (compare
iii, 9) and made his bed (compare John v. 9), doing for himself what others for
eight years had been doing for him. (4) Really. Though Renan says that
“ Peter” only ‘“ passed for having cured a paralytic,” there is no reason to doubt
that he actually did so. 4. The physician. Not Peter but Jesus Christ. “In
the assonance of the Greek words (’Iyjcods iarai oe) we may perhaps trace a
desire to impress the thought that the very name of Jesus testified that He was
the Great Healer. Such a paronomasia has its parallel in the later play upon
Christian and Chrestiani=the good or gracious’ people (Tertull., Apoc., c. 3),
perhaps also in Peter’s own language that the Lord is not Christos only but
Chrestos = gracious (1 Peter ii. 3)” (Plumptre). 5. The prescription. “ Arise
and make thy bed.” Probably a reminiscence of the way in which Christ was
accustomed to proceed in similar cures (Matt. ix. 6 ; John v. 8).

III. The result.—l. The cowntryside was affected by the miracle. “ All that
dwelt at Lydda and in Sharon ”—i.c., the plain extending along the coast from
Joppa to Caesarea, a distance of thirty miles, “‘saw” the man that had been
cured, and were convinced of the reality of the miracle (compare iii. 9), 2. Most


222


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IX.





of those who saw were by the sight converted. They believed the gospel Peter
preached and turned to the Lord. The evidence of their eyesight was too strong
to be gainsaid.

Learn.—1. That the edification of the Church proceeds best in the time of
peace. 2. That the best propagandists of Christianity are devout Christians.
3. That Christian ministers should avail themselves of every opportunity opened
_in providence for the prosecution of their sacred calling. 4. That the miracles of
ipl healing performed by Christianity are a powerful means of attracting men
to faith.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 31. The Church of Jesus Christ.

I. Independent of territorial limita-
tions.—“ The Church throughout all
Judea and Galilee and Samaria.”

II. Possessed of spiritual unity —
“The Church,” though existing in
different localities.

III. Susceptible of growth.—Out-
wardly its number “was multiplied ” ;
inwardly its religious life ‘ was
edified.”

IV. Distinguished by its walk and
conversation.—‘ Walking in the fear
of God and in the comfort of the Holy
Spirit.”


Ver. 33. The Healing of dineas.

I. An affecting emblem of the sinful
soul._l. Afflicted with a grievous
malady. Sim, which, like a palsy,


paralyses the soul’s powers. 2. Of


long standing—not for eight years only,
but from birth. 3. Incurable by human
means. Even if Aineas’s malady might
have been remedied by ordinary thera-
peutics, the soul’s cannot be removed
by any known power or wisdom of man.

IJ. A cheering proclamation of the
soul’s physician.—1. His name, Jesus
Christ—.e., the Heaven-sent Saviour.


2. His presence—in the immediate
vicinity of every sick soul, so that He
can operate at once. 3. His power—
able to make the soul whole, to heal
its destroying malady of sin, to cancel


the guilt and break the power of it—


and to do this completely.

III. Anauthoritative declaration of
the soul’s duty.—1. To believe. In the
revealed physician. In His name and
character, His presence and power.
2. To appropriate by an act of faith the
healing offered. Without this the soul
could not arise. 3. To arise from its
sinful—z.e., guilty and helpless—con-
ditior. Practically it is the soul’s duty,
instantly on believing, to begin to lead
a new life.

IV. A simple illustration of the
power of faith—The moment he
believed,appropriated, and endeavoured,
he arose a cured man. So is it always
with them who believe and obey the
prescription of the soul’s physician.
They arise from their guilty and con-
demned condition—no condemnation
(Rom. viii. 1). They shake off the
fetters of sin’s bondage and enter into
spiritual liberty.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 36—43.


Among the Disciples at Joppa ; or, the Raising of Dorcas.
I. Doreas living.—1. Her name was beautiful. Dorcas, in Chaldee Zabitha,


signifying ‘‘ Gazelle.”


The gazelle, or antelope of Judah, celebrated for its


slender and agreeable form, its graceful motions, its fiery and beautiful eyes, was
not infrequently employed by Hebrews and other Orientals as a type of female
loveliness. To Dorcas the name “ Gazelle” may have been originally ascribed
on account of her personal attractions, though more probably because of the
grace and beauty of her character ; and pre-eminently beautiful it is when the
lovely name is but an index to the lovely soul within, and the beauty of the


223


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





person a reflection of that beauty of holiness in which the spirit should aspire
continually to be arrayed. 2. Her character was beautiful.


“ What is beauty? Not the show
Of shapely limbs and features. No;
These are but flowers
That have their dated hours
To breathe their momentary sweets and go.
Tis the stainless soul within
That outshines the fairest skin.”


Crown the female figure with every conceivable excellence, till in perfection of ex-
ternal loveliness it may be said of her whose that figure is, as Milton said of Eve—


“Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye ;
In every gesture dignity and love” ;


or as Shakespeare wrote of one of his heroines :—


“ She looks as clear
As morning roses newly washed with dew ;”


yet, devoid of the inner principle of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ and of the
unseen graces that cluster round and, in fact, spring from that, she is destitute
of the one thing needful to consummate her perfections and constitute her
brightest lustre in the sight of God; while with these, on the other hand, she
possesses what lends an additional charm to all her other loveliness. So was it
with the holy women of old time (1 Peter iii. 5, 6) and with Dorcas of Joppa,
who was “ a disciple ” possessed of that faith which is the root and vital sap of
all other Christian virtues and graces. 3. Her life was beautiful. As nearly as
possible Dorcas realised the primitive idea of feminine loveliness as sketched by
both Peter (Eph. iii. 1-4) and Paul (1 Tim. ii. 9,10). She was “full of good
works and alms deeds which she did.” Her Christian activity dispiayed itself
specially in the making of coats and garments for poor widows in connection with
the Church. Probably purchasing the material with her own savings, she wove
it with her own labour, and fashioned it into articles of apparel with her own
hands ; so that the coats and garments she distributed, besides being valuable
gifts of her charity, were substantial tokens of her industry as well. And here
arises a hint of what is pre-eminently woman’s sphere within the Christian
Church, which is hardly that of preaching or ruling, but of teaching the young,
ministering to the sick, and caring for the poor.

II. Dorcas dying.—1. Notwithstanding her piety, Dorcas died. Her beautiful
name, lovely character, and useful life proved unable to ward off the attack of
the last enemy. Having fallen sick, though Scripture maintains a holy reticence
concerning the nature of her ailment, she passed from this mortal scene, most
likely leaving behind her no death-bed testimony, but only the memory of her
saintly character and life to suggest whither she had gone. 2. In consequence of
her piety Dorcas was much lamented. Truth in the familiar phrase that one is
never missed and one’s worth never appreciated till one dies. Whether Dorcas’s
character and philanthropic labour were known beyond or even throughout the
little circle of the Christian community in Joppa before her death cannot be told ;
but hardly had the vital spark become extinct within her frame than the whole
truth concerning her was disclosed. First came the Church members, her fellow-
disciples, to mourn for her death, and condole with her bereaved relatives, so
proving that human hearts may be bound together by other ties than those of
mere earthly relationship; and then arrived the weeping widows, the recipients
of her benevolence, who exhibited the coats and garments she had made as a
testimony at once to the piety of the deceased and to the gratitude of the living.


224


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. IX,








III. Dorcas rising.—1. Unexpected on the part of the disciples. Difficult to
think these had any other idea in sending for Peter than simply to receive from
him comfort and consolation. As yet the apostles had never restored a dead
body to life. Then the attentions bestowed upon the corpse showed it was
being prepared for burial. Certainly the early Christians believed in the possi-
bility of a resurrection ; but ground scarcely exists for supposing the friends of
Dorcas expected her revival. ‘‘ Perhaps something whispered in the troubled
hearts of the disciples, ‘If Peter had been here our sister would not have died’
. . . but the surpassing consolation with which the Lord intended presently to fill
them went beyond their prayers and thoughts” (Besser). 2. Effected by the apostle,
(1) In solitude. Having entered the death-chamber, Peter put out all whom he
found there; in this following the example of Christ in the house of Jairus
(Luke viii. 54). (2) By means of prayer. Christ raised the daughter of Jairus
by His own power ; Peter invoked Christ’s aid. (3) With appropriate actions.
With a word of command—“ Tabitha, arise!” (compare Luke vii. 14, viii. 54 ;
John xi. 43). With a helping hand: “ He gave her his hand and lifted her up.”
3. Authenticated in the eyes of the Church. When she had been recalled to lifia
Peter presented her to the saints and widows waiting without; to those most
anxious to believe in her restoration, it may be said, but also to those best
qualified to attest its reality and least likely to be imposed upon—to those who
had seen her die, washed her corpse, and prepared it for the tomb; and these
having seen her, distinctly realised she was alive, 4. Yollowed by the happiest
results in the general community. The miracle became “ known throughout all
Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.”

Lessons.—l. The great poor law of the Christian Church. The strong should
help the weak (Rom. xvi.). 2. The proper sphere of work for woman.
Ministries of love. 3. The value of a good name. Better than great riches
(Prov. xxii. 1). 4. The mutual sympathy which ought to bind together the
various members of the Church (Gal. vi. 2). 5. Tabitha’s resurrection a picture
of the resurrection of the saints.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 36. Joppa, a City of— in the seventh century to his Royal

I. High antiquity.—Reported by Highness the Prince of Wales in the
ancient geographers to have been built nineteenth” (J. LZ. Porter). (2) The
before the Flood. It certainly existed object of many sieges, from the days of
in the days of the conquest of Canaan Pompey (B.c. 63) to those of Napoleon I.
under Joshua (xix. 46). Tlf. Natural beauty. — “It is,”

II. Historical renown.—1. Jn pre- writes a distinguished traveller, “ beau-
Christian times. (1) Solomon’s ships _ tifully situated on a little rounded hill,
sailed from its harbour to goto Tarshish dipping on the west side into the waves
(1 Kings x. 22). (2) Hiram’s timber of the Mediterranean, and on the land
floats landed at its quay (2 Chron. side encompassed by orchards of orange,
ii. 16). (3) Ezra’s cedar trees received lemon, apricot, and other trees, which
at its port (iii, 7). (4) Jonah em- for luxuriance and beauty are not sur-
barked at its wharf for Tarshish passed in the world.”
(Jonah i. 3). 2. In apostolic times.
(1) The scene of Peter’s miracle in Full of Good Works. Good works—
raising Dorcas. (2) The place of Peter's I. Flow from a right principle —the
vision concerning Cornelius (x. 1). Jn love of God (John xiv. 15-23; Rom.
modern times. (1) ‘“Thelanding-place xiii. 10; 1 John v. 3).
of pilgrims going to Jerusalem for more II. Proceed according to a right
than a thousand years—from Arculf rule—the word of God, the only rule


Q 225


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY;


THE ACTS.





of faith and practice (2 Tim. iii. 16, 17).

III. Tend towards a right end—the
glory of God (Rom. xiv. 7, 8; Col. iii.
17-23).

1V. Should be constantly maintained
(Titus iii. 8).

V. Will certainly be rewarded
(Rom. ii. 7).


The Variety of Gifts bestowed upon
the Christian Church. Four characters,
exceedingly diverse.

I. Paul, a man singularly gifted,
morally and intellectually, with quali-
ties more brilliant than almost ever
fell to the lot of man.

II. Peter, full of love, a champion
of the truth.

III. Ananias, one of those disciples


of the inward life whose vocation is
sympathy, and who by a single word,
‘“‘ Brother,” restore light to those that
sit in darkness and loneliness.

IV. Dorcas, in a humbler, but not
less true sphere of Divine goodness,
clothing the poor with her own hands.
practically loving and benevolent.—
Robertson, of Brighton.


Vers. 36-42. Dorcas and Peter.

I. The character of Dorcas illustrates
the amiableness of female piety.

II. The conduct of the widows
supplies a beautiful instance of grati-
tude.

III. The behaviour of Peter exem-
plifies that promptitude in doing good
which ought to characterise Christians,


CHAPTER X.


THe CuurcH’s Door OPENED FOR THE GENTILES—ACCESSION OF CONVERTS
FRoM HEATHENDOM.


§ 1. Cornelius’s Vision ; or, a Gentile Inquirer directed (vers. 1-8).
§ 2. Peter’s Trance; or, the Apostolic Agent instructed (vers. ‘9-16).
§ 3. Cornelius’s Messengers at Joppa; or, the Gentile Proselyte knocking for


Admission (vers. 17-23).


§ 4. Peter’s Journey to Cxsarea ; or, the Candidate’s Examination (vers, 24-33).

§ 5. Peter’s Sermon to Cornelius; or, the Gospel preached to a Gentile (vers.
34-43),

§ 6. The Descent of the Spirit on Cornelius ; or, a Gentile’s Reception into the
Church (vers. 44-48).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. There was.—Omitted in best MSS. Centurion—éxarovrdpyys (xxvii. 1) =
éxarovrdpxos (xxi. 32; compare Luke vii, 2-6, xxiii. 47). Italian band, or cohort.—The legio
Italica of Tacitus (Hist, i. 59, 64), raised by Nero (Dion. Cass., lv. 24), was not at this time
in existence, “ An inscription in Gruter informs us that volunteer Italian cohorts served in
Syria—i.e., Italian or Roman cohorts who enlisted of their own accord instead of being
obliged to perform military service” (Hackett). The number of soldiers in a cohort was
usually six hundred, though the term was frequently used for a maniple, which was a third
of a cohort (Holtzmann),

Ver. 2. Devout.—evdcefiys, different from evdaBets in ii. 5, viii. 2, describes “the special type
of devotion that belonged to Gentile converts” (Plumptre), though there is no ground for
believing that Cornelius was a proselyte (Olshausen, Neander, Wendt). Against this stand
(Zockler) : (1) the word addépudos of another nation, applied by Peter to Cornelius (ver. 28) ;


226


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. X.





(2) the characterisation vf Cornelius and his family as belonging to the Gentiles (ver. 34);
(8) the great excitement kindled by their reception of the Spirit, and their baptism by Peter
(ver, 45, xi. 1 ff).

Ver. 3. Evidently = openly, so that the vision was not purely subjective (Neander).

Ver. 4. For a memorial before God.—Alluding to “that part of the meat offering which is
burnt, and whose savour was intended to remind God of the worshipper” (Ewald), It is
doubtful, however, if this is not somewhat fanciful.

Ver. 5. Send men to Joppa, etc.—Zeller correctly observes (Die Apostelgeschichte, p. 181)
that this minute acquaintance of the angel with Peter’s name and residence with Simon the
Tanner shows that Cornelius’s vision was not a mere fancy, ein blosses Phantasiegebilde dvs
Betenders, but an objective appearance.

Ver. 6. The best MSS. omit the words, he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do, as an
insertion in accordance with ix. 6 and xi. 14.

Ver. 7. For unto Cornelius read wnto him. Of thom that waited. on him continually may
point to similarity of disposition, as in viii. 13 (Zockler, Holtzmann), as well as to menial
service (De Wette, Overbeck).

Ver. 9. The house-top was frequently employed for devotion. The roof, almost flat, only
sloping enough to let the rain run off, was surrounded by a balustrade as directed by the law
(Deut. xxii. 8), and formed thus a terrace which served as a place of retirement (Stapfer’s
Palestine in the Time of Christ, p. 175).

Ver. 10, Would have eaten should be desired to eat, felt the demands of appetite conse-
quent upon long fasting.

Ver. 11. And saw should be and seeth. Omit unto him after descending. As it had been
a great sheet knit at the four corners and let down to the earth, according to the R.V.
should be as it were a great sheet let down by fowr corners upon the earth—Ssedeuévor cal
being wanting in the best MSS. In the former case the sheet was tied at its four corners
with ropes which let it down towards the earth; in the other it was let down by its four
corners or ends (to which, however, ropes may have been attached, though this is not stated).
The sense is not materially different. Alford, Hackett, Lechler, Plumptre, and others, prefer
the first reading ; Lachmann, Zockler, Holtzmann, with Westcott and Hort, whom the R.V.
here follows, decide for the second,

Ver. 12. Should read all manner of, or simply all the fourfooted beasts (omitting and wild
beasts, a clause introduced from xi. 6) and creeping things of the earth, with the sanction of
the best texts (Tischendorf, Lachmann, Meyer, Westcott and Hort).

Ver. 14, Common or should be common and unclean.—‘ Common” is the opposite of “ holy,”
hence unholy.

Ver. 16, Substitute straightmay, ev0vs, for again, rd\w. Thrice.—For the sake of emphasis.
(Compare Dan. vi. 10, 13; 2 Cor. xii. 8.)

Ver. 17. év éavr@ dinrbper, doubted in himself, or was much perplexed in himself (as in ii. 12,
v. 24), seems to intimate that Peter’s trance was over and Peter himself returned to his
ordinary consciousness.

Ver. 19. The Spirit said unto him.—Neander thinks that Peter’s attention was first arrested
by the sound of the men’s voices in the court below, and that the Spirit only explained to
him the connection between their visit and his meditations. This, however, is incorrect.
The numeral three is by some codices omitted, while others have two; and instead of the
present seek the participle seeking. Westcott and Hort read men seeking; Alford, Hackett,
and Zockler men seek.

Ver. 21. Which were sent unto him from Cornelius should be omitted on the authority of
the best MSS.

Ver. 22, Warned from God, one word éypyyaricOn, signifies was divinely instructed. (Com-
pare Matt. ii. 12, 22.)

Ver. 23. For Peter went away, the best authorities read, he arose and went away. The
brethren from Joppa were six in number (xi. 12), the whole company ten.

Ver. 25. And worshipped.—Not Peter (Adoravit: non addidit Lucas “eum,” Bengel), but
God in him, or who sent him. (Compare Gal. iv. 14.)

Ver. 30. Four days ago I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in
my house.—This seems to say that Cornelius had four days previous to Peter's arrival been
fasting until a certain hour, probably the sixth, and that thereafter, when engaged in prayer
about the ninth hour, he beheld a vision (Alford, Spence, Zockler, Holtzmann). The best
authorities, however, omit the clausule Z was fasting—but wrongly, as many think (Alford,
Meyer, Wendt, Zéckler)—and translate “ Four days ago until this hour I was at the ninth
hour praying,” or literally, from the fourth day until this hour, etc., which cannot mean that
Cornelius had been praying four days consecutively up to the moment in question, the ninth
hour (Neander, De Wette), but must be understood as signifying that on the fourth day pre-
ceding he had commenced his devotions (or his fasting), and had continued on that day till
the ninth hour,


227


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Ver. 31. Is should be was heard, elcnxotc6n, and are should be were had in remembrance,
éuvicOnoay. So also in ver. 4 the present tenses should be past.

Ver. 32. Who when he cometh shall speak unto thee, as an insertion similar to that in
ver. 6, is wanting in the best MSS.

Ver. 33. Substitute of the Lord—i.e., Christ— for of God.

Ver. 34. The word for respecter of persons, rpoowmodjmrns, is found only here in the N.T.,
though zpocwroAnpia occurs in Rom. ii. 11.

Ver. 35. Accepted with Him.—Better, acceptable to him. Though applied to Cornelius
prior to his hearing the gospel, this did not imply that before and without a believing recep-
tion of that gospel Cornelius was in an absolute sense justified, forgiven, and accepted (see
ver. 43). What is here taught is not indifferentismus religionum, but indifferentia nationum

Bengel),

: var 36 The construction of the next three verses is uncertain. Hither (1) the word
Tov Noyov (ver, 36) should be connected with “I perceive,” caradauBdvoua (ver. 34) and ver. 43
taken as in apposition to vers. 34, 35 (De Wette, Ebrard, Lange, Alford); or (2) rév Adyov
should be regarded as in apposition to ducaocdvny (Ewald, Buttmann, Nosgen, Zockler) ;
or (3), and perhaps the best way (Kuinoel, Meyer, Wendt, Winer, Overbeck, Lechler,
Holtzmann, and others), the word (ver. 36) should be construed with ye know (ver. 37), the
word being described by the three clauses standing in apposition—(a@) which God (or He)
sent unto the children of Israel, etc. (ver. 36); (6) that word (or, that saying) which was
published, or (as in Luke ii, 15) that affair which took place (ver. 37) ; and (¢) (the subject
of that saying, also in the accusative) Jesus of Nazareth, etc. (ver. 38).

Ver. 39. Whom also they (indefinite) slew and hanged (rather, having hanged him) on a
tree.—Speaking to the Gentiles, Peter does not specify the agents as when addressing the
Jews (ii. 23, iii, 14, iv. 10, v. 30).

Ver. 41. Bengel, placing the clause “who did eat and drink with Him” in a parenthesis,
explains it as pointing to the intercourse of the apostles with Christ before His death ; it
obviously, however, alludes to their fellowship with Him after His resurrection (Luke xxiv. 43 ;
John xxi. 13).

Ver. 42, Judge of quick and dead.—Not of the righteous and the wicked merely (Olshausen),
but of those who shall be alive at His coming, and of those who shall have fallen asleep
(xvii. 31; 2 Tim, iv. 1; 1 Peter iv. 5).

Ver. 47. Can any man forbid the water ?—The question suggests what was probably the
case, that the primitive practice was to bring the water to the candidate rather than the
candidate to the water.

Ver. 48, He commanded them to be baptised.—Most likely by another than himself, a
practice afterwards followed by Paul (1 Cor. i, 14). Peter only completes by outward form
what God has already in inward essence, by communicating the Holy Ghost, effected—viz.,
the admission of Cornelius and his company to the Christian Church.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—8.


Cornelius’s Vision ; or, a Gentile Inquirer directed.

I. Cornelius’s person.—1l. His name. This “ may indicate a connection with
the great Cornelian gens which had been made famous by the Gracchi and by
Sylla” (Plumptre). There is no reason to suppose he was the individual
mentioned in uke vii. 5. 2. His profession. A soldier. ‘A centurion of the
band called the Italian.” The military profession not incompatible with
Christianity. Christianity has won numerous converts from the army. Yet
modern soldiers too seldom resemble Cornelius. The special cohort commanded
by Cornelius may have derived its name from having been either composed of
native Italian soldiers, or at least commanded by Italian officers. Another
cohort, called the Augustan, is mentioned later (xxvii. 1). The ordinary cohorts
stationed at Czsarea, which consisted of levies from the provinces, were not
always reliable (Jos., Ant., XIV. xv. 10; Wars, I. xvii. 1). 3. His rank. <A
centurion or captain of a hundred, the sixth part of a cohort and the sixtieth of
a legion. 4. His residence. Cesarea, situated on the Mediterranean Sea, was
the headquarters of the Roman procurator, and the seat of a Roman garrison.
Built by Herod the Great, it was inhabited mostly by Gentiles, though it con-
tained a considerable sprinkling of Jews (see on viii. 40).

II. Cornelius’s character.—A devout—i.e., pious man, a worshipper of Jehovzh,
not necessarily a proselyte. The word here used differs from that employed to


228


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. X.





describe serious and religious-minded Jews (see “ Critical Remarks”). His piety
exhibited itself in four ways. 1. Jn cherishing the fear of God in his own soul

As the absence of such fear is characteristic of the wicked (Psalm xxxvi. 1 ;
Rom. iii. 18), so does its presence mark the good or righteous man (Psalm ii. 11,

ciili, 11; Prov. i. 7; 2 Cor. vii. 1; Eph. v. 21). That Cornelius’s fear of God
was sincere, was attested by his own domestics (ver. 22). 2. In seeking the
spiritual welfare of his household. In caring for the religious training of all
committed by providence to his care, his family, his slaves, his soldiers; like
Abraham (Gen. xviii. 19), Job (i. 5), and David (2 Sam. vi. 20). A proper
exemplar in this respect to Christian husbands, fathers, masters, and superiors
(Eph. vi. 4,9). ‘It is the highest ornament of a house when both the master
and the dependants acknowledge and fear God” (Starke). 3. Jn practising
benevolence towards the poor. In distributing much alms among the people—i.e.,
of the Jews (see ver. 42, xxvi. 17, 23, xxviii 17), though not necessarily to
them exclusively. Kindness to the needy (Psalm cxii. 9), a grace enjoined upon
Christians (Luke x. 37; John xv. 17; Rom. xii. 10; Gal. v. 13; 1 John iii. 17),
as well as a dictate of ordinary humanity. There may have been in Cornelius’s
philanthropy ‘something of the service of works,” yet was it not on that
account to be adjudged as hypocritical. 4. Jn habitually maintaining the
exercise of prayer. This was another mark of indwelling grace. A religion
that does not prompt men to pray is not a true religion (Rom. xii. 12; Eph. vi..
18; Phil. iv. 6; Col. iv. 2; 1 Thess. v. 17, etc., etc.). Among other matters
carried by Cornelius to the throne of grace, it may be assumed, was the new
religion which had been brought by Philip to Caesarea (viii. 40), and concerning
which he most likely desired to be guided. N.B.—All the centurions of scripture
xxvii. 3; Matt. vii. 5; Luke vii. 2) are presented in a favourable light.

III. Cornelius’s vision.—1. The time. ‘“ About the ninth hour of the day ”—i.e.
somewhere in the course of it (the force of ace). As this was 3 p.m., one of
the hours for temple worship (iii. 1), it has been suggested that Cornelius may
have been a proselyte, but this hardly harmonises with subsequent statements
(vers. 28, 34, xi. 1, 8, xv. 7; see “Critical Remarks on ver. 2”). The most that
can be inferred is that along with his family he had adopted some of the forms of
Hebrew worship. 2. The manner. Evidently, or openly; meaning clearly and
distinctly, not obscurely and faintly, neither in a dream (compare Matt. i. 20, ii.
13), nor in a trance (compare ver. 10, xxii. 17), but with his bodily eyes, “ thus
asserting the objective truth of the appearance” (Alford). 3. The appearance.
“ An angel of God” (as in viii. 26, xxvii. 23). Cornelius, it should be observed,
did not call him an angel of God, but described him as “a man in bright
apparel” (ver. 30). Yet Cornelius must have recognised the apparition as an
angel, since his messengers used this appellation (ver. 22); which suggests that
Cornelius was accustomed to read the Scriptures in his household (Ezek. i. 13, 14 ;
Dan. x. 6). In any case Peter, who had witnessed the Ascension and seen the
two men in white apparel (i. 10), had no difficulty in identifying the ‘“‘man in
bright apparel” as a celestial intelligence (xi. 13); and this fact that Cornelius’s
visitor was from heaven presumably weighed with him and his fellow-apostles in
deciding whether right had been done in admitting an uncircumcised Gentile
into the Christian Church. That Cornelius saw the angel coming in, and heard
him speak, accords with the Biblical representation of these heavenly messengers
(v. 19, xii. 8, xxvii. 23). 4. The impression. (1) Cornelius having fastened his
eyes upon the angel, was afraid, no doubt, at his dazzling appearance. That
men should be alarmed at unusual phenomena, and in particular at the presence
of the supernatural (Job iv. 15), is an indirect witness to the fall. (2) Having
recovered from his fright he inquired the reason of the angel’s coming—“ What
is it, Lord?” |

229


CHAP. X. AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





TV. Cornelius’s commendation His prayers and his alms, said the angel,
reversing Luke’s order, perhaps to show that God regarded chiefly the heart
(Lechler), had been—l. Noticed by God. The Supreme is an indifferent
spectator of nothing, least of all of what is done by them that fear Him (Job
xxxiv. 21; Prov. xv. 3; Mal. iii. 16; Heb. iv. 13). 2. Remembered by God.
Gone up “for a memorial before God ;” before God not as a plea in justification
but as requests to be kept in mind and answered (see “ Critical Remarks”). God
forgets nothing but pardoned sin. Never in any instance the supplication of a


humble heart (Psalm Ixv. 2; Isa. Ixv. 24; Matt. vii. 8.)


V. Cornelius’s instruction—Given by the angel.
“One Simon, who is surnamed Peter.”
Neither had he been sent for that purpose.
2. Where to find him.


Cornelius.
direct Cornelius to send for Peter.


1. Whom to send for.
The angel did not attempt to convert
His mission was to
“ He lodgeth with


one Simon a tanner in Joppa” (see ix. 43), “ whose house is by the seaside.”
N.B.—God’s knowledge of men extends to their names, surnames, residences,


trades, ete. 3. What to do.
(But see “ Critical Remarks.”)


VI. Cornelius’s obedience.—1. Prompt.


‘“‘ He shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do.”


Immediately the angel had departed


he took steps to carry out the injunctions received. Faith commonly brooks no


delay.


does faith (Gen. vi. 22). 3. Prudent.


“ Straightway” a familiar word in Faith’s vocabulary. 2. Hxact.
did precisely as the angel had commanded. He sent men to Joppa.
never attempts to improve on Divine instructions.


He
Faith
As the Lord commands so


The messengers were carefully selected—


two of his household servants, who, no doubt, like himself, were God-fearing,


and a pious soldier who usually waited on himself.


prudence, but looks well to her goings.


Faith never abandons


Learn.—1. That piety may exist and flourish in any rank and station in life.


2. That God’s salvation is nigh them that fear Him.
wait on man than he'll take knowledge of.”


3. That ‘more servants
4, That prayers and alms are twin


advocates of great influence with God. 5. That God never leaves the meek


without guidance.
them.


6, That good men should study to have pious servants about
7. That pious households are often visited by angels.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. The Centurion of Cosarea.
—A Roman from head to foot,
Cornelius had still no heart for the
Roman gods; he was one of Japhet’s
children, who in the conquered tents of
Sbem had himself been conquered by
the God of Shem. Certainly he was
still a heathen; Jerusalem’s desolate
temple had not had for him attraction
enough to cause him to become a
proselyte ; had he sought to find peace
there, he would have returned from
Jerusalem just as unsatisfied as the
Treasurer from the East.—Besser,
Bibelstunden: Apostelgeschichte, III. i.
514).


Cornelius the Centurion.—An example


Lof—
Mees. 5


7


* 230


I. Goodness in high station—A
Roman soldier of exalted rank, and
yet obviously kind to and considerate
of his dependants as well as of the
poor; two marks of moral excellence
not always found among Christians,
though they should be (Rom. xii. 13, 16).

II. Piety outside the pale of the
Church.—A devout man who prayed
to God always and gave much alms to
the poor, though by birth and education
he was a Gentile. God has other sons
besides those who are called by His
name (Hosea ii. 23; Rom. ix. 25, 26),
and Christ other sheep than those
who belong to the recognised fold
(John x. 16).

ITI. An earnest soul seeking after
God,—Though pious, he was yet con-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. X.





scious of a want. Though no longer
in heathen darkness, he realised he
had not yet attained to perfect light.
Though delivered in a measure from
fear, he was not at rest. For more
light, fuller knowledge, deeper peace,
his prayers were doubtless directed.

IV. Meekness instructed by God.—
“The meek will He guide in judgment,
and the meek will He teach His way”
(Psalm xxv. 9). This promise was
signally illustrated in the case of
Cornelius.

V. Faith proving itself by obe-
dience—No sooner did the angel
command than with military prompti-
tude he obeyed. (Compare Luke vii. 8.)


Ver. 2. Praying Always.

I. Enjoined in Scripture. — By
Christ (Luke xviii. 1) and by Paul
(1 Thess. v. 17).

II. Not impossible.—Except as a
mere external performance or bodily
service (Matt. xxvi.41). Asa spiritual
exercise (1 Cor. xiv. 15) by no means
unattainable, as the cases of the Twelve
(vi. 4), of Cornelius, and of Paul
(Col. i. 9) prove. The heart may be
always in an attitude of prayer, though
not every instant conscious of desire.

III. Eminently reasonable. — The
man who prays always shows himself
to be good—z.e., humble and wise.


IV. Never unprofitable-—The soul
that communes much with God will
not only receive much from God
(Matt. vii. 8), but will gradually
become like God.


Vers. 5, 6. Simon the Apostle and
Simon the Tanner; or, Christian
Preachers and Christian Tradesmen.

I. Both known to God.—Their
names, callings, and residences.

II. Both serve God.—Their callings
may be different ; their Master is one.

III. Both advance Christ's kingdom.
The preacher (the apostle) directly by
publishing the gospel; the tradesman
(the tanner) indirectly by lodging the
preacher.

IV. Both honoured by God.—Their
names stand together in the annals of
the Church and on the page of in-
spiration.


Ver. 7. A Model House.

I. Religious.—Characterised by the
fear of God and sanctified by prayer.

II. Harmonious.—Master and ser-
vants, doubtless also parents and
children, living in concord and love.

III. Benevolent.—Mindful of the
wants of others; distributing to the
necessities of the saints.

IV. Blessed. — Visited by angels,
God’s ministers of salvation.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—16.


Peter's Trance; or, the Apostolic Agent prepared.

TI. The circumstances.—1. Where? (1) In Joppa (see ix. 36-43). How Peter
came to be in that seaside city has already been related. (2) In the house of
Simon the tanner (ver. 6). A good man is near to heaven anywhere and
everywhere. (3) On the flat roof of Simon’s mansion, whither he had retired
for devotion. Since Christ came every place is holy ground. Oriental houses
were commonly constructed like Simon’s (Mark ii. 4). 2. When? (1) On the
morrow after Cornelius’s vision, after the departure of his messengers and as
they were approaching the city. (2) About the sixth hour—i.e., about noon.
This also was a favourite hour for prayer with devout Jews (Psalm lv. 17).
(3) While Simon’s domestics were making ready (ver. 10)—7.e., while they were
preparing the midday meal, which in all probability would consist of “ fish,
locusts baked in flour or honey, onions, and (perhaps) butcher’s meat” (Stapfer’s
Palestine in the Time of Christ, p. 189). 3. How engaged? In prayer, for
which roofs of houses were often used (Matt. x. 27, xxiv. 17; Luke xvii. 31), as
being both secluded and safe, in consequence of ordinarily having a balustrade


231


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a








of three or four feet high running round them (Deut. xxii. 8). It was not
surprising that Peter should have a heavenly vision while engaged in prayer
(see “Hints on ver. 11”). Glimpses within the veil are most likely to be
enjoyed by them who live nearest it. 4. In what condition? “ Hungry,”
very (Hackett), and desirous of eating. He had probably partaken of no food
since the morning, more especially if the day was one of those (the second and
fifth of the week, Monday and Thursday) which were habitually observed as
fasts by pious.Jews (Stapfer’s Palestine in the Time of Christ, p. 381). Although
Jews often fasted from strange motives, as, e.g., ‘to secure pleasant dreams, to
find the explanation of a dream, or to avert some evil omen” (Stapfer, p. 381),
it cannot be supposed that either Cornelius (ver. 30, A.V.), or Peter was
similarly actuated. By them, doubtless, abstinence from food, either wholly
or in part, was regarded as a valuable, if not necessary, preparation for high
spiritual exercises (Psalm xxxv. 13, Ixix. 10; Dan. ix. 3; 1 Cors yin 5
Acts xiv. 23).

II. The occurrences.—1. The trance. “He fell into a trance; or there came
upon him an ecstasy or rapture (= being in the Spirit, Rev. i. 10), by which, as it
were, he was carried out of himself and put into a mental state in which he
could discern objects beyond the apprehension of man’s natural powers (Hackett).
Compare xi. 5, xxii. 17; 2 Cor. xii. 3; perhaps also Numb. xxiv. 4 and Ezek.
viii. 3. 2. The sights. (1) Heaven opened. So it happened to Christ on the
oceasion of His baptism (Luke iii. 21); to the beloved disciple in Patmos
(Rev. iv. 1, xix. 11); and to Stephen in the council chamber (vii. 56). Compare
also in the Old Testament the cases of Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 17), Isaiah (vi. 1),
Ezekiel (i. 1), and Daniel (iv. 13). (2) A great sheet descending out of it, let down
by the four corners upon the earth—i.e., either the sheet, which in form resembled
a vessel or receptacle, was fastened to the four corners east, west, south, and
north of heaven (Meyer), or the ends of the sheet were fastened to and upheld
by ropes let down from heaven (see “ Critical Remarks”). (3) The cavity in the
sheet filled with “all manner of four-footed beasts and creeping things of the
earth and fowls of the heaven.” (4) The sheet swaying and moving towards Peter.
The words “unto him,” though omitted by the best MSS. (see “ Critical
Remarks”), probably express what Peter beheld (compare xi. 5). (5) The drawing
up of the sheet into heaven after a threefold repetition of the scene. (6) Whether
Peter saw any personal form or figure is not stated, but seems almost implied
in what follows. 3. The sounds. (1) Rise, Peter. The apostle may at this
moment have been kneeling in prayer, or most likely prostrate in awe and
wonder before the vision (compare Rev. i. 17). The mysterious voice, recognised
by Peter as that of a heavenly being (compare ver. 4), addressed him by name.
Compare the cases of Moses (Exod. iii. 4); Samuel (1 Sam. iii. 10); Saul (ix. 4);
and Cornelius (x. 3). (2) Kill and eat. Any of the creatures, without regard
to the distinction of clean or unclean, was what the voice intended. That Peter
understood this his answer showed: ‘Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten
anything that is common (unholy) and unclean,” or, according to Peter’s own version,
‘Nothing common or unclean hath ever entered into my mouth” (xi. 8).
Peter’s scrupulous conscientiousness as a Jew caused the commandment to come
upon him with a shock of surprise. In the times of the Maccabees (Mace. vi. 18,
vii. 1) the Jews suffered death rather than submit to the seeming indignity here
proposed. Peter’s refusal accorded with his well-known character for impulsive-
ness (compare John xiii. 8). 3. “‘ What God hath cleansed call, or make, not
thou common.” Like the former voice this came from heaven, and implied that
all meats were originally alike clean, that the distinction of clean and unclean
had been of God’s making, that henceforth God had abolished all such distinctions,
and that the perpetuation or. institution of such distinctions was an express


232


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. ¥.





violation of the Divine ordinance. Compare Christ’s teaching on defilement
(Mark vii. 14-23).

III. The teachings.—These were all such as concerned the Church, and in
particular—l. Jts universal character. It was henceforth to embrace all
nationalities, not Jews only, but also Gentiles. Ceremonial distinctions were no
more to operate as dividing lines between the peoples of the earth. The Church’s
gates were to stand open continually for the admission of all comers. All souls
were in future to be equally precious in God’s sight (Rom. i. 14-16, iii. 22, 29, 30;
Gal. iii. 28; Eph. ii. 14-22). 2. Jts absolute permanence. Not even an apostle
—and far less a Church council, and least of all a private member—should be at
liberty to change its constitution, restrict its freedom, or impose conditions which
would deny entrance therein to a heathen. ‘ What God hath cleansed make
not thou common.” ‘Three times had the Lord formerly commanded Peter to
feed His sheep and lambs: three times He here admonishes Peter to make the
door into the sheepfold no narrower than God will have it” (Besser). The
Church of Christ in all ages has suffered from the illegal intrusion of man’s
power into her sacred domain. 3. Jts sole sovereign. God or His Son Jesus
Christ, to whom alone pertains the right of making laws for His kingdom—of
admitting to or excluding from the fellowship of His Church (Eph. i. 22).

Lessons.—l. The reality of a supersensible world. 2. The possibility of
revelation. 3. The world-wide destiny of the Church. 4. The dignity of human
nature. 5. The headship of Christ within and over His own Church,


‘HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS. '


Ver. 11. Heaven opened.

I. Heaven may open to any man.—
To a Jacob (Gen. xxviii. 12), an
Ezekiel (i. 1), a Stephen (vii. 56), a
Paul (ix. 3), as well as to a Peter—
and in any place, on a hillside, a river
bank, a council chamber, a public high-
way, or a housetop.

II. Heaven mostly opens to them
who have prepared themselves for it
—By prayer, meditation, or other
suitable exercise. God is mostly found
of them who seek Him.

III. Heaven seldom opens without
imparting new revelations—Hither of
truth or duty. God has promised to
instruct and guide those who wait upon
Him in humility and faith.

IV. Heaven never opens to the
spiritually blind.—‘“‘ The natural man
receiveth not the things of the Spirit
of God.” The eye must be opened
before it can discern visions. ‘ He
that is of the truth heareth Him who
is the truth.”

Ver. 15. No Difference.

I. The one broad level of humanity,
in the sight of God, for blessing.—
There are various levels in other re-


spects, various ranks and differences;
national, personal, intellectual, educa-
tional; but here, in connection with
spiritual blessing,—acceptance, favour,
and the like, all these disappear.

II. The rebuke here given to
national pride. —The Jew despised the
Samaritan, and the Samaritan the
Jew, both despising the Gentile.
There was the pride of birth, the pride
of descent, the pride of race. Here
was God’s rebuke to all such pride.

III. The rebuke given to spiritual
pride.—This spiritual reward is two-
fold—the personal and the ecclesi-
astical.

IV. The open door for all.—There
is no restriction now. God’s free love
goes out unconditionally—without re-
striction or qualification—to the lost.—
H. Bonar, D.D.


Ver. 16. The Number Three in the New
Testament.—That some special signifi-
cance, most likely that of solemn em-
phasis, was designed by the threefold
repetition of an event becomes apparent
from a study of the instances in which
this occurs.


233


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





I. In the history of Christ.—1. The
three temptations in the _ wilderness
(Matt. iv. 1-11). 2. The three raisings
of the dead (Matt. ix. 25; Luke
vii. 14-16; John xi. 43, 44). 3. The
three prayers in Gethsemane (Matt.
xxvi. 44).

II. In the history of Peter.—1. The
three denials of Christ (Matt. xxvi.
69-75). 2. The three questions of the
Saviour (John xxi. 15-17). 3. The
three voices in the vision.

IIT. In the history of Paul.—1l. The
three requests about the thorn (2 Cor.
xii. 8). 2. The three scourgings (2 Cor.
xi. 25). 3. The three shipwrecks (2
Cor. xi. 25).


Vers. 9-16. Peter’s Vision on the
Housetop; a Mirror for the Heathen


Mission. To show—
I. Its heavenly origin.—A ppointed
by God.


II. Its immense field.—The whole
world, Jew and Gentile.

III. Its severe work.—To make all
nations obedient to the faith.

IV. Its doubts and difficulties.—
The first from within, in the prejudices,
fears, and unbelief of Christ’s people ;
the second in the hardness and hostility
of the natural heart.

V. Its Divine promise.—Of continual
assistance and ultimate success.—
Adapted from Gerok in Lange.


Lessons from Peter's Vision.—In this
vision we see the beginning of a great
era—the first important breach in
the iron partition wall that divided
the human race into two hostile
ranks. We have here the annexation
of the whole Gentile world, without
shedding a single drop of blood or
wasting a single pennyweight of gun-
powder. Peter saw the vision when
engaged in prayer on the housetop of
Simon the tanner, at Joppa. Prayer
is a great revelation, and the stronger
the prayer the grander the vision. He
who would see the heavens opened
must first open the heavens with the
key of prayer. LEcstasies and visions
are rewards of importunate prayer.


234


Peter prayed from the housetop of a
tanner ; was there anything strange in
that? Undoubtedly. Tanners were
looked down upon as the pariahs, the
outcasts of Jewish society. For Peter,
the orthodox Hebrew, to lodge with a
tanner, an outlaw, was the first step
out of his miserable narrowness; and
we are not surprised to find the tanner’s
lodger entering the Gentile centurion’s
house a little later. How striking
these coincidences of history! There
is as much Divine design in the move-
ments of the centuries as in the forma-
tion of the rocks or the clustering of
the stars. Cornelius prayed in Cesarea,
and Peter prayed in Joppa. How ex-
quisite these dovetails, these morticings
of history, and how marvellously well
timed the correspondence! Surely the
world is not governed by a fortuitous
concourse of blind atoms, but by in-
telligence and unity of design. The
first lesson of this vision of the great
sheet is :-—

I. The Divine origin of the Christian
gospel._Peter ‘saw heaven opened,
and a certain vessel descending unto
him, as it had been a great sheet knit
at the four corners, and let down ta
the earth.” The gospel did not spring
up from the ground; it came down
from the upper skies, and it bears in-
numerable evidences of its Divine
origin. If God be not its parent, who
is? The angels could not have invented
it, for in inventing a false system and
labelling it with the Divine name they
would have become demons instantly.
Demons could not have invented this
system, whose main purpose is to
destroy the works of the devil. The
science of comparative religion proves
that Christianity is as much loftier
than all other systems as the heavens
are loftier than the earth. A religion
well adapted for the whole race must
have the following elements: 1. An
adequate revelation of God. 2. A pro-
vision of mercy for the guilty which
satisfies the conscience, 3. Power given
to lead a new life of virtue and _holi-
ness. 4. An ideal pattern of life which
men may imitate. 5. A refuge for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP. X.





man in sorrow and bereavement. 6.
Such a revelation of the future life
as shall help man to prepare for his
duties and destinies. All these im-
portant elements. are in the Christian
gospel, and are not in any other system
under heaven. Does not this one
fact establish its unquestionable pre-
eminence ?

II. The Divine origin of the human
race.—The sheet, with its miscellaneous
contents, came down from the heavens,
and this suggests the Divine origin of
all men. The contents of the sheet, as
well as the sheet itself, came down
from above. The gospel that gave the
world a new conception of God has
also given it a better conception of
man. It teaches us to say “Our
Father,” that we may the better be
able to say “My brother.” In this
respect for man as man the gospel
stands alone among the great religious
systems of the world. Look at man
through the eyes of Jesus, and if the
man be only a London dock labourer
or a Dorset farm labourer, you will be
able to see something of the Divine in
him. Positivism boasts of its love for
the race, and talks of ‘the parliament
of man, the federation of the world.”
Where has Positivism found its funda-


mental doctrines? I charge it with
being a plagiarist. The doctrines of
the brotherhood of man and the one-
ness of the race are stolen from Christ.

III. The universality of the gospe.
—Man is the heaven-sent ambassador
to man. Cornelius sent for Peter.
Why not send an angel to preach to
him? The angel would have been
the very first to object. Indeed, it was
the angel who suggested Peter’s name.
Methinks the angels know a great deal
about us. The angels seek for a man
to preach tomen. A preacher is never
so effective as when he speaks to us in
the first person. Cornelius must have


a man named Peter to preach the


sermon. Why not send troops of
angels into the heart of Africa, or to
the isles of Polynesia to evangelise
those blacks? ‘Thank God He has
dignified man by making of him a
minister to men. He sent a Divine
Man to reveal the gospel, and he com-
missions man to preach it. When
Cornelius fell down at Peter’s feet and
worshipped him, the apostle instantly
cried out, “Stand up; I myself also
am a man.” Man must neither be
worshipped on the one hand nor
maligned on the other.—J. Ossian
Davies.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17—23.


Cornelius’s Messengers at Joppa ; or, the Gentile knocking for Admission.

I. The arrival of the messengers at Joppa.—l. The time of their arrival.
“While Peter doubted in himself what the vision he had seen should mean.” A
reminder that inspired men often saw and heard, thought and spoke, more than
they could immediately understand. As Joppa was thirty Roman, or twenty-
seven and a half English miles, from Czsarea, Cornelius’s servants would not
require to leave their master’s house till the morning after the vision (ver. 9) in
order to reach Simon’s dwelling about, or shortly after, noon; although it is
quite probable that they started the night before the day of their arrival.
2. Their conduct on arrival. Like good servants, they carried out their master’s
instructions with exactness. Having inquired for Simon’s house and been
directed thither, they stood before the gate, which opened directly into the house
or court, where, having called on some one to come out, they respectfully asked
if Simon, surnamed Peter, lodged within. How many blunders might le
avoided were all messengers equally faithful and minute !

II. The direction of Peter by the Spirit.—1. The announcement. ‘“ Behold
(three), men seek thee!” The numeral, omitted by the best codices, was
probably inserted from ver. 7 or xi. 11. If, however, it formed part of the
communication inwardly whispered to Peter, it sufficiently proved that eommuni-


235


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








cation to be supernatural. The notion that Peter came to know about the ~
presence of the men by hearing their footsteps and voices in the court below
(Neander) is contemptuously rejected by critics of the Baur and Zeller school.
2. The commandment. “ Arise and get thee down, and go with them nothing
doubting ”—i.e., making no scruples on the ground that they are heathen. This
again confirms the supernatural character of the prompting of which Peter was
conscious, since, though from the housetop, he might have heard the men calling
tor him, it is little likely he could either have known them to be three, or guessed
what they wanted. 3. Zhe incitement. ‘For I have sent them.” Peter having
recognised the voice that spake within him to be Christ’s or the Spirit’s, and
naving learnt that Christ had sent the messengers, immediately proceeded to
grant them an interview. i

III. The conversation of Peter with the messengers.—1. Peter’s introduction
of himself and inquiry at the messengers. ‘Behold, I am he whom ye seek”
(compare John xviii. 4-8)—an example of frank courtesy ; “ What is the cause
wherefore ye are come ?”—a pattern of direct speech (Matt. v. 37). 2. The reply
of the messengers concerning their master. Announcing (1) his name—Cornelius ;
(2) his rank—a centurion; (3) his character—a righteous man, a person of
rectitude (d/karos), one that feareth God (doBovpevos tov Oedv), and of good
report, or well reported of by all the nation of the Jews (compare on vers. 1, 2),
like Ananias (xxii. 12) and Demetrius (3 John 12). That man must be good
who is well reported of by his own domestics or servants. (4) His vision—
“warned of God,” or divinely instructed (compare Matt. ii, 12), “by a holy
angel”—+.e., through his agency (Peter was instructed by the Spirit), “to send
for thee into his house, and to hear words from thee.” With this the last vestige
of doubt disappeared from Peter’s mind. “ He called them in and lodged them,”
as Laban did the messengers of Abraham (Gen. xxiv. 31).

IV. The journey of Peter to Cesarea.—tl. After providing the messengers with
hospitable entertainment. ‘‘ He called them in and lodged them” over night.
Hospitality to strangers a duty practised in Old Testament times (Gen. xviii. 3,
xix, 1, xxiv. 31; Exod. ii. 20), and enjoined upon Christians (Rom. xii. 13;
1 Tim. iti. 2, v. 10; Heb. xiii. 2). 2. With cheerful alacrity. ‘On the morrow
he arose and went with them,” in obedience to God’s command, and in ac-
cordance with their invitation. 3. Accompanied by certain brethren from Joppa.
Six in number (xi. 12), they may have escorted the Apostle as his personal
friends, or out of a natural desire to see the issue of so remarkable an
occurrence.

Learn.—l. The duty of looking for and following the Spirit’s guidance.
2. The beauty of Christian courtesy. 3. The excellence of household piety.
4, The value of fidelity in service.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. The Embassy from Cesarea
to Joppa.— testimony to—

I. The poverty of heathenism, which
has nothing that can satisfy the soul.

II. The power of the gospel, which
can draw towards itself men of all
ranks and characters.

III. The love of God, who will have
all men to be saved.


Vers. 19, 20. The Offices of the Spirit
towards Christ’s Servants.


236


I. To inform their minds.—* Behold
three men seek thee!”

II. To direct their steps.— Arise
and go with them !”

III. To find them work.—‘“I have
sent them !”


Ver. 22. Cornelius’s Certificates of
Character were three.

I. That of the angel, which was
practically that of God (ver. 4).—Com-
pare the cases of Daniel (x. 11) and


oy HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Nathanael (John i. 47). Who would
not wish to be possessed of such a
testimonial to the genuineness of one’s
piety? The nearest approach to this
is the witness of the Spirit through the
word (Rom. viii. 16).

lI. That of his messengers, who
were members of his own household
(ver. 7). He whose piety can stand
the inspection of those whose eyes are
constantly upon him is beyond all
question a sincere disciple. Many
who are supposed to be saints abroad


CHAP. X.


———


are known to be the opposiss at
home.

III. That of the nation of the Jews,
who might almost be considered his
enemies. When a man’s foes are com-
pelled to acknowledge his goodness. he
must have reached a high point of
excellence. Compare the case of the
centurion of Capernaum (Luke vii. 4)
Even the testimony of one’s neighbours
is no small guarantee of substaztal
worth. Compare the cases of Timothy
(xvi. 2) and of Demetrius (3 John 12).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 24—33,


Peter’s Arrival at Cesarea ; ov, the Gentile Candidate's Examination.

I. Peter’s reception by Cornelius.—l. With eager expectancy. Having enter-
tained no doubt as to the success of his embassy—a remarkable instance of faith
—Cornelius had collected his kinsmen and near friends to await the apostle’s
arrival. Yet so impatient did he feel to look upon the messenger of heaven that
he hastened out to meet Peter at the door, as Laban did with Eliezer (Gen.
xxiv. 31). 2. With demonstrations of religious homage. How much Cornelius
designed to express by prostrating himself, Oriental fashion, at Peter’s feet
(compare 1 Sam. xxv. 24; 2 Kings iv. 37; Esther viii 3; Mark y. 22;
Matt. xxviii. 9) cannot be ascertained. Luke does not say that Cornelius
worshipped Peter. Yet Peter obviously regarded this action as at least
approaching such reverence as was due to God alone, and rejected it accordingly
(ver. 26), as Paul afterwards refused similar worship from the Lystrans (xiv. 15),
and as the angel put away from him that of John (Rev. xix. 10). Of course
Peter may have attributed more to Cornelius’s action than it was meant to
convey, and some (Hackett, Stier) prefer to hold this rather than believe that
Cornelius, a worshipper of Jehovah, should have been guilty of rendering Divine
homage toa man. ‘That he was still under the dominion of his old superstitious
ideas about heroes who had been deified, and saw in Peter a superhuman being
(Zéckler), is scarcely credible after the plain intimation by the angel that Peter
was @ man.

TI. Peter’s explanation to Cornelius.—Addressed to the assembled company,
but intended principally for the centurion. 1. The old principle—that inter-
course with Gentiles was regarded by the Jew as unlawful (ver. 28)—was of long
standing and widely known. Though professedly grounded on Mosaic law, it
had no such foundation in fact. The practice rested on traditional Pharisaism,
according to which a Jew must have no relations with a foreigner, and must not
enter his house (John xviii. 28). ‘ He was not allowed to sit down at the table
of a Gentile; the very sight of the Gentile world was repulsive to a Jew”
(Stapfer, Palestine in the Time of Christ, p. 128). Compare Josephus (contra
Apion, ii, 28). “ Those foreigners who come to us without submitting to our laws
Moses permitted not to have any intimate connections with us.” Juvenal
(Satires, xiv. 103) says of the Jews it was their custom, non monstrare vias
eadem nisi sacra colenti, not to show the way except to those observing the same
sacred rites; while Tacitus (Hist., v. 8) affirms that they cherished against all a
hostile hatred, and kept themselves apart in their feasts and couches: adversus
omnes hostile odium, separati epulis discreti cubilibus. 2. The new light—that 16
man should be called common or unclean—was to a Jew a marvellous discovery,


237


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








which probably nothing but a Divine revelation would have enabled him to
accept. Hence Peter distinctly traced his acquaintance with it to God’s showing,
though he did not at the time mention the way in which such showing had taken
place. 3. The explicit declaration that he had come to Casarea immediately on
being sent for, ‘‘ without gainsaying,” not because he had forgotten or resolved
to ignore, or through his own charity or wisdom had overstepped the bounds of
traditional exclusiveness, but solely in consequence of that new light which had
been imparted to him—in other words, that his appearance before Cornelius was
at once an expression of his faith in God and of his obedience to the heavenly
vision (compare xxvi. 19). 4, The direct question—for what intent had he been
sent for? Peter knew he had been sent for in accordance with instructions given
by Jehovah to Cornelius (vers. 20, 22); but as yet Cornelius had offered no
explanation of his mission.

III. Peter’s answer from Cornelius.—In this Cornelius rehearsed the story of
how he had been led to send for Peter, mentioning—1l. The time when his vision .
had appeared to him. “Fonr days ago,” about ‘this hour,” which was probably
about the ninth (ver. 3). The fasting had continued till noon, when during his
subsequent devotions the vision burst upon his view, “as it were about the ninth
hour.” (See “ Critical Remarks.”) 2. The condition of his body and mind when the
vision came. “ Fasting” and “ praying.” Even should “fasting” be omitted
from the text (see “Critical Remarks”), it was probably included in Cornelius’s
devotions. Fasting and prayer go well together, bodily abstinence being a
suitable preparation for high spiritual exercises (compare ver. 9). Fasting was
frequently conjoined with praying by the apostolic Church on occasions of
special solemnity and high responsibility (xiii. 2, 3, xiv. 23). 3. The form which
appeared in his vision. A man, standing before him in bright apparel. A
description shown by its liveliness and minuteness to be that of an eyewitness.
Compare with this Luke’s account (ver. 3), which omits the “ Behold !” and says
nothing about the angel “standing before” Cornelius. 4. The address which the
man in bright apparel made to him. (1) Calling him by name, Cornelius ! the
heavenly visitor ; (2) assured him that his prayer had been heard and his alms
remembered (sce on ver. 4); and (3) directed him to send to Joppa for Simon
Peter; at the same time (4) mentioning the house in which Peter lodged (see on
vers. 5, 6). 5. The action which he (Cornelius) had then taken. He had sent for
the apostle forthwith, as the business to be done was too important for delay
(Eccles. ix. 10). 6. The gratification with which he welcomed the apostle’s arrival.
“Thou hast well done that thou art come” (compare 3 John 6). Peter's
arrival gave an indirect guarantee that he should learn more about the mind of
God with reference to his salvation (ver. 32, xi. 14). 7. The readiness of himself
and all present to hear what he (Peter) had to impart. “Now then we are all
here present,” etc. (ver. 33.)

Learn.—That God’s messengers—1. Should be prepared for by private and
(where practicable) social prayer. 2. Should never intercept for themselves any
of the glory that belongs to God. 3. May sometimes learn profitable teaching
from those to whom they are sent. 4. Should always be respectfully heard by
those to whom they are sent.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 25. Mistaken Worship. the sender. 2. With wrong feelings.
I. Is that which is offered—1. 7o Of humility and reverence, which
the wrong object. The creature instead would have been proper and in place
of the creator, the servant rather than had they been directed to the right
the master, the messenger in place of object, but, being directed to the wrong


236


object, were improper and out of place.
3. In ignorance, though pardonable.
Cornelius having been as yet only im-
perfectly enlightened, may not have
understood that religious-homage be-
longed to God alone.

II. Should be rejected.—1. Promptly.
Peter trifled not a moment with what
he saw, but declined the proferred
worship. Had he hesitated, or for an
instant seemed to appropriate to him-
self what belonged to God, he would
have heen guilty of lése-majesté
against the God of heaven whose
creature, servant, and messenger he was.
2. Kindly. With no rebuke upon his
lips he simply bids the prostrate wor-
shipper arise, at the same time assist-
ing him to regain an upright position.
3. Reasonably. Peter explained what
was wrong in Cornelius’s action and
what was right in his own by adding,
“T myself also am a man!”


Ver. 26. “JZ myself also am a
man.”

I. A man and therefore a creature.
—Hence not a proper object to re-
ceive religious homage, which belongs
to God alone (Exod. xx. 3; Isa. xlii. 8 ;
Rom. i. 25).

II. A man and therefore a sinner.
—Hence as much needing forgiveness
and salvation as the most benighted
and degraded of Adam’s race (Rom. iii.
225% Ve),

III. A man and therefore a brother.
—Hence such distinctions as divide me
from my fellows, putting me above
them or them above me in an essen-
tially superior class, are against nature
as well as grace (Prov. xxii. 2; Mal.
ii. 10; Acts xvii. 26, 29).

TV. Aman and therefore a son of
God.—Having been made in God’s
image (Gen. i. 27; Acts xvii. 28).
Hence in all I do I should remember
my exalted origin (Col. i. 10), and do
nothing to disgrace my rank.

Vv. Aman and therefore a possible
heir of glory.— Having been redeemed
by Jesus Christ. Hence in all things
I should comport myself as one with a
high destiny (Eph. iv. 1),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. X.


Ver. 29. A Minister and his Congre-
gation. (Suitable for entering on a
charge.

I. No minister should undertake the
care of a congregation without being
called.—l. Invited by the people.
Peter came not before he had been sent
for. It is against all Scripture that
preachers should thrust themselves
upon unwilling people. Under such
conditions the most talented ministry
can only prove a failure. 2. Sent by
God. It is doubtful if Cornelius’s
invitation would have sufficed to carry
Peter to Caesarea had he not already
been directed by the Spirit to accom-


_pany the messengers (ver. 20). So


the true minister will always be care-
ful not to run without being sent, will
strive to ascertain whether the out-
ward call of the people concurs with
the inward prompting of the Spirit.
II. To such a combined call every
minister should respond.—l. Jmme-
diately. As Peter did, without un-
necessary delay, considering that the
king’s business requires haste, and
that especially in matters of the
soul delays are dangerous. The cry
“Come over and help us” (xvi. 9)


‘should always be regarded as urgent.


2. Cheerfully. Again like Peter, with-
out offering any objections or express-
ing any reluctance, or putting any
obstacles in the way. The minister
who enters on his sacred calling with a
grudge or without enthusiasm cannot


possibly succeed, and had better
change his mind or abandon his
calling.


III. The true business of a minister
is not to push his own but his people's
interests.—It goes without saying that
these interests must be spiritual.
Otherwise the congregation is not a
Church of Christ. Hence, every
minister should have it clearly under-
stood that those are the interests at
which he is to aim—the advancement,
not of his hearers’ intellectual culture,
or of their social status, or of their
material enrichment, or of their
amusement, but of their spiritual and
religious welfare.


239


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





IV. When minister and congre-
gation conjointly recognise and work
for this the true ideal of a Christian
pastorate is reached.—But the two
must be of one mind. A spiritually
minded pastor and an unspiritual con-
gregation, or vice versd, cannot long
remain together. One or other must
attain superiority. If victory inclines
to the spiritual element then prosperity
of the highest kind ensues; if to the
unspiritual, then decay of the worst
sort follows.


Ver. 33. A Fortunate Journey.
“Thou hast well done that thou art
come.” That Peter undertook that
journey to Cesarea was— -

I. Well for Peter.—1. Jt proved the
reality of his own faith, which would
certainly have been open to suspicion
had he not gone to Cxsarea as directed.
2. It brought him into contact with a
pious Gentile, of the existence of which
he might otherwise have remained in
doubt. 3. It helped him to understand
the significance of the vision he had re-
ceived, which, though explained by the
heavenly voice (ver 15), was not all at
once apprehended by the Apostle (ver.
17), and was none the worse of the
commentary furnished by his inter-
view with Cornelius. 4. It secured for
him a special mark of honour in being
permitted to open the door to the
Gentiles, which, but for this journey,
he might have missed.

II. Well for Cornelius.—1. It assured
him of the truth of his own vision, of
which he might in course of time have
become sceptical had Peter not ap-
peared upon the scene. 2. It afforded
him an opportunity of hearing the gospel
preached by an apostle, though probably
before this he had listened to it from
the lips of Philip (viii. 40). 3. It led
to the salvation of himself and his house,
seeing that they all believed and were
endowed with the Holy Ghost (ver. 47).
4. It ended in their formal reception into
the Church, through their being baptised
in the name of Jesus Christ (ver. 48).

III. Well for the Church.—Which
was thereby—l. Prevented from sink-


240


ing back into a narrow-minded and
exclusive Jewish sect, whereas it was
intended to be a large and liberal-
hearted community, knowing no dis-
tinctions of age, sex, culture, or nation-
ality, but embracing mankind in all.
ages and countries, ranks and con-
ditions of society. 2. Enabled to over-
come a danger which threatened the
realisation of this idea, aS was soon
shown by the part played by tte
Cornelius incident in the apostolic
council (xv. 7-11). Had Peter not
been able to speak as he did in that
assembly, the issue of the conference
might have been different. 3. En-
lightened as to its true character as a
world-embracing institution, and so in
a manner fitted for the more success-
ful prosecution of its work.

TV. Well for the world—Which
1. Would hardly have been atiracted—
at least in great numbers—to Chris-
tianity, had it been presented to them
as a Jewish sect. And 2. Would have
missed the hopes and consolations which
the gospel brings. The world has much
reason to thank God for Peter’s journey
to Cesarea.


The Picture of a Model (Christian)
Congregation.

I. All present.—None absent from
the stated place of assembly.

II. All reverent.—Realising they
stand in God’s sight—which they do in
a special manner when they enter God’s
house.

III. All attentive.—Ready to hear
what may be said by the preacher,
who, if a true minister, is God’s servant
and Christ’s ambassador.

IV. All obedient.—Prepared sub-
missively to accept whatever God
might command through His servant.

V. All believing.— None professing
obedience merely in word or form, but
all obeying in reality, receiving the
truth into honest hearts and minds.

VI. All saved.—A1l baptised with the
Holy Ghost, all sealed with the Spirit.


Vers. 24-33. Cornelius and Peter.
Cornelius appears here in various
aspects,


s HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. OMAP. &.


——— EEE


I. Waiting for Peter, as God’s am- III. Talking to Peter, explaining his


bassador. desires.
II. Reverencing Peter, as God’s IV. Listening to Peter, as God's
representative. mouthpiece.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 34—48,


Peter’s Sermon in Cornelius’s House ; or, The Gospel preached to the Gentiles.

I. The audience.—Cornelius and those assembled with him (vers.: 27, 33).
1. Devout. Cornelius was so, and so most likely were his kinsmen and his friends
around him (ver. 2). 2. Intelligent. Already they possessed some acquaintance
with the main facts of gospel history (ver. 37). 3. Serious. A solemn sense of
the Divine presence rested on their spirits (ver. 33). 4. Humble. Prepared for
the reception of the message, they were ready to accord it obedience. A good
model for every congregation when it comes together to listen to the preaching
of the Word. (See “ Hints on ver. 33.”)

II. The preacher.—Peter. Having already been honoured to preach the
gospel to his kinsmen according to the flesh, homeborn and foreign Jews (ii. 14),
he now enjoyed the privilege of publishing the truth in the hearing of a company
of Gentiles. This he did—l. With much solemnity, as if realising the importance
of the occasion—an idea conveyed in the words “Then Peter opened his mouth ”
(compare viii. 35). 2. With peculiar tact. Not reminding them of their heathen
origin, or saying aught to impress them with a sense of their inferiority, but
crediting them with deep religiousness and even Christian intelligence (compare
Paul’s treatment of the Athenians: xvii. 22). 3. With great fulness, setting
forth in an address, of which, doubtless, only an outline has been preserved, the
main facts and doctrines of gospel history and teaching (vers. 36-43). 4. With
spiritual power. Which may be inferred from the fact that all who heard the
Word believed and were baptised (ver. 44).

III. The sermon.—1. Jts exordiwm. A statement which showed the preacher
to be no narrow-minded bigot, but possessed of a mind open to receive “light from
heaven ” whensoever it was graciously vouchsafed ; as well as tended to disarm
the prejudice of his hearers and ingratiate himself with them. In this respect the
fisherman apostle might be profitably followed by preachers of to-day. The truths
contained in the statement were two: (1) That God was no respecter of persons.
A truth known to holy men of God before Peter’s day (2 Sam. xiv. 14; 2 Chron.
xix. 7; Job xxxvii. 24), but not understood by Peter till revealed by God through
the vision lately given (ver. 28), which reminds us that many truths which have
been revealed are not yet fully understood. A truth afterwards insisted on by
the apostle (1 Peter i. 17), and by Paul (Rom. ii. 11; Eph. vi. 9; Col. iii. 25),
and signifying that God in dealing with men, whether in providence or in grace,
in judgment or in mercy, takes no account of such accidents as nationality,
birth, rank, wealth, power, or other temporal or material circumstance, but has
regard solely to manhood and character. (2) That in every nation piety and
goodness were equally acceptable in His sight. What Peter meant by piety and
what by goodness he explained. The root of all piety he discovered in the fear
of God (Psalm cxi. 10), and the essence of all goodness in working righteousness
(1 John iii. 7). Wherever these existed, the individual possessing them, though
not justified on their account (ver. 43; Rom. iii. 20), was acceptable in God’s
sight as one to whom belonged the qualification necessary for admission into the
Church of Christ (see ‘‘ Hints on ver. 35”). 2. [ts contents. A brief summary of
the facts and doctrines of the gospel, embracing—(1) The earthly ministry of
Jesus, which began in its complete independence and unrestrained activity after
John’s ministry had closed; which had been divinely raised up and directed to


R 241


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





the children of Israel, of which the burden had been peace (Eph. ii. 17), and
which, commencing in Galilee, had been published throughout all J udea ; for which
Jesus had been anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power (Luke iv. 18), and
which had been exercised in going about and, through the power of God who
was with Him, doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil (Matt.
iv. 23; Luke iv. 36); the character of which had been witnessed by Peter and
his colleagues in the apostleship, and the end of which had been a violent death
and hanging on a tree (vers. 36-39). (2) The resurrection of Jesus, which was
effected by the power of God on the third day after His crucifixion, and attested
by His being openly shown or made manifest, not to all the people, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God—viz., to the apostles and others of the brethren,
“who did eat and drink with Him after He rose from the dead” (vers. 40, 41).
(3) The second coming of Jesus to judge the quick and dead (Rom. xiv. 9;
2 Cor. v. 10), to which office He had been ordained of God (xvii. 31; John v. 22),
and about which He had Himself commanded them, the apostles, to testify unto
the people, the Jews (ver. 42). That the summary of Christian truth here put
into Peter’s mouth was not a second century embellishment has received most
remarkable confirmation, not only from Pliny’s letter (a.p. 112), but also from
the recently discovered apology of Aristides (A.p. 125), both of which show that
Christian Churches so widely apart as Bithynia and Athens accepted the very
tenets here set forth. 3. /ts application. Contained in the statement that,
according to the unanimous testimony of Old Testament prophecy, through His
name whosoever believed should receive remission of sins (Isa. Jiii. 11; Zech.
vathiea! Ne

IV. The Result.—1. All those who heard the word helieved. Though not stated,
implied. Cornelius and his companions, without exception, received the word
into honest and good hearts (Luke viii. 15). It is certainly a great sermon
—great in the best sense—which converts all who hear it. 2. The Holy Ghost
fell on all them who believed. Upon all Cornelius’s household. The supernatural
endowment, which descended on them while the apostle was yet speaking,
revealed itself in the usual way, exactly as it had done at Pentecost, through
speaking with tongues (ver. 46). 3. Those who received the Holy Ghost were
baptised. Those believers of the circumcision who had come with Peter were
profoundly astonished to hear Gentiles speaking with tongues; but they
could not resist the apostle’s argument when he asked, “Can any man forbid
water?” etc.

Learn.—1l. The heaven-sent preacher should always speak his Master’s
message with boldness. 2. The best sermon is that which has most of Christ
in it. 3, The Holy Ghost knows no distinction between Jew and Gentile.
4. Those who have received the essence should not be denied the sign of
salvation.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 34. God no Respecter of Persons.

I. Expose some false constructions
of the text.—1. It is not true that God
does not love one man more than an-
other. He loves with a special affection
all who believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Cain and Abel. 2. It is not
true that God does not bestow on one
man what He withholds from another.
Natural gifts, social advantages, re-


242


ligious privileges, spiritual _ blessings.
3. It is not true that God does not
admit one man to heaven while He
excludes another. Some are cast out.

II. Explain the real meaning of our
text.—l. God does not respect persons
on the grounds on which men are
treated with partiality by their fellow-
men—wealth, birth, genius. His pre-
ferences are determined by other


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. X.





considerations, although these cannot
always be ascertained. 2. God does
not respect persons as He Himself did
under the former dispensation. The
Jew has no monopoly of the blessings
of the gospel. As Christ died for all
men without distinction, so salvation
through Him is to be offered to all,
and shall be bestowed on all who
believe in Him. (1) Rejoice in the
impartiality of God. (2) Avail your-
selves of the impartiality of God by
embracing the common salvation. (3)
Imitate the impartiality of God.—
G. Brooks.


Vers. 34, 35. God no Respecter of
Persons.

I. What the proposition does not
mean.—1. That God is indifferent to
diversities in human character. 2.
That all religions are equally accept-
able in God’s sight. 3. That belief in
Christ is not required for salvation.
4. That all men will eventually be
saved.

Ii. What the proposition does mean.
—l. That the essence of religion
consists in fearing God and working


righteousness. 2. That God is in-
different to external distinctions
between man and man. 3. That all


who possess the inward characteristics
of religion are equally well pleasing
in God’s sight. 4. That all men who
are thus religious belong to His Church,
irrespective of nationality or other
accidental circumstance.


On the Reception of New Truth.—
Here is Peter, with the traditional
spirit of an Oriental, violating the
apparently natural order, and passing
at once under a new set of ideas.
What is the explanation ?

I. It seems to be in the Nature of
religious changes that they shall take
place suddenly.—There may be, there
must be, long seasons of preparation
for any moral change, but the transi-
tion is instantaneous. It is the law
of revelation.

II. His change was due to the fact
that he had got sight of larger and


more spiritual truths than he had


‘been holding.—Peter had been used


to believing that God was a respecter
of persons, but when he caught sight
of the fact that God has no partialities,
but accepts all men who work righteous-
ness, his truth-loving nature rushed at
once toward the greater truth.—
Theodore Munger.


Ver. 36. The
Christ.

I. Its basis.—His redeeming work.

II. Its extent.— All things and
persons.

III. Its purpose. — Salvation or
eace.

IV. Its perpetuity.—Till the time
of the end.

V. Its authority—Derived from
the Father.


Lordship of Jesus


Preaching Peace; or, Publishing
Good Tidings of Peace.

I. The Messenger of peace.—Jesus
Christ.

II. The basis of peace.—His atoning
work.

III. The terms of peace.—Faith.

IV. The blessing of peace.—Remis-
sion of sin.

V. The fruit of peace.— Holiness,


Peace to the Far Off and the Near.

I. What it is.—It means sometimes
friendship or reconciliation ; and some-
times the state of soul resulting from
these. O man of earth, is this peace
yours ?

II. What it is not.—It is not mere
indifference. The frozen lake is calm ;
but that is not the calm we desire. It
is not the security of self-righteousness.
That a hollow security. It is not the
peace of prosperity, or pleasure, or
earthly ease. There is the world’s
peace.

III. Where it comes from.—It does
not come from self, or sin, or the flesh
or the world. Nor does it come from
the law, or our own goodness, or. our
prayers or religiousness. It comes
directly and solely from Jesus Christ ;
from Himself, and from His cross;


243


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





from Him as Jesus, from Him as the
Christ.

IV. How we get it.—Our text says
it is “preached” to us; or more ex-
actly, “the good news of it are brought
to us.” The pacifying, conscience-
purging work is done; and God has
sent us His account of it.


V. What it does for us—l. It


No peace, no purity. 2. It
liberates. ‘The possession of this peace
is the liberty of the soul. Without
peace we are in bondage and darkness.
3. It satisfies; it fills the soul ; it takes
away weariness and emptiness. 4. It
animates. ‘Till peace takes possession
of us we are sluggish in the cause of


purifies.


Gud. Peace makes us zealous, brave, -


self-denied; willing to spend and: be
spent, to do and suffer.—H. Bonar, D.D.


Ver. 38. “Who went about doing
good.”

I. A significant testimony.—Spoken
by an eyewitness, authenticating the
gospel records of the life of Christ.

II. A deserved eulogy.—History
has preserved the names of individual
princes, to whom she gives the title of
benefactors : thus are held in memory
a Ptolemeus Euérgetes, a Titus, ‘‘ the
joy and delight of all mankind”; but
of what “benefactors” (Luke xxii. 25),
' must not the name and reputation dim
and pale before that of the Sovereign
of God’s kingdom ?

III. A loud call.—To unswerving
faith in Christ as the promised
Saviour, the crown and ornament of
humanity, God’s highest revelation.

IV. A constant spur.—To a love
which yields itself without condition
to such a loving Saviour, and hence-
forth knows no greater joy than,
though at a distance infinite, to foliow
in his footsteps.—Oosterzee.


“ God was with Him.”
I. Providentially.—As with all.
II. Spiritually.—As with those who
fear Him.
Ill. Efficiently.—As with prophets
and apostles working through Him.
IV. Essentially.—As with none else,


244


being one with Him in substance and
in power, holiness, goodness, and truth.


The History of Jesus of Nazareth.
I. His Divine mission.—Sent by
God.

II. His personal qualification.—
1. Anointed with the Holy Ghost.
2. Clothed with supernatural power.
3. Attended by the Divine presence.

III. His philanthropic career.—
1. Its benevolent character. Doing
good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the devil. 2. Its extensive
circuit. He went about; not restricting
Himself to one town or province.
3. Its unwearied continuance. He
went about manifestly without cessa-
tion.

IV. His tragic end.— Whom they
slew and hanged on a tree.” A violent,
undeserved, substitutionary death.

V. His triumphant resurrection.—
“ Him God raised up.” The proofs of
His resurrection : eating and drinking
with the apostles.

VI. His sublime exaltation.—“ Or-
dained to be Judge of quick and dead.”

VII. His culminating glory.—
“Through His name whosever believeth
in Him shall receive remission of
sins.”


Ver. 39. The Death of Christ.—A
study in apologetics.

I. Its early occurrence.—After a
brief ministry of three (or two) and a
half years. Out of a life so short,
followed by a death so soon, what great
results could be expected to flow? Yet
no life or death has moved the world
like that of Christ.

II. Its shameful form.—Slain and
hanged upon a tree, like the vilest of
malefactors. Out of an end so igno-
minious, what hope of posthumous
fame could spring? Yet  Christ’s
death has attracted more attention and
been more widely and permanently
remembered than any other that has
occurred,

III. Its undeserved character.—
For no crime or sin of His own, proved
or unproved, but for a life spent in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, X.





holy fellowship with God, and in
benevolent ministries among men. In
this respect standing apart from that
of any son of man who has ever died
either before or since. Impossible that
in such a death no greater significance
could be than in that of ordinary
mortals. ’

IV. Its age-long remembrance.—
When Peter spoke of it to Cornelius
it was little more than ten years old.
The world had scarcely had time to
forget it. But nineteen centuries have
rolled away since then, and its memory
is still green. In all countries men
are thinking and speaking of the
decease which was accomplished at
Jerusalem. The question therefore
rises, what was there about this death
of Jesus of Nazareth that makes the
world unable or unwilling to forget
it?

V. Its extraordinary influence.—
Christ Himself predicted that if He
were lifted up from the earth He
would draw all men unto Him
(John xii. 32), and let it be accounted
for as one will, the fact is true that the
death of Christ has ever since it
occurred been one of the most potent
—conjoined with the resurrection, the
most potent—factor in the onward
development of human history.

VI. Its amazing significance.—In
this alone lies the explanation that
a death so early, so shameful, so
undeserved, so long remembered, so
profoundly influential, could have taken
place, that it was the death: 1. Of
an Incarnate God. 2. In the room of
sinful men. 3. As an atonement for
their sin. 4. As a means of effecting
their sanctification ; and 5. In order to
secure for them eternal life. It is
these considerations which give to
Christ’s death its unique position and
power.


Ver. 41. Hating and Drinking with
the Risen Christ.

I. A proof of Christ’s resurrection.

II. An evidence of believers’ salva-
tion.

III. A foretaste of the saints’ glory.


Vers. 36, 43. The Threefold Office of
Christ.
I. Prophetical.— Preaching peace.
II. Priestly.—Remitting sin.
III. Kingly.—Ruling all.


Ver. 43. His (i.e, Christ's) Name.

I. Divinely attested.—“ To Him give
all the prophets witness.”

II. Widely published.— He com-
manded us to preach unto the people
and to testify.”

III. Highly exalted.—Raised up
and established above every name.

IV. Certainly saving. — Procuring
forgiveness for all who believe.

V. Constantly enduring.—Since the
gospel was designed not for one age but
for all the ages.


Ver. 43. The Great Blessing of the
Gospel.

I. Its nature.— Remission of sins,

II. Its channel.—Through Jesus
Christ.

III. Its recipients.—All who believe
in Him.

IV. Its condition.—Faith in Him.

V. Its certainty.— Witnessed by the
prophets.


Ver. 45. The Gift of the Holy Ghost.

I. Its nature.—The inhabitation of
the soul by the Spirit of God.

II. Its effect.—In some, divers
gifts ; in all, holiness and eternal life.

Ill. Its recipients. — Those who
believe and obey the word.

IV. Its sign.—Baptism.


Vers. 44-48. The Conversion of Cor-
nelius.

J. Prepared for by his religious
condition. —1. His character before
conversion. (1) A devout man, who
(2) feared God, (3) cared for the godly
training of his house, (4) practised
philanthropy, and (5) prayed to God
always. 2. His need notwithstanding
of conversion. This may seem to be
contradicted by Peter’s statement in
ver. 34. Explain (1) what ver. 34
does not and (2) what it does mean
(see “ Hints”).

II, Brought about by a threefold

245


NHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





instrumentality.—1. By the providence
of God. Who had (1) brought Cornelius
into contact with the Jewish people
and their worship ; (2) awakened in his
heart dissatisfaction with the gods of
Rome and eager longing for a purer
religion ; (3) led him to Caesarea where
he heard the gospel ; and (4) sent Peter
to Joppa, where he was easily found
by Cornelius. 2. By the ministry of
angels. In his own and Peter’s visions.
3. By the preaching of the word.

III. Sealed by the gift of the Holy
Ghost.—1. The signs. Tongues. 2. The
significance. An earnest of the inherit-
ance.

IV. Attested by baptism. — The
ordinance of Christ to be observed by
believers.


Vers. 47, 48. The Administration of
Christian Baptism.

I. Hindrances to its reception.—
1. The absence of faith. The individual


who is not prepared to profess faith
in Jesus Christ has no claim whatever
to be admitted to baptism. 2. The
presence of open sin. Though a pro-
fessed believer, the individual who lives
in scandalous sin is in an unfit state
for partaking of this holy ordinance.
3. The want of adequate knowledge.
The person who has not yet attained
to a clear understanding of the nature
and significance of baptism is not a
proper subject for its reception.

II. Qualifications for its reception.
—l. The qualification in God’s sight.
Endowment with the Holy Ghost.
Baptism ideally considered is not a
means of imparting the Holy Ghost,
but a sign and seal of the Holy Ghost’s
presence. 2. The qualification in man’s
sight. An outward profession of faith,
attested by visible saintship or 4
corresponding walk and conversation,
accompanied, as above stated, with
adequate knowledge.


CHAPTER XI.


Tue CHURCH AT JERUSALEM AND GENTILE CoNverTS—THE LIBERTY
OF GRACE.


§ 1. Peter’s Report to the Church at Jerusalem; or, the Admission of the


Gentiles vindicated (vers. 1-18).


§ 2. The Origin of the Church at Antioch; or, the Preparation of a Centre for


the Gentile Mission (vers. 19-30).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. The apostles.—Peter and John (viii. 14), with James (xii. 2), and possibly the rest


of the Twelve.


The brethren,—The body of disciples.


Ver, 2. They that were of the circumejsion.—In the first instance all the Judean disciples
who were Jews, afterwards a party in the Church who contended for circumcision as a
term of Christian communion (Phil. iii. 3; Col. iv. 11; Titus i. 10).


Ver. 3. Didst eat with them.—See on x. 28.


Ver. 4. Rehearsed the matter from the beginning and expounded it by order.—Better,
having begun, expounded the matter unto them in order.


Vers. 5-10.—Peter’s account differs from Luke’s in only minor details,


Analysis.”)


(See “ Homiletical


Ver. 11.—Mentions that Cornelius’s ambassadors were three in number (x. 19), and ver. 12


that Peter’s companions were six (x. 33)


Ver. 13.—Represents Cornelius as calling his mysterious visitor an angel, whereas Luke’s


246


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XI.





account makes the centurion speak of him as a man (x. 30). The word men, an insertion
from x. 5, should be omitted.

Ver. 14.—Adds an item of the angel’s message not before mentioned.

Ver. 15.—The clausule as I began to speak contradicts not that in Luke’s account “ while
Peter yet spake ” (x. 44), but draws attention to the shortness of the interval which passed
before the Holy Ghost descended. In the beginning = on the day of Pentecost, about ten
years before: see on ver. 26.

Ver. 17, Whether the antecedent to who believed micrevcacw is us (A. and R.V., Bengel,
Meyer), or them and us (Alford, Hackett), or them only (Plumptre), cannot be decided ; but
in each case the sense is the same.

Ver. 18. Glorified God.—Correct if the reading is édéf¢acav (Westcott and Hort, R.V.); if
éddgagfov be preferred (A.V., Alford, Hackett), then the rendering should be kept glurifying
God, a- continuous act.

Ver. 19. Upon the persecution.—Or, tribulation, ad mis OMWews: better, from (as an effect
of) the persecution, that arose about Stephen, ém) Drepdvw—i.e., on account of, rather than in
the time of Stephen, which would have required ér Zreddvov. Phenice.—“ The region of
palms,” a narrow strip of territory about two hundred miles in length, with a varying
breadth, never more than thirty-five miles, looking out upon the Mediterranean, having
Syria upon the north, the country of the Philistines upon the south, and the range of Lebanon
in its rear on the Hast. Its chief cities were Tyre and Sidon. Cyprus.—See on iv. 3-6.
Antioch.—The capital of the Seleucid, situated on the Orontes, sixteen miles from the sea
and forty-one from the river’s mouth. ‘The queen of the Hast, the third metropolis of the
world, the residence of the imperial legate of Syria, this vast city of perhaps 500,000 souls

. was no mere Oriental town with low, flat roofs, and dingy, narrow streets, but a Greek
capital, enriched and enlarged by Roman munificence, . . . situated at the point of junction
between the chains of Lebanon and Taurus,.and containing an immense colony of Jews”
(Farrar, The Life and Work of St. Paul, p. 288). “In this splendid world-city, where all
nationalities of the Hast and West flowed together, and every stranger instantly was received
into citizenship, washed itself out more than anywhere else the strong exclusiveness of the
Jewish character. If the synagogues as a whole adhered closely to the law, yet were there
many Jews who held friendly intercourse with the heathen, and were even susceptible
towards the preaching of Christianity ” (Langhans’s Biblische Geschichte und Literatur, ii.
726).

or. 20. Cyrene.—See on ii. 10. Grecians.—J.e., Greek-speaking Jews; Greeks (R.V.).
1. The testimony of the best documents countenances the text, Grecians. 2. Internal
harmony appears to favour Greeks. 3. Some of the oldest versions and a tew MSS. support
Greeks. 4. The majority of critics decide for Greeks (Griesbach, Lachmann, Tischendorf,
De Wette, Holtzmann, Zockler, Meyer, Alford). 5. On the other hand, scholars of ability
incline to Grecians (Westcott and Hort, Wordsworth, Alexander, Spence). 6. The Sinaitic
MSS. affords no certain light, since it reads edayye\ords, which is clearly wrong, although
it points in the direction of ‘EA\quiords, Grecians.

Ver. 22. Barnabas.—See on iv. 36.

Ver. 25. On Tarsus.—See ix. 30. To seek Saul.—They had met last in Jerusalem (ix. 27),
where Saul had preached till compelled to flee for his life (ix. 30). How long an interval
had passed cannot be exactly computed ; but as Paul’s second visit to Jerusalem occurred a
year after he had come to Antioch (ver. 26)—+.e., in A.D. 44— several (perhaps five; Ramsay
thinks ten) years may have elapsed since they had beheld each other in the flesh. During
these years the incidents connected with the evangelistic wanderings of Peter (ix. 31-43),
the conversion of Cornelius (x., xi. 1-18), and the founding of the Church at Antioch
(zi. 19-26), as well as in Syria and Cilicia (xv. 23), may have taken place.

Ver. 26. Christians.—Xpicriavod, the name given to the disciples first in Antioch about ten
years after the Ascension. Hardly by the disciples themselves, for whom such titles as
“the brethren,” “ the saints,” were enough, or by the Jews, who would scarcely have admitted
what the name seemed to imply that Jesus of Nazareth had been the Messiah; but most
likely by the pagans, though whether by the Romans (compare Tacitus, Ann., xv. 44), or
by the Greeks (Lepsius, Holtzmann), or by the Syrians cannot be ascertained. It may have
been given by the populace or by the civic authorities (Renan), and intended as a nickname
(Zockler), since Antioch was fond of nicknames, or simply as a title of distinction, ‘‘ derived
from-the watchword of their faith’? (Weizsacker). “In any case the name belongs to
popular slang ” (Ramsay).

Ver. 27. Prophets.—Men endowed with the gift of prophecy (Rom. xii. 6; 1 Cor. xii. 10),
who occupied a sort of teaching office in the Church, and were often associated with the
regular teaching order (xiii. 1; 1 Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11).

Ver. 28. Claudius Casar.—Succeeded Caligula from A.D. 41-54, Schiirer (Jud. Volk., i. 474)
regards Luke’s statement about the famine as unhistorical ; but Claudius’s reign throughout
was remarkable for the frequent famines which occurred in it (Suetonius, Claudius, 18;


247


t


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a tana mains iy ur am gn


Tacitus, Ann.,xii.43). One of these Josephus (Ant., XX. v. 2) mentions as specially affecting
Judea and Syria under the procuratorship of Cuspius Fadus, a.D. 45. This date important
for arranging the chronology of the Acts. Ramsay dates the famine in A.D. 46. :

Ver. 29. Relief —Lit. for ministry or service, in anticipation of the impending famine.

Ver. 30. Elders.—The first mention of these office bearers in the New Testament. That
these office bearers afterwards existed in Jerusalem is subsequently stated (xiv. 23, xv. 2, 4,
6, xxi. 18). That they existed already may be inferred (xv. 2, 4,6). That Paul’s Epistles
do not mention elders in Jerusalem (Weizsicker) is no argument against the truthfulness
of the narrative. The complete identity of elders and bishops in the apostolic time follows
from such texts as xx. 17; Phil. i. 1; Titus i. 5,7; 1 Peter v. 1.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—18.


Peter's Report to the Church at Jerusalem ; or, the Admission of the Gentiles
vindicated.

I. The serious indictment preferred against Peter.—1. The occasion. (1) The
tidings that had reached the apostles and brethren in Judea that the Gentiles
also had received the word of God (ver. 1). So remarkable a phenomenon was
not likely to remain unknown ta the Church leaders in Jerusalem. Nor is it
readily conceivable that tidings *o0 glorious should have given rise to dissatisfac-
tion in any right-thinking bosom. Yet such actually appears to have been the
case. (2) The return of Peter to the metropolis, which was dictated not by any
peremptory summons issued te him by his colleagues to defend before them the
action he had taken—an assertion destitute of even the slightest evidence—but
by a natural desire to explein what had taken place and his relation thereto
(ver. 2). 2. The movers. “They that were of the circumcision”—z.e., the
Jewish Christians as distinguished from the Gentile (see x. 45)—the party in
general and not an inner circle of them more zealous for the rite than their
tellows (Lechler). Sucb a party afterwards arose (Col. iv. 11; Titus i. 10); here
its first indications are »bserved. At this stage the whole Jerusalem Church,
being composed of Jews, felt disposed to emphasise the importance and obligation
of circumcision. 3. The gravamen. Not that the apostle had preached the
gospel to the Gentiles—which, in face of Christ’s command, could hardly have
been pronounced a fault (Matt. xxvii. 19)—-or that he had baptised them, and
so received them into the Christian Church, but that he had done so without
subjecting them +o circumcision. As yet the apostles and brethren do not so
express their theughts, but merely charge Peter with having violated (traditional)
Mosaism by entering into friendly intercourse, and holding house and table
fellowship with the Gentiles (ver. 3),

II. The triumphant vindication offered by Peter—l. The frankness with
which it was given. Not standing upon his dignity as chief among the apostles
(primus inter pares), or resenting their interference with what was so un-
mistakably a work of God, but recognising their right to have their difficulties
stated and, if possible, removed, doubtless also appreciating their perplexity
concerning what conflicted so strangely with their traditional beliefs, Peter began
and expaunded the matter in order to them. A Christian of the right spirit—
whether a public official or a private member in the Church—will not fail to
exhibit the like anxiety, by means of a frank explanation, to remove any offence
or stumbling block which his personal behaviour may have placed in the way of
his weaker brethren (Rom. xiv., xv). 2. The fulness with which it was given.
The main particulars of the story were related. (1) The vision he had himself
beheld in Joppa (5-10), his own account differing from Luke’s only in minor
details, such as the omission of all mention of the time when the vision occurred
and of the hunger which preceded it, saying nothing about seeing heaven opened,
and adding that the sheet appeared to come even unto him, and that it con-
tained “wild beasts” (ver. 6) as well as other animals. (2) The arrival of


248


x HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, XI.


eee


Cornelius’s messengers, though he did not at all mention the centurion’s name,
or at that stage in his tale allude to the vision which had prompted the
centurion to despatch his embassy (ver. 11). (3) The inward whispering of the
Spirit which had directed him to accompany the strange men from Cesarea
(ver. 12), which prompting he obeyed, taking with him six brethren who were
then present, having apparently come up to Jerusalem along with him, and to
whom he may be pictured as having pointed—“ these six brethren also accom-
panied me.” (4) The account Cornelius gave of the angel’s appearance in his
house with instructions to send men to Joppa for him, Simon, whose surname
was Peter, who, the angel said, should tell him words whereby he and all his
house should be saved (vers. 13, 14). (5) The descent of the Holy Ghost upon
Cornelius and his household almost immediately after he had commenced to
speak (the interval between his beginning to preach and the Spirit’s coming
down seemed so short), and in exactly the same fashion as it had done. upon
Jewish believers at Pentecost—i.e., with the same manifestations in the form of
tongues (ver. 15). (6) The impression the phenomenon had made upon himself.
It caused him to remember the word of the Lord (see i. 5) about the difference
between John’s baptism with water and the Lord’s baptism with the Holy Ghost
(ver. 16). (7) The process of reasoning he then followed—which was that, if
God had bestowed on them, the Gentiles, the same gift of the Holy Ghost as He
had conferred on Jewish believers, it was manifest God had received them, the
Gentiles, into His Church; and that being the case who was he, Peter, that he
should withstand God and keep them out by withholding from them the rite of
baptism, which was the sign of their being let in (ver. 17)? 3. The success with
which it was given. (1) The apostles and brethren held their peave. They could
say nothing against it. It was as clearly the doing of God as the healing of the '
lame man at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple had been (iv. 14). (2) They
glorified God, saying, ‘Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance
unto life.” What a pity they did not ever after remain in this mind!

Learn.—1. That misunderstandings will arise among Christian brethren.
2. That all Christian believers are not equally enlightened, or equally free from
prejudice, narrow-mindedness and bigotry. 3. That the best way to remove
misunderstandings and overcome prejudices among Christians is to come together
in friendly conference. 4. That the same story is seldom twice told in the same
way and without variation in details. 5. That whom God admits into the
Church none have a right to exclude.

Note A.—The historical credibility of Cornelius’s conversion has been objected to
principally on the following grounds: 1. That it had no practical effect on the
settlement of the Gentile question. 2. That Paul did not cite it as an argument
in the Jerusalem council. 3. That in spite of the silence and glorification of
God which followed Peter’s explanation (xi. 18) the Jerusalem Christians were
not long in reasserting their old demand for the circumcision of non-Jewish
believers (xv. 5). 4. That the council felt itself wholly undecided as to the
position it ought to maintain on this question of the terms of communion for
Gentile members. 5. That Peter’s subsequent behaviour at Antioch showed he
had never really known of such a conversion as is here reported. (See Baur’s
Life and Work of Paul, i. 81-92; Zeller, Die Apostelgeschichte, pp. 183-190;
Holtzmann, Hand Commentar zum Neuen Testament, Erster Band, p. 366).
But—1. Cornelius’s conversion was distinctly referred to by Peter, if not by
Paul, in his speech at the apostolic council (xv. 7), so that it cannot be truth-
fully affirmed. Cornelius’s conversion was wholly without effect in determining
the Gentile question. 2. If Paul did not cite that conversion when addressing
the council, he may have deemed it unnecessary to do so after Peter’s reference
to the same event. Along with this it should be noted that as Paul’s address


249


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
oe


has not been reported, one cannot be certain that he made no allusion to Peter’s
action in receiving Cornelius. 3. If circumcision for the Gentiles was again
mooted in Jerusalem, that was not surprising considering it was the Pharisees
who mooted it (xv. 5). 4. The allegation that the council did not know how to
act upon the question is incorrect, since they answered the question to Paul’s
satisfaction. 5. The wavering of Peter at Antioch (Gal. ii. 12) only showed
that he, like many another good man before and since, was inconsistent—not
that he had not baptised Cornelius. Lesser difficulties—such as the number of
visions connected with the story, the uselessness of sending Cornelius to Peter
to hear about the gospel, when he could have learnt all he wanted to know
from Philip, and the obvious inaccuracy of the statement (x. 28), since how
otherwise could a Gentile be transformed into a Jewish proselyte—scarcely
require an answer. The notion that the Cornelius history is a free composition
intended to legitimate Paul’s Gentile mission by showing that Peter had opened
the door to the heathen before him contains this element of truth, that Peter’s
action in baptising Cornelius without circumcision because the Holy Ghost had,
on the same terms, granted the gift of tongues, proved that Paul’s procedure in
the Gentile Churches was not unauthorised and self-invented, but had the
highest possible sanction, that of the Holy Ghost and of Peter. The remainder
of the Tiibingen theory is an exploded delusion.

Note B.— The Theology of Peter, as set forth in the various addresses given by
him in the Acts :—

1. In the Upper Room (i. 15-22); 2. On the Day of Pentecost (ii. 14-36) ;
3. In Solomon’s Porch (iii. 12-26) ; 4. Before the Sanhedrim (iv. 8-12) ; 5. In the
Chiistian Meeting (v. 3, 4, 8, 9); 6. Before the Sanhedrim (v. 29-32); 7. In
Samaria (viii, 20-23); 8. At Lydda (ix. 34); 9, At Joppa (ix. 40); 10. At
Ceesarea (x. 24-43).

I. Peter’s doctrine of God.—1. The personality of God is everywhere assumed
(i. 24, ii. 29, iii, 13, etce.). His wisdom, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth.
2. The sovereignty of God, both in providence (ii. 23) and in grace (iii. 26), is
fearlessly asserted. 3. The wnity of the Godhead is everywhere clearly taught,
as, for instance, when the term God is used absolutely (iii. 18, iv. 10, v. 4, x. 34,
etc.). 4. The trinity of persons in the Godhead, if not distinctly expressed,
is fairly implied in such passages as teach the divinity of Christ and of the Holy
Ghost.

II. Peter’s doctrine of Christ.—1. His person. (1) That Jesus of Nazareth
was an actual historical personage, a true man, a genuine partaker of flesh and
blood humanity, and not a mere semblance thereof, as the later Docetz taught,
Peter presupposes throughout—taking for granted all the details of His earthly
history as these have been recorded in the gospel records, if not mentioning His
Incarnation implying it when affirming His divinity (see below), alluding to His
. baptism (x. 38), His philanthropic ministry (x. 38), His sinless character calling
Him God’s holy and righteous One (iii. 14), affirming His crucifixion (ii. 23,
x. 39), His resurrection (ii. 23, 31, iii, 15, v. 40, 41), and His ascension (ii. 33,
iii, 21, v. 31), and predicting His future coming as the Judge of quick and dead
(x. 42). (2) That Peter regarded Jesus of Nazareth as a pre-existent Divine
being, who had been sent and who had come into the world, may be reasonably
inferred from such statements as these—‘“ He is Lord of all” (x. 36), “ David
saith concerning Him, I beheld the Lord always before my face” (ii. 25), and
“The Lord saith unto my Lord” (ii. 34), since, even if they refer to the exalted
Christ, it cannot be supposed that Christ could have Leen made a Divine being
by the process of resurrection and exaltation if He had not been so before. (3)
That Peter considered this exalted Divine human personality as the Messiah of
Israel (ii. 36) and the Saviour of the world (iii. 25), is expressly stated. 2. His


250


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XI.





work, That Peter regarded Christ as Jehovah’s servant (iii. 13, 26, iv. 27, 30)
who had been commissioned to perform upon the earth a work through which
men might receive remission of sins (iii. 19, x. 43), is hardly less apparent
than that Peter connected that work with His death upon the cross (ii. 32, 38,
iii. 26, iv. 10-12, ix. 43).

II1. Peter's doctrine of the Spirit.—1. The personality (v. 3), and 2. The
divinity (v. 4), are unambiguously asserted.

IV. Peter’s doctrine of Providence.—Includes the following points: 1. The
sovereignty of God in foreordaining whatsoever comes to pass (iv. 28). 2. The
freedom of man in accomplishing his own will while all the time he executes the
purpose of God (ii. 23, iv. 27). 3. The present and immediate knowledge of all
that man thinks and does upon the earth (i. 24, iv. 29). 4. The possibility of
interposing, either naturally or supernaturally, in the course of mundane history
(iv. 29).

V. Peter’s doctrine of sin—On this momentous subject the Apostle taught:
1. That sin in its essence was disobedience to God (iv. 19, v. 29). 2. That
thoughts of the heart as well as overt actions or words were included in the
category of sin (v. 3, viii. 27). 3. Thatsin until it was forgiven held men’s souls
in spiritual bondage (viii. 23). 4. That the sins of men might work out the
purposes of God (ii. 23). 5. That sins of the most heinous character were


pardonable through Christ’s blood (ii. 38, ili. 19, vili. 22, x. 43).


VI. Peter’s doctrine of salvation—Contained these tenets:
men needed salvation, Jew and Gentile alike (ii, 39).
attainable only through Jesus Christ (iii. 12).


1. That all
2. That this salvation was
3. That the only condition of


salvation was faith in Christ’s name (x. 43).
VII. Peter’s doctrine of the last things.—This included—1. A second advent
of Jesus Christ to be preceded by times of refreshing, and ushering in the times of


the restoration of all things (ili. 21).
(iv. 2).


2. A future resurrection for all men


3. A solemn assize for quick and dead (x. 42).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Ecclesiastical Controversy.

I. Frequently arises concerning
points of small moment.—About non-
essentials rather than about essentials,
about external forms and ceremonies
rather than about internal thoughts
and dispositions, about the tithing of
mint, anise, and cummin, rather than
about the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, and mercy, and faith (Matt.
xxiii. 23). Such was the case here.
The contention which arose between the
circumcision party and Peter was not
about spiritual religion but only about
bodily ritual, was not whether Cornelius
had been converted, but whether he
had been circumcised, was not whether
Peter had received him into the Church
without the exercise of faith, but
whether Peter had dispensed with the
corporeal mark of Mosaism. A small
affair to make a noise about.


II. Is seldom settled without strife
and angry feeling.—To the credit of
the brethren and of Peter in this
instance it was. Peter, by his frank
and unvarnished recital of what he
had done, and how he had been led to
do it, cleared away the misconceptions
and disarmed the suspicions of his
brethren ; they, on the other hand, by
their amiable tempers and ready dis-
position to have their difficulties re-
moved, contributed to a speedy settle-
ment of what might have developed
into a prolonged and bitter agitation,
A pattern which might be profitably
studied by disputants of all sorts.

III. Would be easily disposed of
were both parties always anxious to
find out and follow the mind of God.—
It was thus the threatened rupture in
Jerusalem was averted. Peter did not
oppose his own authority to that of his


251


CHAP, XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


sp


brethren, or lecture them on their
narrow-mindedness in seeking to im-
pose their antiquated ceremonial on
the Gentiles, or plume himself on his
superior enlightenment in dispensing
with the Mosaic rite, but simply
assisted his brethren to see how God
in His providence and by His grace
had already decided the controversy.
His brethren when they perceived this
could no longer maintain their favourite
views, but humbly and submissively
accepted the verdict of heaven, feeling
that when God interposed with a
decision there was, and ought to be, an
end of all controversy.


Ver. 4. Expository Preaching.
Should be like Peter’s discourse to his
brethren.

J. Regular and systematic.—Going
over the contents of revelation in order,
so as to present Divine truth in its
inherent connection, logical succession,
and due proportion.

II. Clear and emphatic.—Showing
that the speaker has an adequate grasp
of his theme, is master of his own
thoughts, and can express both with
perspicuity and power.

III. Comprehensive and detailed.—
Neither fragmentary nor trivial. Not
leaving great lacunz, or condescending
to over-minute particulars; but pre-
senting a broad view of the truth in all
its parts, and with such parts as are
more important set forth in promi-
nence.

IV. Experimental and emotional.—
Not discoursing on the contents of
revelation as if these were mere ob-
jective truths which had no bearing
on either speaker or hearer ; but talk-
ing of them as if conscious of their vast
importance for the inner life of both.

V. Personal and practical.—Aimed
at the conviction as well as enlighten-
ment of them that hear, at converting
their hearts as well as gaining over
their judgments.


Ver. 9. Divine Warnings ; or,
“ What God hath cleansed make not
thou common.”


252


I. To men in general.—In par-
ticular to philosophers, scientists,
statesmen, rulers—not to introduce
distinctions of class, rank, wealth,
power, etc., between man and man,
seeing that God hath made all men
of one blood, and therefore equal. The
brotherhood of man stands to day in
need of emphasis and exposition.

II. To the Church of Jesus Christ.—
In particular to its office-bearers and
spiritual leaders—not to make the
household of faith narrower than
Christ has made it, not to erect around
it fences which Christ has not com-
manded, not to excommunicate those
whom Christ has admitted, not to im-
pose burdens on the consciences of
men which Christ has not directed.

III. To the individual believer.—
In particular to him who is conscious
of being a child of God—not to defile
with sin and guilt the heart and con-
science which Christ by His blood and
word has cleansed, not to let down to
low and common levels the life which
should be lived in the high and pure
atmosphere of fellowship with God and
Christ.


Ver. 14. Words of Salvation. Words
setting forth—

I. The nature and necessity of sal-
vation.—1. Its mature. Deliverance
from the curse, power, and pollution
ofsin, 2. Its necessity. All are under
condemnation, on account of sin, en-
thralled by the power of sin, and
tainted by the moral pollution of sin.

II. The source and the means of
salvation.—1. The source. Jesus Christ,
the Incarnate Son of God. 2. The
means. Faith in His blood, which
signifies reliance on His propitiatory
sacrifice for the sins of the world.

ITI. The recipients and subjects of
salvation.—1. Believers—i.e., such as by
faith have put their trust in Him. 2.
Ther houses—t.e., on their complying
with the same condition.


Ver. 16. Remembering the Word of
the Lord.


i, A much-neglected duty—Not by


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. X%,





the world alone, but also by the Lord’s
people, who not only know and profess
to believe that word, but who have
themselves been saved by it, and have
been commanded to keep it in remem-
brance (John xv. 20; Col. iii. 16).

Il. An exceedingly delightful
exercise.—Not for the unbelieving and
unspiritual, but for the religious and
devout, to whom that word is more
precious than thousands of silver and
gold (Psalm cxix. 72), and who can
truly say, “Thy testimonies also are
my delight ” (Psalm cxix. 24).

Tit. A highly profitable employ-
ment.—Were Christ’s words more
frequently remembered, they would—
1. Save Christ’s people from falling
into error and sin (Matt. xxvi. 75;
Mark xiv. 72; John ii. 22). 2. Com-
fort them in seasons of despondency
and trouble (Luke xxiv. 8). 3. Stimu-
late them to works of faith and labours
of love (xx. 35). 4. Secure for them
answers to prayer (John xv. 7).
5. Evidence the sincerity of their
discipleship (John viii. 31).


Ver. 17. Who was I? or, the Im-
possibility of withstanding God.—Peter
felt that he could not oppose the
introduction of Cornelius on four
grounds.

I. He was only a feeble creature,
whereas God was the Almighty Creator,
and therefore had a right to do accord-
ing to the counsel of His own will
(Dan. iv. 35; Job ix. 12; Isa. xlv. 9;
Rom. ix. 20; Eph. i. 11).

II. He was only a commissioned
servant, whereas God was the com-
missioning Sovereign, and was entitled


to expect that His purpose should
prevail over the wish of His
ambassador.

III. He was only a recipient of
grace, whereas God was the dispenser of
grace, and possessed exclusively the
right of saying on whom that grace
should be bestowed.

IV. He was only a member of the
Church, whereas God was the Church’s
Head, and reserved to Himself alone
the right of defining the terms on
which admission to that Church might
be secured.


Ver. 18, Repentance unto Life.

I. Its nature.—A turning of the
soul from self and sin towards Christ
and holiness—implying a genuine heart
renunciation of the soul’s old life of
selfishness, worldliness, irreligion, im-
morality, and idolatry, and an equally
sincere embracing of the new hfe of
faith, godliness, obedience, and love,
which is enjoined by Jesus Christ in
the gospel.

II. Its origin.—Repentance unto
life is a grace—i.e., a heavenly gift, such
a quality and disposition of soul as can
be inwrought by no natural process,
but must be created by the action of
the Holy Spirit.

III. Its necessity.— Required by all
men equally, by Jews as well as
Gentiles, and required in the same way
as a free gift of grace. None exempt
from its obligations.

IV. Its end.—Salvation and eternal
life. Hence called a saving grace.
Wherever it truly exists the soul is
passed from condemnation and become
an heir of glory.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 19—26.


The Origin of the Church at Antioch ; or, the Preparation of a Centre for the
approaching Gentile Mission.

I, The first gospel preachers at Antioch. 1. Who they were. Jewish Chris-
tians who had been scattered abroad in consequence of the persecution (or
tribulation) that arose on the death of Stephen, a.p. 38. Some of these were
foreign Jews, men of Cyprus (see on iv. 36) and Cyrene (see on ii. 10). That
Barnabas was among them is not favoured by the narrative (ver. 22), though
his. connection with Cyprus may have led him to direct the fugitives to carry the
glad tidings to his native island. That Mnason of Cyprus (xxi. 16), and Lucius


253


OHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





of Cyrene (xiii. 1), formed two of these pioneer missionaries, though not certain,
is by no means improbable. 2. How they came to Antioch. (1) The road they
pursued was most likely that which ran up the coast of Pheenicia (xv. 3, xxi. 2),
passing, doubtless, through its historic towns, Tyre and Sidon, where some years
afterwards Christian communities were found by Paul (xxi. 3, xxvii. 3). (2) As
to why they betook themselves to Antioch, the importance of that city as the
largest in Asia Minor and the third in rank in the Roman Empire—Rome and
Alexandria only being larger—would naturally have something to do with
attracting them thither. Besides, as the capital of Syria and the residence of
the Roman Governors of that province, it had gathered into it people of many
nationalities, including a large colony of Jews. Nor is it unlikely that they
were influenced by the number of Jewish proselytes who were attached to its
synagogues, as well as by the circumstance that already “‘ Antioch had furnished
to the Church of Jerusalem one of its most influential members—viz., Nicolas,
one of the deacons” (Renan). 3. When they arrived in the city. Whether
before or after the conversion of Cornelius cannot be deduced from the narrative.
The decision depends chiefly on whether xv. 7 teaches, as it appears to do, that
Peter was the first to preach to the Gentiles. If so, then the missionaries must
have heard before reaching Antioch of Peter’s reception of Cornelius into the
Church, which would explain their subsequent procedure in that city. 4. The
persons to whom they preached. (1) On the way to Antioch, to none save only to
Jews (ver. 19), whether Hebrew or Greek speaking. This was natural if either
Cornelius’s conversion had not yet taken place or they had not yet heard of it.
(2) On reaching Antioch, to the Greeks or Grecians—it is uncertain which.
The reading “ Greeks” suggests that either an unauthorised Gentile mission had
been undertaken by the missionaries before Cornelius’s conversion, if that had
not yet taken place, or they had not yet heard of it, or, what is more probable,
that having heard of it on reaching Antioch they forthwith began to extend
their mission, and that the more gladly since “in a city where pure Jews—Jews,
who were proselytes, etc., people fearing God—or half-Jewish Pagans, and pure
pagans, lived together, confined preachings, restricted to a group of houses,
became impossible” (Renan). The reading ‘Grecians” leaves the time of the
missionaries’ arrival in Antioch undecided, and harmonises with the idea that
Peter was the opener of the Church’s door to the Gentiles—which however he
still was on the preceding hypothesis (see Critical Remarks). 5. The burden of
their preaching. The Lord Jesus—i.e., the facts and doctrines concerning His
life, death, resurrection, ascension, and future coming. As much as this seems
implied in the use of the term “ Lord” along with “ Jesus” in defining the sub-
ject of their ministry. There can be no ground for thinking that they preached
another gospel than that which was preached in Jerusalem and at Cexsarea
by Peter, and afterwards at Antioch and throughout Asia Minor by Paul.
6. The success of their labours. Not through superior ability, eloquence, industry,
or persuasiveness of their own, but solely through the power of the truth, accom-
panied by the power of Christ operating through His Spirit, “a great number
believed and” or, having believed, “ turned to the Lord ”—1.e., avowed themselves
to be His disciples. It is not necessary, in order to account for this remarkable
awakening, to call in the aid of extraneous circumstances such as the excitement
caused in the city by an earthquake which occurred on March 23rd, of the year
37, or the disposition to believe in supernatural matters which had been produced
in the people’s minds by the pretensions of an impostor, Debborius, who claimed
that by means of ridiculous talismans he could prevent the recurrence of such
catastrophes (Renan, The Apostles, xii.). A faithfully preached gospel in the
hands of the Holy Ghost is sufficient to explain the entire phenomenon which
appeared at Antioch, the gospel’s acknowledged adaptation to the soul’s needs


294


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XI.





SUNS that it will sooner or later win its way to the hearts of some who
ear.

II. The mission of Barnabas to Antioch. 1. The occasion of his mission.
This was the report which had reached Jerusalem concerning the progress of the
gospel in that heathen city. If this occurred before Cornelius’s conversion, it
would doubtless startle the Church leaders, though the statements are quite
unwarranted that “notwithstanding the kindly wishes of some of the principal
members of the Church in Jerusalem, Peter in particular, the apostolic college
continued to be influenced by the meanest ideas,” and that “on every occasion
when they heard that the good news had been announced to the heathen some
of the elders manifested signs of disappointment” (Renan, Zhe Apostles, xiii.).
If the tidings came to the Church leaders after Cornelius’s conversion, as may
reasonably be inferred from the narrative, then they would not be taken
unawares or at a loss how to act in the crisis that had arisen. 2. The object of
the mission. It is not supposable that Barnabas was sent to frown upon, or
even suspiciously regard, the new movement, but presumably (1) to reconnoitre
the situation, and observe the facts, as became prudent Church leaders whose
duty it was to do nothing rashly ; (2) on ascertaining the genuineness of the
awakening, to confirm with suitable counsels and exhortations the young con-
verts, for which by his sincere piety and sympathetic nature he was eminently
fitted ; and (3) if need were, to assist the evangelists in gathering in the fruits
and widening the circuit of their labours, for which task again he was signally
qualified, though it does seem going too far to say he was “ the most enlightened
member of the Church at Jerusalem,” and ‘the chief of the liberal party which
desired progress and wished the Church to be open to all” (Renan). 3. The
reason of his mission. That is, the reason of his selection by the apostles as
their delegate; which was most likely: (1) because of his being an eminent
disciple of undoubted Christian character, and almost apostolie rank (iv. 36) ;
(2) because, as above stated, he was personally fitted for the work which
required to be done at Antioch ; and (3) because he was a native of Cyprus, and
in all probability known to some of the evangelists who were labouring in
Antioch. 4. The execution of his mission. On reaching Antioch Barnabas did
the business for which he had been commissioned. (1) He investigated the
work of grace that had been reported as going on in that city, found it to be
genuine, and, like the good man that he was (ver. 24), was glad, though it was
a work which he himself had no hand in bringing about. (2) He exhorted the
converts, that with full purpose of heart they should cleave unto the Lord—
not unto their leaders merely, or to one another, but to the Lord, which would
certainly prove the speediest and most efficacious way to secure their growth in
grace, their perseverance in religion, and their final salvation. (3) Though not
stated, it may be assumed that he aided the brethren in preaching the gospel,
it being barely conceivable that Barnabas, through jealousy, or indolence, or
indifference, would stand aloof. 5. The success of his mission. ‘‘ Much people
was added unto the Lord,” by repentance, faith, and baptism. Though, perhaps,
the numerous conversicns that were effected cannot all be ascribed to him, it
need not be doubted that he exercised a powerful influence for good upon those
who listened to his preaching; and, without endorsing the verdict that
“ Christianity has always done injustice to that great man in not placing him
in the front rank cf her founders” (Renan), it may cheerfully be granted that
his name will for ever remain associated with that Church, which, if he did not
originate, he at least did much to consolidate and extend.

III. The appearance of Saul at Antioch—-1. How it was brought about. By
Barnabas, who conceived in his noble heart the magnificent idea (Renan) of
fetching Saul from Tarsus, and for this purpose went forth to seek him. On


255


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Se SS SS SS nh nL ie


escaping from Jerusalem Saul had betaken himself to his native city (see ix. 30),
where he had been living, and without doubt labouring in the gospel ever since.
It is to this period that the founding of the Syrian and Cilician Churches (xv. 41 ;
Gal. i. 21) can with most plausibility be ascribed. For the notions that Saul at
this time in Tarsus was fretting out his soul in enforced indolence, and that “ his
false position, his haughtiness, and his exaggerated pretensions were neutralising
many of his other and better qualities” (Renan), there is absolutely no foundation.
2. How long it continued. “A whole year”—ze., during a.p 44—the year
immediately preceding that of Paul’s second journey to Jerusalem, at the time
of the famine (ver. 30). ‘‘‘This was,” says Renan, “a most brilliant and without
doubt the most happy year in the life of Paul,” adding that “the prolific
originality of these two great men raised the Church of Antioch to a degree of
grandeur to which no Christian Church had previously attained.” In any case,
the spiritual results of that year’s evangelism were in some measure traceable in
the vigorous missionary Church that was gathered in that city (xii. 1-3),
3. How it was used. As above stated, in helping on the Christian cause in
Antioch, in evangelising along with Barnabas and the missionaries already there.
No doubt the felt need of additional labourers constituted the motive which
impelled Barnabas to think of the Great Tarser ; and though once more the
imaginative Frenchman’s statement is by no means to be hastily subscribed, that
‘most of the glory which has accrued to the latter is really due to the modest
man who excelled him in everything, brought his merits to light, prevented more
than once his faults from resulting deplorably to himself and his cause, and the
illiberal views of others from exciting him to revolt, and also prevented mean
personalities from interfering with the work of God” (Renan, 7’he Apostles, xiii.),
it may frankly be conceded that no more important service was ever done by
Barnabas to the Church of Christ than when recalling the brilliant ability and
fervid zeal of Saul he fetched that distinguished man to Antioch. It was one of
those small and seemingly unimportant actions which bring large and far-
reaching results in their train. Saul’s appearance in Antioch made Antioch a
missionary centre, and himself the greatest missionary the world has ever seen.
IV. The coming of Jerusalem prophets to Antioch.—1. The alarming prediction.
(1) What it was. That there should be great dearth throughout all the world—
literally, over all the inhabited land, meaning Judea and the surrounding
countries, or perhaps the Roman empire. The communication would have been
sufficiently distressing at any time and to any people, the horrors of famine,
especially -vhen long continued, being well nigh indescribable (compare Deut.
xxviii. 53-57 ; Lev. xxvi. 19-29; 1 Kings xvii. 1-16; 2 Kings vi. 24-29). To the
Church at Jerusalem, consisting as it did mostly of poor people, and impoverished
as it had been by its communistic experiments, the contemplation of such a
visitation was simply alarming; and the suggestion is not without likelihood
that the apprehension of this appalling calamity was the cause of the prophetic
embassy to the Church at Antioch—“ the elders of Jerusalem” had “ decided to
seek succour from the members of the richer Churches of Syria” (Renan).
(2) By whom it was spoken. Agabus, of whom nothing is known beyond the
fact here recorded that he was one of the prophetic or inspired teachers who were
attached to the Church at Jerusalem, and the subsequent statement that in after
years he went down to Caesarea and foretold Paul’s impending imprisonment
(xxi. 10). Such prophets were also found in the Churches of Antioch (xiii. 1,
xv. 32) and Corinth (1 Cor. xii. 28, 29, xiv. 29). That Agabus was a compara-
tively obscure individual—like Ananias of Damascus (ix. 10)—shows that great
services to the Church of God may be rendered by exceedingly humble instru-
ments. (3) On whose authority published. Not that of Agabus himself, but: of
the Holy Spirit who spoke through him. Not every word uttered by an inspired
256


rs HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XI





teacher was inspired (1 Cor. vii. 6, 12), though this was. Those who speak in
God’s name should be careful not to mistake their own thoughts for God’s, and
should never claim for their own pronouncements an authority which belongs
only to God. (4) When it came to pass. “In the days of Claudius.” No
universal dearth is, though several local dearths are, reported as having prevailed
during the reign of that Cesar. Indeed, ‘the reign of Claudius was afflicted
almost every year by partial famines” (Renan). According to Josephus
(Ant., XX. ii. 5, v. 2) many of the inhabitants of Judea were about his time
swept away by a famine, which Helena, Queen of Adiabene, a Jewish proselyte
then at Jerusalem, relieved by importing corn from Egypt and Cyprus,
distributing it among the starving population. If this was the famine referred
to by Luke, it occurred in the year 44 a.p. (see ‘“ Critical Remarks”). 2. The
generous resolution ‘To send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Juda,”
Generous this proposal was—(1) In the kindness it displayed toward the Mother
Church, which was certain, for reasons already explained, to suffer more than
Churches in other cities when the famine came (Row. xv. 1). (2) In the
unselfishness it manifested, since, although they themselves would assuredly
suffer from the dearth, they thought first of the wants of the poor disciples at
Jerusalem (1 Cor. x. 24). (3) In the forethought it evinced—not waiting till
the need arose, but taking time by the forelock, and providing beforehand for
the coming pressure (2 Cor. viii. 11). (4) In the unanimity with which it was
adopted, every member of the Church agreeing with and entering heartily into
the proposal (1 Peter iii. 8). (5) In the liberality which it contemplated, each
man determining to contribute according to his ability (see 1 Cor. xvi. 2; 2 Cor.
viii. 12). 3. The benevolent donation. When their generous gift had been
collected they despatched it to Jerusalem. (1) Without delay. Bis dat qui cito
dat. Many acts of kindness lose their tragrance by being too late. (2) By the
hands of trusted messengers—Barnabas and Saul. This showed the importance
the Church at Antioch attached to their gift and the confidence they reposed in
these honoured brethren. (3) To be placed in the hands of the elders of the
Church at Jerusalem for judicious distribution among the poor saints.
Learn.—l. The Church’s duty to travel abroad with the gospel, to confirm
young converts, to evangelise the community in which she is placed, to listen to
whatever teaching God may send her from time to time, and to relieve the wants
of her poorer members. 2. The Church’s strength—the gospel she preaches,
“the Lord Jesus,” the presence with her of the Lord’s hand, the devotion of
talented and faithful ministers, the constancy and mutual love of her members.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 20, 21. The Awakening at of the period. ... Antioch not only


Antioch.

I. The clamant need which existed
at Antioch for such an awakening.
Antioch was a heathen city. 1. Large.
Crowded with human beings, every one
possessed of a nature which had been
made for God and _ Immortality.
2. Wealthy. And, therefore, filled with
temptations for its inhabitants to
serve mammon rather than God.
“‘ Temples, aqueducts, baths, basilicas,
nothing was wanting at Antioch in
what censtituted a grand Syrian city


possessed immense edifices of public
utility ; it had that also which few of
the Syrian cities possessed—the noblest
specimens of Grecian art, wonderfully
beautiful statues, classical works of a
delicacy of detail which the age was no
longer capable of imitating ” (Renan).
Wealth seldom favourable to religion
(Matt. xix. 24). 3. Degraded. In spite
of its picturesque site Antioch was
little better than another Sodom.
“The depravity of certain Levantine
cities, dominated by the spirit of in-


257


CHAP. XI.





trigue, delivered up entirely to low
eunning, can scarcely give us a
conception of the degree of corruption
reached by the human race at Antioch.”
“It was an inconceivable medley
of mountebanks, quacks, buffoons,
magicians, miracle mongers, sorcerers,
false priests; a city of races, games,
dances, processions, fétes, revels of
unbridled luxury, of all the follies of
the East, of the most unhealthy super-
stitions, and of the fanaticism of the
orgy” (Renan, The Apostles, xii.).
4. Benighted. Notwithstanding the
Jewish element in its population, it
was practically shrouded in spiritual
darkness—“ having no hope and with-
out God in the world” (Ephes. ii. 12).
Devoted to debasing superstitions, “full
of the worship of Apollo and the
nymphs,” it possessed no true light.
“ Syrian levity, Babylonian charlatan-
ism, and all the impostures of Asia had
made it the capital of all lies and the
sink of every description of infamy.”
If ever city needed an awakening,
Antioch did.

IJ. The simple instrumentality by
which its awakening was _ brought
about. 1. The arrival in the city of
a few wandering preachers, men of
Cyprus and Cyrene, foreign mission-
aries from the Mediterranean and the
North of Africa. It was a mo-
mentous day for Antioch when these
men presented themselves before its
gates. Neither the civic authorities
nor the pleasure-loving citizens had the
smallest conception of the spiritual
dynamite which these men had con-
cealed about their persons. Compare
Paul’s landing on the shores of Europe
and entering Philippi. 2. The procla-
mation of a strange doctrine to the
people. For strange it must have been
to Jew and Greek to learn that Jesus
of Nazareth, who had been crucified by
the Romans, was risen from the dead
and exalted to the highest seat of
authority in heaven—was Israel’s
Messiah and the world’s Saviour. Yet
just this simple announcement was the
force that awakened Antioch from its
spiritual slumber. And just this to-


258


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS.





day is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believeth, to the Jew
first and also to the Greek (Rom. i. 16).
3. The invisible working of Divine power
upon the people’s hearts. For this must
be assumed as what is meant by the
statement that the hand of the Lord
was with the preachers. Without the
Spirit’s help the most learned and
eloquent, even the most scriptural
preaching, must prove ineffective so far
as the production of spiritual results is
concerned.

III. The glorious result in which
this awakening at Antioch issued.
1. In the salvation of many souls.
Both Jews and Greeks became con-
verts. This the immediate and grand
end of all preaching. It may instruct
the understanding, interest the fancy,
gratify the taste, stir the emotions, if
it does not lead to personal decision for
Christ, it is useless. Modern preachers
should remember that saved souls,
besides being valuable to their indi-
vidual possessors, constitute a Church’s
and a city’s truest and best wealth.
2. In the establishment within its walls
of a Christian Church. How much
that Christian Church did for Antioch
with its teeming population—what
light streamed forth from its teachers,
what gracious influences were exerted
by its members—has not been tabu-
lated in the form of statistics ; but the
day will declare. Conceive what
present-day cities are where no
churches have been planted; imagine
what Christian cities would become
were their churches to be extinguished.
Such mental efforts will enable one to
understand the power for good which
the Church at Antioch exerted on the
heathen populace amongst whom it
was planted. 3. In the subsequent
origination of a heathen mission. Te
assert that had the Church at Antioch
not been founded Europe might not
have been evangelised, would perhaps
be going too far. But certainly if in
Antioch a Church had not arisen, it
might have been a considerable time
longer before the thought of a heathen
mission had occurred to the poor


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Christians at Jerusalem. Antioch had
the fresh zeal, the liberal outlook, the
enterprising spirit, and the pecuniary
resources which were necessary for
originating such a movement as that
of attempting to evangelise the Gentile
world; and one has reason to bless
God that the gospel was preached and
a Church planted in Antioch at so early
a stage in the history of Christianity.


Ver. 23. Barnabas at Antioch.

I. What he saw.—The grace of God
manifested: 1. In the spiritual awak-
ening which had taken place; and
2. In the number of conversions that
had been registered.

II. How he felt.—He was glad.
Because: 1. The gospel was spreading.
2. His countrymen were believing.
3. Souls were being saved. 4. Christ
was being glorified.

ITI. What he said.—“ He exhorted
them all that with full purpose of
heart,” ete. A counsel which was—
1. Timely, suited to their condition as
young disciples. 2. Wise, since their
onward progress in religion depended
on this. 3. Necessary, since if they
fell away they could not be saved.


Cleaving to the Lord, an Address for
Present-Day Christians.

I. Cleave to the Lord’s work as the
only and the all-sufficient ground of
acceptance and salvation. The Lord’s
work twofold: external, that accom-
plished by Himself in the days of His
flesh and finished on the cross-—a work
for man ; internal, that wrought in the
heart by His Holy Spirit—a work in
man. Both of these, the Atoning
Blood and the Quickening Spirit, are
much in danger of being sacrificed
even by Christians under the fascina-
tions of the new or anti-supernatural
theology, while by the unbelieving
world they are utterly rejected. But
without these and a steadfast ad-
herence to these both forgiveness and
holiness are unattainable.

II. Cleave to the Lord’s person as
the exclusive source of spiritual life
and the supreme object of affection.


CHAP. XI.








For religion after all does not consist
in adherence to any system of beliefs,
even though these should be right, but
in allowing these beliefs to influence
the heart and life. In other words,
conduct, rather than creed, is the ulti-
mate test of piety, adherence to Christ’s
person rather than to Christ’s truth (if
this be all) is the surest token of dis-
cipleship. Only the Lord to whose
person this adherence must be is not
the historical Christ, as He is called,
the man Jesus of Nazareth, but the
crucified risen and exalted Lord of
glory, who alone is the source of life
and object of love for the believing
soul,

IIT. Cleave to the Lord’s book as the
best directory for faith and practice.
Notwithstanding present-day contro-
versies about the inspiration and in-
errancy of Scripture, the divinity of
the sacred volume has never been
successfully assailed. After all that
criticism, higher or lower, has said, or
can say, it remains that the Bible
stands out pre-eminent over all the
writings of men as the loftiest com-
pendium of truth and the safest guide
for duty. No book like it can so
satisfactorily reply to the questions—
What should one believe? and What
must one do? in order to properly
fulfil his heaven-appointed mission on
the earth.

IV. Cleave to the Lord’s people as
the best companions for the heaven-
ward journey. If not possessed of
wisdom, or wealth, or power, or social
prestige—though even these are not
wanting among Christ’s followers—
they have holiness which always
carries about with it a contagion of
goodness, and they have spiritual
insight, an acquaintance with the
secret of the Lord which is invaluable
for such as would live well, and they
know where they are going, which is
more than the men of the world know.

V. Cleave to the Lord's heaven as
the future and final home. Of this
also there are those who would fain
deprive the Christian, saying there is
no hereafter, nothing beyond the tomb,


259


CHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








no resurrection, and no eternal life.
But to him who believes that Jesus
died and rose again, and that Jesus
lives and reigns to-day upon the throne
of the Universe, all these are guaran-
teed and made sure for evermore.


Ver. 24. The Piety of Barnabas.

I. Its visible flower and fruit.—
Goodness. “Barnabas was a good
man.” Arare commodity in the world
or even in the Church. In Barnabas
it was conspicuous and recognised by
all. The form it assumed in him was
that it must take in all to be genuine
—viz., love to the neighbour (Matt.
v. 43, xix. 19, xxi. 39; Rom. x19;
Gal.v. 14). Kindlyconsideration for and
tender sympathy with others appear in
all that is recorded of this distinguished
man—in his cheerful surrender and sale
of his property to relieve the necessities
of his poorer brethren (iv. 36, 37), in
his fraternal mediation between Saul
and the apostles (ix. 27), in his kindly
counsels to the young converts at
Antioch (ver. 23), in his journey to
Tarsus to fetch Saul (ver. 25), in his
modestly according the first place to
his brilliant colleague (xiii. 7, 13, 46),
in desiring to cover up the failings of
his sister’s son, John Mark (xv. 37).
In all he appears as a man in whose
eyes the claims of others stand first,
and those of self second.

II. Its hidden source and root.—
Faith. “ Barnabas was full of faith”
—i.e., faith in God and Jesus Christ,
in things spiritual and Divine, in
heaven and immortality. And with-
out this no man can be good in the
highest sense of that term. It is
doubtful whether real love to man is
possible to him who has not begun to
love God, or rather it is not doubtful.
Only he who regards man as God’s
child can attain to that spiritual affec-
tion which constitutes true neighbour
love (1 John iv. 7-21, v. 1, 2).

ITI. Its vital sap and nutriment.—
The Spirit. ‘“ Barnabas was full of
the Holy Ghost.” Such goodness as
Barnabas displayed can only spring
from a renewed heart (Gal. v. 22;


260


Eph. v. 9), in which the principle of
faith has found a lodgment and room
to operate (Gal. v. 6). Practical, self-
forgetful, philanthropical love is at once
the fruit of the Spirit and the work of
faith, and the one because the other.


Ver. 26. A Remarkable Year.—That
of Barnabas and Saul at Antioch. A
year of —

I. Brotherly communion with each
other.—One would like to have over-
heard the talks those two eminent men
of God and servants of Jesus Christ had
with one another—the one all aglow
with tender human sympathy, the
other all ablaze with spiritual en-
thusiasm ; the one with a presence that
felt like a soft summer wind, the other
with a soul that heaved and throbbed
like a burning volcano.

II. Spiritual fellowship with the
Church.—While appreciating the rare
privilege of each other's society, it
is obvious these noble men did not
disdain communion with ordinary
saints. For a whole year they were
gathered together with or in the
Church. They forsook not the as-
sembling of themselves with Christ’s
people as the manner of many is.
Social worship in the Christian sanc-
tuary is an invaluable privilege which
cannot be neglected without suffering
spiritual loss.

III. Ministerial labour for Christ.—
It was a year of unwearied evangelical
activity. They taught much people.
They relied, it is apparent, more upon
the self-evidencing power of the gospel
they proclaimed than upon their own
eloquence or argument. Their ad-
dresses were more didactic than horta-
tory. They taught the people—im-
parted to them instruction rather than
stirred them with movingappeals. A
good model for modern evangelists.


Ver. 26. The Name “ Christian.”

I. Its origin——1l. As to place—
Antioch. 2. With whom—most likely
the heathen population. 3. In what
spirit. Probably a spirit of mockery,
(See “ Critical Remarks.”)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


II. Its import.—1l. It was meant to
pour contempt upon believers in the
Saviour, by designating them Christians
or followers of Christ who had been
crucified. 2. It is meant to-day to dis-
tinguish believers in the Saviour as
Christ’s people and friends.

III. Its distinction. — Originally
given as a mark of dishonour, it is now
a badge of glorious renown for all who
wear it, the name of Christ being the
highest either in heaven or on earth.

IV. Its obligations,—Now, as at
first, it imposes on its bearers certain
high responsibilities, which may all be
summed up in this that they shall walk
worthy of that name by—1. Treading
in Christ’s footsteps (1 Peter ii. 21;
1 John ii. 6), 2. Breathing Christ’s
Spirit (Eph. v. 2; 1 John iii. 16; and
3. Maintaining and extending Christ’s
cause (Matt. xxviii. 18-20).


Vers. 29,30. Concerning the Collection.

I. Its object was praiseworthy.—To
assist the poor saints at Jerusalem.
Kindness to the poor frequently en-
joined upon Christ’s followers (Matt. v.
42; Luke xii. 33, xviii. 22; Eph. iv.
28) as an essential ingredient of Chris-


. CHAP. XII.


tianity (Rom. xii. 13; Gal. vi. 10;
James i. 27).

II. Its character was voluntary.
As all charity and almsgiving should
be (Rom. xii. 8; 2 Cor. viii. 12). En-
forced contributions have no religious
value whatever. -They may do good,
but they are not Christian alms.

IIT. Its universality was undoubted.
Every man determined to have a share
in the collection, When will all Christ’s
people be voluntary givers? How the
Church’s exchequer would overflow !

IV. Its liberality was great.—EHach
man contributed according to his ability,
as God had prospered him (1 Cor. xvi.


2 2 Oore ia? \e


V. Its promptness was decided.
They acted on their ,enerous impulse
at once, without delay or hesitation
(2 Cor. viii. 11).

VI. Its despatch was qguick.—It was
no sooner collected than it was for-
warded to its destination.

VII. Its application was swre.—Com-
mitted to the hands of the Jerusalem
elders, it was certain to reach the
persons for whom it was intended.
All points worthy of imitation by
Christian Churches.





CHAPTER XII.


Divine INTERPOSITIONS ON THE CHURCH’s BEHALF—EXPERIENCES OF MERCY
AND JUDGMENT.


§ 1. The Days of Unleavened Bread; or, the Persecution of the Church (vers,
1-19).
§ 2. The Death of Herod ; or, the Church’s Persecutor Punished (vers. 20-25).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1, About that time (compare xix. 23).,—Te., before, or about the time of, the arrival
of Barnabas and Saul at Jerusalem (xi. 30). The incidents recorded in this chapter seem to
have occurred during the stay of these brethren in Jerusalem (ver. 25). As the predicted
famine broke out under Cuspius Fadus, who was sent to Judea after the death of Agrippa
—i.é. after August 6th, A.D. 44—the visit of Barnabas and Saul most likely took place before
Agrippa’s death. Herod the king.—Heiod Agrippa I. was the son of Aristobulus and
Bernice (Jos., Ant., XVII.i.2 ; Wars, I. xxviii. 1),anephew of Herod Antipas and grandson of
Herod the Great (see further in ‘ Homiletical Analysis”), To vex certain of the Church.—
Better, “ to maltreat certain of (lit., from) the Church,” a6 conveying the idea of proceeding


26]


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





from, and hence belonging to. James the brother of John.—The elder of the two sons of
Zebedee (Matt. iv, 21, x. 2), and to be distinguished from James the Less (i. 13), as also
from James the brother of our Lord (ver. 17, xv. 13, xxi. 18; Gal. i. 19). James’s martyrdom
fulfilled our Lord’s words in Matt. xx. 23. “It was wonder Herod killed no more, seeing
this took so well with the people” (Trapp). That so little is said about this apostle’s
martyrdom has been explained (Weizsiicker), though wrongly, on the grounds partly of
Luke’s want of knowledge concerning the incident (which is hardly likely, since he knew
both John and Paul), and partly of the unhistorical character of the narrative which, it is
said, was composed mainly for the glorification of Peter.

Ver. 3. It pleased the Jews.—This remark is assigned, though without cause, to Luke’s
pragmatism, and pronounced inaccurate (Hausrath, Holtzmann), on the ground that some-
what later the Pharisees in a particular instance sided with the Jewish Christians against
the Sadducees (Jos., Ant., XX. ix. 1), as if popular bodies were not proverbially variable in
their judgments and actions! The opinion is as likely to be correct (Zeller) that Herod
found the murder of James to be not so popular as he at first imagined, and accordingly
winked at Peter’s liberation from prison!! The days of unleavened bread.—The festival of
the Passover, so named because of the injunction to remove leaven from the house during its
continuance (Hxod. xii. 15, xiii. 7).

Ver. 4. For Easter read the Passover, meaning not the paschal supper (Wieseler), but the
whole period of the festival. To the people.—To gratify them by the spectacle of his
execution, é

Ver. 5 The Church.—(See on ii. 47, v. 11, viii. 1, xi. 26.) Nowa large community which
must have assembled in different buildings throughout the city. Without ceasing.—
Rather, earnestly, éxrevys, a word of later Greek, signifying ‘that which is stretched,”
hence “ intent ” or “ fervent.”

Ver. 6. The same night.—Emphatic, the night before the day on which Herod contemplated
making his exhibition of the Apostle. Sleeping between two soldiers.—T wo of the quaternion
entrusted with his keeping (ver. 4). Bound with two chains.—JZ.e., by one to each soldier.
The keepers or guards before the door were the other two soldiers of the company of four.
This, the Roman method of imprisonment, custvdia militaris (which, however, usually
fastened the prisoner to only one soldier), as indeed imprisonment of any kind, was unknown
to the Mosaic law. The kings were the first to introduce this form of punishment, especially
for the chastisement of free-speaking prophets (2 Chron. xvi. 10; Jer. xx. 2, xxxii. 2).

Ver. 7. The or an angel of the Lord.—The various attempts to explain Peter’s deliverance
on natural grounds are all unsatisfactory (see “ Homiletical Analysis). The light which
shined in the prison, lit., hvwse (a euphemism), was the usual supernatural radiance or
“olory Bg the Lord” that encompassed angelic visitors to earth (Luke ii. 9, xxiv. 4; Matt.
xxviii. 3).

Ver. 8. Gird thyself, etc.—Shows Peter had divested himself of his outer coat or tunic
and shoes before lying down to sleep.

Ver. 10. The first and the second ward, or watch.—T.e., the two soldiers stationed at the
door of Peter’s cell, and two others posted near the iron gate which led out to the city.
The situation of the prison is unknown.

Ver. 11.—Suggests that until the angel had left him Peter had not come to himself, or
recovered his ordinary consciousness, lit., become in himself. The expectation of the people
of the Jews reveals that the populace were now against the apostles, and eagerly looking
forward to Peter’s execution ; changed times since iv. 21.

Ver. 12, Considered tie thing.—Better, having become aware of ru yevdueva, what had
happened. Whether John whose surname was Mark was the second evangelist is uncertain,
thovgh he is commonly supposed to have been the Mark whom Peter terms his son (1 Peter
v. 13), 4.¢., spiritually, as having been converted through his instrumentality. He was sister’s
sin Cather, cousin) to Barnabas (Cul, iv. 10), whom he accompanied on an cvangelising
tour, after Barnabas had separated from Paul on his account (xv. 37, 39), He had formerly
attended these two missionaries as far as Perga, and there deserted them (xiii. 13).

Ver. 13. The Greek name, Rhoda, Rose, does not prove that the maid who acted as portress
was not a Jewess (see on i, 23). The office of doorkeeper among the Jews was commonly
assigned to a female (John xviii. 16).


Ver, 14.—Peter must have spoken, perhaps told his name, to cause his voice to be re-
cognised.

Ver. 15.—The doctrine of tutelary angels (see “ Homiletical Analysis ”) is neither affirmed
nor denied, but simply cited as a popular opinion (compare Matt. xviii. 10).

Ver. 17. Went to another place.—Hardly in the city (Meyer), but outside of it, though
not to Rome (Catholic expositors), or Antioch (Kuinoel)—perhaps to Babylonia (Nosgen),
or some one of the cities of the Diaspora named in his first epistle (i. 1) (Zéckler). The
place of Peter’s concealment would no doubt, for prudential reasons, at first be kept secret
and might easily have been unknown to Luke’s informant,


262


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XIi.





Ver. 19. Put to death.—Should be led away—i.e., to execution.

Ver. 20, For And Herod read And, or but, he—i.e., Herod. Highly displeased.—dupyopayar
in a hostile state of mind, in modern phrase, “ contemplating hostilities” (Plumptre), thoug!
it is doubtful whether open war against Phoenicia would have been permitted by Rome.
Perhaps prohibitory tariffs with shutting of ports and markets were what Agrippa had in
view. Tyre and Sidon.—The first mention of these Picenician cities in the Acts. For their
antiquity and splendour see Isa. xxili. 7, 8; Hzek. xxvii. xxviii. Blastus.—Judging from his
name may have been a Roman, and from the epithet, 6 él rod co:rGvos, preefectus cubiculi,
cubicularis, was a chamberlain like Candace’s minister (viii. 27), though not like him a
eunuch.

Ver. 21. The set day.—According to Josephus was August Ist, and the second day of the
public games celebrated by Agrippa in honour of Claudius (Jos., Anzt., XIX. viii. 2), The
royal apparel_—Was wholly of silver and of a contexture truly wonderful. The throne, or
judgment scat, bad been prepared for him in the theatre.

Ver. 23. For the read an angel of the Lord. Smote him... eaten of worms... gave
up the ghost.—According to Josephus (Amt., XIX. viii. 2), the disease, which was acute
disorder of the bowels, smote the king with sudden and violent pain. Forthwith he was
carried out of the theatre a dying man; and in five days—i.e., on August 6th, he was dead.
Compare the deaths of Joram (2 Chron. xxi, 19), Antiochus Epiphanes (2 Macc. ix. 5-10),
and of Herod the Great (Jos., Ant., XVII. vi. 5). As to the nature of this disease by which
Agrippa was cut off see “ Homiletical Analysis.” The suggestion that Herod was poisoned
by Blastus, the king’s valet, whom the Pheenicians had gained over for this purpose (Renan),
is scarcely worthy of consideration, having no plausible support either from Josephus or
Luke.

Ver, 24. But the word of God grew and multiplied.—An antithesis to the horrible end
of the persecuting king. (Compare v. 12 ff, vi. 7, ix. 31.)

Ver. 25. And Barnabas and Saul returned.—Not to, as some authorities read, but from
Jerusalem.—shortly after Herod’s death, How long they remained in the metropolis is not
stated, but it is not likely to have been long. Alford thinks their arrival should be placed
after Herod’s death, as “of all the persons whose execution would be pleasing to the Jews
Saul would hold the foremost place.” Took with them John, whose surname was Mark.—
See ver. 12, whence the inference has been drawn that Barnabas and Saul, while in the city,
belonged to the congregation that assembled in John’s mother’s house.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—19.


The Days of Unleavened Bread ; or, the Persecution of the Church.

I. The imprisonment of Peter.—1. When tt happened. (1) “ About that
time ”—i.e., about the time when Barnabas and Saul went up to Jerusalem.
(2) In “ the days of unleavened bread ”—1.e., during the Passover festival, which
continued seven days, and was so named because during its currency no leaven
was allowed in Jewish houses. (3) Shortly before or after the death of Herod.
(4) Hence about the spring, end of March, or beginning of April, a.p. 44.
2. To whom it was due. Herod Agrippa the First, that “vile Oriental,” as
Renan styles him (Zhe Apostles, p. 199), Aristobulus’s son, and Herod the Great’s
grandson, who on the accession of Caligula, a.p. 37, received the title of king
with the former possessions of Philip and Lysanias (Luke iii. 1), at a later period
the tetrarchy of Antipas, and later still, in a.p. 41, from Claudius, Samaria, and
Judea; so that, like his grandfather, he swayed the sceptre of kingly authority
all over Palestine, besides possessing a royal residence in Jerusalem with an
income of twelve million drachme (see ‘ Hints” on ver. 1). 3. By what motive
inspired. A desire to please the Jews. Anxiety to win the favour of his Jewish
subjects had already caused Agrippa I. to unsheath the sword against the
Christians, and even to behead the son of Zebedee, James the Just, whose
execution tradition (Jerome) places on the 15th Nisan, or the anniversary of the
Crucifixion. Combined with this was more than likely a fanatical zeal for the
Jewish religion which he personally affected, and which, it has been well said
(Renan), inevitably led a weak prince like him to become a persecutor. 4. Jn
what manner carried out. Having been arrested, the apostle was securely lodged
in the Tower of Antonia on the north-west corner of the Temple—a fortress


263


cHap. xt. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


De eee eee


originally built by John Hyrcanus for a residence, and subsequently enlarged
by Herod the Great “in a magnificent manner.” Four quaternions of soldiers—
i.e., sixteen warriors were told off to guard the apostle lest an escape or a rescue
should be attempted and perhaps effected. Clearly Herod was afraid of the
Christians or of the Christians’ God, or of both. ‘ Had Peter’s captors regarded
him as a common every-day criminal, they would have deemed it preposterous
that sixteen soldiers or even four at a time should be required to keep him safe.
That such unusual precautions were judged necessary is one of those indirect and
latent marks of historic truth with which this narrative abounds, and which are
even more valuable than direct proofs, because of being undesigned ” (Whitelaw,
The Theological Monthly, No. 24, p. 406). 5. For what purpose intended. To keep
him securely till the feast was passed, when he should be brought forth before
the people and despatched into the other world after James. Agrippa, being a
“pious” sovereign who had begun to “attend to his devotions” (Renan, The
Apostles, p. 200), suffering not a day to pass over his head without its appointed
sacrifice (Josephus, Ant., XIX. vii. 3), would not profane the sanctity of the
season by an act of bloodshed. Beautiful piety! Besides, the spectacle could be
performed with as much effect when the festival had closed and before the con-
gregated crowds dispersed to their homes. Behold, another Solomon arisen in
the land! 6. To what action it led. It set the Christian community a-praying
for their incarcerated leader. Had Agrippa known, that calling in of Heaven's
aid on behalf of Peter and against him was ominous. Where is the creature
that can stand when God Almighty takes the field against him? “Judged by
ordinary standards, the fate of Peter was sealed. The probability of his escaping
the headsman’s axe was small, if not absolutely ni/. Nevertheless, as people who
had not been initiated into ‘modern science,’ and in their lack of nineteenth
century culture saw no irreconcilable contradiction between tke reign of law and
answers to prayer, but believed that ‘all things were possible with God,’ the
Jerusalem disciples betook themselves to besieging Heaven with their outcries
and their supplications, appealing with exquisite naiveté to Him in whose hands
were all men’s lives, those of kings as well as common men” (The Theological
Monthly, No. 24, p. 407). 7. How it affected the prisoner. ‘Incarceration was
for Peter unfortunately no new experience (iv. 3, v. 18); and although in the
present instance grounds existed for apprehending that he would never leave his
cell till he was marched forth to die, it does not appear that the prospect filled
him with dismay or even disturbed his nocturnal slumbers.” ‘That Peter
exhibited such quietness of spirit when on the verge of martyrdom was a proof
that he was then a better man than he had been when, after having boastfully
exclaimed, ‘ Lord, I will lay down my life for Thy sake,’ to save his skin he first
ran away and then denied his Master with oaths and curses ” (Lbid., p. 406, 407).
See ‘‘ Hints” on ver. 6.

II. The deliverance of Peter (ver. 7).—1. Brought about in answer to prayer.
Renan, who has scruples about “ the angel,” and is silent concerning the Church’s
prayers, for reasons not specified, nevertheless entertains no doubt that Peter
was lodged in the Tower of Antonia by command of Agrippa I., and that on the
night before the morning fixed for his execution he escaped—in this agreeing
with such critics as Zeller, Weizsiicker, and others, who, while rejecting what
they style the mythical embellishments of the story, do not question that Peter
was both imprisoned and made his escape ; but if between these two occurrences,
the imprisonment and the escape, it really happened that the Church prayed as
above described, it will be hard to convince an ingenuous mind that Peter’s
deliverance was not something more than a happy coincidence, was not a con-
spicuous fulfilment of that Scripture which says, ‘‘ Before they call I will answer,
and while they are yet speaking I will hear” ([bid., pp. 407.408). 2. Hffected by

264


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xt


miraculous intervention. Exactly this was Peter’s own account of the matter to
his friends assembled in the house of John Mark’s mother (ver. 17). Luke’s
report—of the descent of the angel into Peter’s cell, of the falling off from
Peter's hands of the chains with which he was bound, etc., etc. (vers. 7-11), was
probably derived from Peter himself or from John Mark, whom he subsequently
met in Rome (2 Tim. iv. 10, 11); and unless his report is to be set aside as
utterly unhistorical—and Renan admits “it is so lively and just that it is
difficult to find in it any place for prolonged elaboration ”—it will need to be
conceded that Peter’s rescue was brought about by miracle. Other explanations
of a naturalistic sort—such as the bursting open of the prison by a flash of
lightning or an earthquake (Hegel), as at Philippi (Acts xvi. 26), the bribing of
the apostle’s guardians by the apostle’s friends, or the conniving of the former at
Peter’s escape through sympathy for him or hatred of his persecutor (Eichhorn,
Ewald), or finally some unknown but still natural cause (Renan, Zeller,
Weizsicker, Beyschlag), are insufficient to account for the incident, unless first
the credibility of the record be broken down. To challenge the authenticity of
this portion of the Acts on the ground that it relates what is supernatural is to
beg the question at issue. 3. Confirmed by the trustworthy character of the
narrative. In addition to those already indicated, the following signs of veri-
similitude in the story may be pointed out. (1) The return of Peter to the
house of John Mark’s mother (ver. 12), a statement which receives explanation
from the circumstance that John Mark was one of Peter’s spiritual children
(1 Peter v. 13). (2) The behaviour of Rhoda (ver. 13), which points to the equal
footing upon which bond and free had by this time begun to stand in the early
Christian Church (ii. 44, iv. 32; compare Lechler, Apostolische Zeitalter, p. 323).
(3) The exclamation concerning Peter’s angel (ver. 15), which harmonises with
the well-known belief, then current among the Jews, that “ every true Israelite
had spécially assigned to him a guardian angel, who, when he appeared in human
form, assumed the likeness of the man whom he protected” (Plumptre).
(4) Peter’s instruction to report what bad happened, unto James and the
brethren (ver. 17), which is exactly what one would have expected from the
prominent position in the Church at that time held, according to both Luke
(Acts xv. 13) and Paul (Gal. i. 19, ii. 9), by the brother of our Lord. (5) The
excitement among the soldiers when it was discovered that Peter had escaped
(ver. 18), which could hardly have arisen had an earthquake happened or had
they themselves been privy to his flight. The idea of their pretending an
excitement they did not feel is out of the question. (6) The fruitless search of
Herod for his prisoner (ver. 19), which shows at least that Peter had been
delivered. (7) The execution of the guards for allowing him to escape (ver. 19),
which abundantly attests that they had not been able to prevent Peter’s
release.

Learn.—That Christ’s Church and people will certainly suffer persecution.
2. That both have strong encouragement to pray. 3. That it is better to have
angels on one’s side than soldiers. 4, That Christ is as able as ever to watch
over and defend His Church and people. 5. That whatever deliverances are
enjoyed by either should be thankfully acknowledged by both.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver 1. The Persecution of the Church ties, and gladiatorial combats. 2. A
by Agrippa. hypocrite. If he practised the outward
I. The persecutor.— Herod AgrippaI. forms of piety it was not because he
—His character. 1. A heathen. Ad- loved them. Jost (Geschichte Juden-
dicted to public games, musical festivi- thwms, i. 420) relates that once when


265





CHAP. XII.








reading in a public service, “ One from
among thy brethren shalt thou set
king over thee; thou mayest not set a
stranger over thee which is not thy
brother” (Deut. xvii. 15), Agrippa
burst into tears, and that the people
cried out, ‘‘ Be not distressed, Agrippa,
thou art our brother.” This incident
Plumptre cites as an illustration of
Herod’s “sensitiveness to praise or
blame”; if authentic, it may, with as
much reason, be interpreted as showing
that this ‘pious sovereign,” like other
potentates that have lived since, was a
skilful actor and knew how to play a
part. 3. A hater of Jesus. He had
inherited the passion of hostility against
Jesus from his fathers, one of whom,
Herod the Great, had persecuted the
child Jesus, and another, Herod
Antipas, had beheaded John the
Baptist (Besser: Bibel Stunden, III.
i. 588).

II. The persecuted.—The Church
in Jerusalera—i.e., the Church—1l. At
its headquarters. _ Paralysed at the
centre, Herod doubtless thought it
would become inactive at its extremi-
ties. 2. In its leaders. These cut
off, the king may have reasoned, the
followers would be dispersed.

III. The persecution.—1. Jés motive.
(1) To gratify his own hatred of the
new faith. (2) To ingratiate himself
with his Jewish subjects. 2. Jts time.
(1) When the Church was forming for
itself a new centre of operations at
Antioch—which showed how greatly
Herod had miscalculated. (2) When
the Church at Jerusalem was becoming
distressed on account of the impending
famine—which shows how God some-
times allows the trials of His people to
multiply when these are least able to
bear them. 3. lis form. (1) Violent
death for James. (2) Unjust im-
prisonment for Peter. (3) Cruel harass-
ment for the disciples.


Ver. 2. The Death of James.

I. Early.—About ten years after
the Ascension ; a testimony to his ripe-
ness in grace (Matt. xx. 23). James
died first, John last, of the Twelve.


266


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


II. Violent.—Probably by decapita~
tion; a fulfilment of the Saviour’s
promise.

III. Sudden.—-No reason to believe
he either languished long in prison or
was put to the trouble of a trial,
though Clement of Alexandria and
Eusebius of Czsarea say there were
both an accusation and a defence.

IV. Lonely.—Hardly likely he had
the presence of any friends except God
and Jesus Christ to comfort or cheer
him at the fatal moment. Yet these,
one need not question, would not be
absent.

V. Submissive.—Not to be doubted
that James met his doom without a
murmur. ‘Tradition speaks of the for-
titude exhibited by him on the way to
excution as having led to the conver-
sion of the officer who guarded him
(see below).

VI. Triumphant—If the Saviour
manifested not His glory to His dying
servant as He did to Stephen, He
assuredly left not that servant to
meet the headsman’s axe without the
inward supports of His grace; and if
the heavens opened not to James’s
mortal vision in the death hour, un-
questionably they would roll back their
pearly gates to receive his departing
spirit.

VII. Lamented.—If uncertain
whether he had a_ burial at the
hands of devout men as Stephen had,
little question may be entertained that
“devout men made great lamentation
over him.”

VIII. Remembered.—Where the
precious dust of the slaughtered dis-
ciple found a resting-place has not been
told. No reason to suppose the
Armenian convent within the walls of
Jerusalem covers the spot. Yet the
existence of such a shrine witnesses to
the affectionate regard with which the
Christian Church has preserved the
recollection of her apostolic martyr.

Note.-—Clement and Eusebius report
an incident connected with the martyr-
dom of James, which, if true, lends a
pathetic interest to the tale. Struck
by the calm fortitude of his prisoner,


i HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. THE ACTS.


CHAP. XI¥.


ae


the officer who guarded the apostle, or,
according to another version, the false
witness who had testified against him,
was moved to repentance, confessed
Christ, and was led forth along with
the apostle to be put to death. On
the way to the scene of judgment,
having asked the apostle to forgive
him, he was at once pardoned; the
apostle, having paused, looked upon
him with a glance of love, embraced
him and kissed him, with the words,
“* Peace be to you!”


James the Brother of John.

I. Honoured in the family to which
he belonged.—1. His father, Zebedee,
a well-to-do fisherman on the sea of
Galilee (Matt. iv. 21). 2. His mother,
Salome, one of the pious women who
had cast in their lot with Christ (Matt.
xx. 20). 3. His brother, John, the
beloved disciple who leaned on Jesus’s
bosom (John xiii. 23).

II. More honoured in the office
which he bore.—The apostleship. An
office which—l. Admitted him t»
closest personal intimacy with Chrrst
(John xv. 15). 2. Opened up before
him a wide sphere of service for C.rrist
(John xv. 16). 3. Conferred on him
high privileges from Christ (Luke v. 10 ;
Mark i. 29, v. 37; Matt. xvii. 1,
xxvi. 37).

III. Most honoured in the crown of
martyrdom he received.—l. After a
short period of service. He was called
to his reward, not so soon as Stephen,
but much earlier than Peter or John.
2. Probably without muck pain. Not
like Stephen stoned to death, but most
likely beheaded with a swift and sudden
stroke. 3. Certainly with great glory.
The crown of martyrdom was for him
a crown of life (Rev. ii. 10), a crown
‘of righteousness (2 Tim. iv. 8),a crown
of glory (1 Peter v. 4).


Ver. 5, 12. The Prayers of the Church
should be—1. Addressed to God. Anot
unnecessary reminder. 2. By a united
congregation. United, if not in place,
in purpose and heart. 3. Jn an earnest
spirit.


Not formally, but sincerely, as _


if the suppliants meant them, which
they do not always. 4. For ministers
of the Gospel. Not excluding all sorts
and conditions of men (1 Tim. ii. 1),
but specially for ambassadors of the
Church’s King and Head (Eph. vi. 19).
5. That they may be delivered from un-
reasonable and wicked men (2 Thess.
iii. 2). If in any measure faithful to
their calling, ministers will be exposed
to trouble from such. 6. That their
lives may be prolonged. If not for
their sakes, for their Master’s and for
the sake of their work. If any lives
are valuable to a community, those of
good ministers of Christ are. And


1. That their usefulness may be in-


creased. A true minister desires not
personal advantage, fame, or wealth,
but growing ability to serve in the
Gospel (2 Cor. xii. 14).

Ver. 6. Sleeping on the Eve of
Martyrdom.—Illustrations: 1. In the
beginning of the Marian persecution,
writes Froude (History of England,
v. 488), ‘Rogers was ‘to break the
ice,’ as Bradford described it. On
the morning of the 4th of February
(a.p. 1555), the wife of the keeper of
Newgate came to his bedside. He was
sleeping soundly, and she woke him
with difficulty to let him know that he
was wanted. 2. Those acquainted with
Scottish history will recall the last
sleep of the great and good Argyll in
Edinburgh prison before he stooped his
honoured head to the loaded axe of the
maiden. 3. A tradesman of Lyons,
of the name of Grivet, was, during the
reign of terror in France, sentenced to
death, and brought into the cave of the
condemned, where were several others
who with him were to suffer next
morning, and who, on his arrival,
pressed round him to sympathise in
his fate and fortify him for the stroke
he was about to encounter. ‘Come
and sup with us,’ said they, ‘this is
the last inn in the journey of life;
to-morrow we shall arrive at our long
home.’ Grivet, who was calm and
composed, accepted the invitation,
supped heartily, and then, retiring to
the remotest corner of the cave, buried


267


CHAP. XII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i  aeEEannmmememnned


himself in the straw and went to
sleep. The morning dawned, the other
prisoners, tied together, were led away
to execution, without Grivet, who was
fast asleep, not perceiving anything or
being perceived. The door of the cave
was locked. On awakening he felt
astonished to find himself in perfect
solitude. Four days passed without
any new prisoners being brought in.
During these days he subsisted on
provisions which he found scattered
about the cave. On theevening of the
fourth day he was discovered by the
turnkey, who reported his omission to
the judges. In a moment of leniency
these set the prisoner at liberty ” (Percy
Anecdotes).


Ver. 12. The Church in Mary's
house.—A. study for present-day con-
gregations.

I. Numerously attended.—“ Many
were gathered together.” A healthful
sign of piety when Christ’s disciples
forsake not the assembling of them-
selves together (Heb. x. 25)—a practice
greatly declining at the present day.
The advantages of social worship are
too obvious to require detailed rehearsal.
The worshipper frequently forgets that
even though he may not himself derive
benefit from the services of the Chris-
tian sanctuary, he may by his presence
impart benefit to his fellow-worshippers.
Besides, apart from benefit either given
or received, it is the duty of Christ’s
people in this way to honour their
exalted Lord. eee |

II. Seriously occupied.— The as-
sembled disciples were ‘“ praying.”
Prayer, though not the sole, yet an
important, part of public worship, and
should be conducted with intelligence,
solemnity, and earnestness. Amongst
the objects of a Church’s supplications
place should be found for all that con-
cerns the welfare of the Church itself,
its pastors and teachers, its members
and adherents, the progress of the
spiritual life among believers, the ex-
tension of the gospel in the world.

III. Delightfully surprised. — By


Peter’s appearance in their midst—no


263


doubt an answer to their prayers. So
will praying congregations and praying
individuals experience similar surprises,
if only their prayers be united, believ-
ing, and in earnest (Matt. xviii. 19;
John xiv. 13; James i. 5).

IV. Wonderfully instructed. — By

Peter’s story of the Lord’s dealings with
him in prison. So should Christian
pastors edify their congregations by
occasionally relating their own ex-
periences and always giving their
hearers the benefit of those higher
views of truth and duty into which
they themselves have been led (1 Peter
iv. 11).
Vis ‘suddenly left.—Peter departed
and went into another place. It would
certainly be wrong to derive from this
an argument against a stationary and
in favour of a circulating ministry ; but
the incident may be used to recall
the thought that here the Church’s
ministers, like the Hebrew priests, are
not suffered to continue by reason of
death (Heb. vii. 23).


Ver. 13. A Maid named Rhoda.

I. A slave girl and yet a Christian.
—Christianity adapted to the deepest
wants of all sorts and conditions of
men. Believers of all ranks and de-
grees may be found within the Church
of Jesus Christ.

II. A servant and yet attending a
prayer meeting.—Many regard the
Church’s services as only designed for
the leisured classes. But Christian de-
votion oils the wheels of all forms of
industry.

IIT. A humble individual and yet
the bearer of a joyful message.—It is
not the medium through which a com-
munication comes, but the character of
the communication itself that imparts
to it its chief value. It is not the
preacher that saves, but the gospel he
preaches. Nor is great talent required
for telling the glad tidings of the gospel.
A very unimportant person may blow
the trump of Jubilee.

IV. A weak woman, and yet able
to do important service in the Church.
—Compare the service rendered to


* HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XII.





Naaman the Syrian by the captive
maid (2 Kings v. 2, 3). No one too
insignificant to work in the Christian
vineyard. Many of the noblest deeds
are done by feeble folk. Women and
children can do acts of high renown
when inspired by love for Jesus Christ
(John xii. 3; 1 Cor. xvi. 15).


Ver. 17. The Three Jameses of Scrip-
ture ; or, Three differing T'ypes of Chris-
tian Service.

I. James the brother of John, the first
apostolic martyr.—A representative of
the Church’s confessors. A type of
those who serve Christ by suffering—
an honour reserved for the few.

Il. James the son of Alpheus, or
James the Little; also one of the Twelve,
concerning whose life and labours
nothing is known. A_ representative
of those who fill humble and obscure
stations in the Church. <A type of
those who serve Christ without attract-
ing, or perhaps even seeking, the notice
and applause of men—an honour be-
stowed on the many.

III. James the brother of our Lord,
the president of the Jerusalem Church.
—A representative of those who are
called to fill public positions in the
Church. <A type of those who serve
Christ by acting as the guides and
leaders of their fellows—an honour
mostly conferred on persons of special
gifts. Allsorts of servants are required
by Christ to do His work in the Church
and in the world.


Vers. 1-17. Peter’s Deliverance.

I. We obtain a pleasing view of the
deep and tender sense of brotherhood
which pervaded the early Christian
Church.—This sense of brotherhood is
one of the best gifts which the gospel
brought to men. It is indeed the
primary, unique element of the human
race as a special, distinct crcation. As
a variety of intelligent creature, in-
tended to carry still higher the proof of
God’s creative wealth, the fact of its
interlaced brotherhood, instinct with a
common life, mutual love, and fully-


shared joys, was its distinguishing
feature. We know what a disastrous
blow sin struck this distinguishing
principle of human nature—how the
members of the one family fell apart ;
how, dissociation came into play, with
all its destructive consequences. If re-
clamation should ever come for the race,
if it should ever be started afresh upon a
career of honour and blessedness, this
principle must be called into life again.
It must become the regulative power of
human action. Men must be taught
not only to know God as a Father, but
each other as brothers, if they would
attain to their true destiny. How


beautifully did the early Church dis-


play this elevated, this transforming
principle! How closely were they
joined together! How constantly
they assembled for mutual instruction !
How tenderly they loved one another !
Out of the fruitful soil of loving
brotherhood sprang up the intense
concern of the whole Church of Jerusa-
lem for Peter, now in the hands of a
relentless enemy. It is the true
cement which binds Christians of every
name and country together in an in-
dissoluble bond.

II. We see the Church of Jerusalem
in the attitude of prayer for an im-
perilled brother.—The Christians of
Jerusalem are described as constituting
one Church. 1. Jé was a praying
Church. When they had returned to
the city from the Mount of Olives after
witnessing the ascension of the Lord
into heaven, they entered into an upper
room, and all continued with one accord
in prayer. 2. By the habit of prayer
the Church was prepared for trying
emergencies. ‘While therefore Peter
was being kept in prison, prayer was
being made of the Church unto God
for him.” Here was a great emergency.
It was a fair, full test of their faith.
They had no carnal weapons with
which to fight. They had no distin-
guished friends at court to whom they
might appeal. They had no treasures
to offer as a ransom for the valuable
life. 3. They prayed in concert. All
hearts were touched, all minds agreed ;


269


CHAP. XII.





not two or three, but the entire Church
of Jerusalem. 4. They prayed un-
ceasingly. There was no relaxation of
energy, no manifestation of doubt, no
giving over of entreaty. 5. The prayer
was not only unceasing ; it was instant,
earnest—intense perhaps better ex-
presses the meaning of the word.
They prayed not coldly, nor over the
fields, says John Calvin, but so long as
Peter was in the conflict the faithful
did what they could to help him, and
that without wearisomeness, What a
power is this intensity in the field of
prayer! 6. They prayed to the point.
It was all for Peter. Self was for-
gotten. 7. And to God direct they spoke.
No living man is called on to help ; no
message is sent to Herod. They cast
themselves on God nakedly; they in-
voke the Divine Power only. The case
is urgent, and the mighty Presence
alone filled the scene.

III. The appeal has been made, the
Divine Power invoked ; let us see the
issue.—W. C. Craig, D.D.


Herod and Peter.

I. God knows all about His children.
—Beyond the bare fact of Peter’s
arrest, the disciples were in profound
ignorance concerning him. The secrets
of the Roman prison-house were well
kept. But there was One whose seeing
and knowing could not be hindered.
God kept watch over Peter, knew in
what corridor and cell he was confined,
knew the names of the guards to whom
he was chained, knew just where and
when and how to send His angel to
visit him. Peter had no occasion to
feel solitary or forsaken. His best
friend never let him for one moment
out of His sight. Our recognised
afflictions are not the hardest to bear.
The tears we shed in secret, the dis-
appointments of which we never speak,
the sorrowful hearts which we hide
under smiling faces—these are the
things that test and strain the fibre of
manhood. It greatly helps us to bear
troubles like these, to remember that
God knows all about them.

II. God keeps Himself informed


270


HOMILE1IC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





about His children in order to help
them.—His knowledge is not accidental,
nor the result of mere curiosity. He
has it, and uses it to succour us in our
times of extremity. He kept watch over
Peter, in order that, when the right
time came, He might deliver him from
prison. We lose a part—and the best
part—of the great truth of Providence
by our false accentuation. Providence
is Providence—the foreseeing and
arranging that precedes helpful doing.
No small part of the anxiety that
disquiets us arises from our failure
to apprehend this gracious method of
the Divine working. Men have too
mechanical an idea of life. They have
a great deal to say about ‘cause and
effect.” Our common blessings are
supposed to come in what we call the
“order of nature.” What we call
“nature” is only the material form in
which God embodies His will and
power. The results of physical pro-
cesses are only the Divine Word ‘‘ made
flesh and dwelling amongst us.” What
we call “law” is only God’s method of
working. In proportion as men
realise that truth they get towards the
heart of things. “The Lord of Hosts
is with us; the God of Jacob is our
refuge.”

III. When God helps His children
He expects them to help themselves.—
It was easily possible for God, in work-
ing a miracle for Peter’s deliverance, to
have wrought out every item of it.
But that; is not the Divine method.
There were some things which the
apostle could do for himself. He could
obey the command to “rise up
quickly” ; he could gird himself and
bind on his sandals; he could cast his
garment about him, and follow the
angel; he could find his own way,
when the angel left him, through the
well-remembered streets to the house of
his friends. What he could not do for
himself was done for him; what he
could do he must do, or it would not be
done. It is an old proverb, but a
weighty one, that ‘‘God helps those
who help themselves.” Men have a
certain range of natural abilities, inside


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XII.





of which God does not step to interfere.
We come into life equipped for its
duties and responsibilities, and are not
expected to let our furnishings rust
from disuse. In the Divine economy of
the universe, there is no provision for
idle blood. Prayer is a power, but not
such a power as allows men to fold
their hands, and expect results which
they might secure by the proper use of
means within their grasp. We are
“workers together with God,” and,
so long as we are idle, the heavens
keep silence. God will never do any-
thing for man that man can do for
himself.

IV. When God moves in behalf of
His children no obstacle is too great
for Him.—Humanly judging, how many
and what insuperable difficulties stood in
the way of Peter’s deliverance! The
prison was secure against assault; no
mob could force its massive gates. The
guards were deaf to either bribes or
threats. Each one must answer with
his life for the safe-keeping of the
prisoner. The shrewdest strategist
could contrive no plan of escape or
rescue that held out the least promise
of success. But how easy for God to
do that which was impossible for man !
He had but to will it, and the keepers
were helpless and asleep. And yet how
apt men always are to magnify what
they call the impossibilities in the way
of answers to prayer! They limit the
range of their petitions to the things
which it seems to them can be done,
and have no heart to ask God for what
seems too hard for them. Our philoso-
phies of prayer often ignore the fact
that Omnipotence is at the head of the
universe. We try with the measuring
line of human probabilities to deter-
mine the sweep of Almightiness. We
have nothing to do with probabilities.
The hand that holds all worlds is able
to work beyond our thought. We must
trust God fully. Herod and Peter
stand as representatives of two distinct
types of humanity. The one, in the
world’s estimate, was rich, strong, and
sovereign; the other was poor, weak,
and a prisoner, The contest between


them seemed most unequal. But God
was on what men called the losing side,
and that determined the issue. It is
a truth to be remembered. In our
schemes of life we give overweight tc
merely human advantages. Social
position, wealth, natural capacity—if
we have these, we think that we are
equipped for success. Weare too hasty
in our conclusion. The real question is
Is God for us or against us? In Him
are all the treasures of wisdom and
righteousness. With Him nothing is
too hard for us to compass or attain.
Apart from Him, our brightest pro-
spects are only dreams, without sub-
stance or warrant.—Monday Club
Sermons.


Vers. 1-19. The Great Struggle ; cr,
the powers of light and darkness in
conflict.

I. The contending forces —1. The
powers of darkness. Represented by
(1) Herod the King. (2) The Jewish
people. (3) The quaternions of soldiers,
2. The armies of light; represented
by (1) The angel of the Lord. (2) The
praying Church. (3) The servant
Rhoda.

II. The invisible commanders.—
1. Of the powers of darkness, Satan,
the spirit that now worketh in the
children of disobedience (Eph. ii. 2).
2. Of the armies of light, the Lord, the
exalted Christ, who walketh in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks
(Rev. ii. 1), and who is a constant
are with His people (Matt. xxiii.
20).

III. The important prize.—The life
of Peter.—1. That of his body, which was
now imprisoned, which the arch enemy
desired to cut off, but which the Lord
of Glory determined to preserve.
2. That of his soul, which, on the one
hand, was seriously threatened by the
persecutions so thickly directed against
him, but on the other hand was
efficiently supported by the grace so
richly manifested toward him.

IV. The ultimate victory.—This lay
completely on the side of Christ and
His heavenly army. 1. Peter’s body


271


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


em


was delivered from the prison. The also rescued from peril. Peter, it 1s
purpose of Herod, the expectation of known, continued faithful to the end,
the Jews, the vigilance of the soldiers, and eventually obtained the crown of
were all outwitted. 2. Peter's soul was life.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 20—25.


The Death of Herod ; or, the Church's Persecutor punished.

I. The occasion of, and circumstances connected with, Herod’s death
(vers. 20-22).—1. The place where it occurred—Cesarea (see on viii. 40). If
Luke suggests that Herod’s motive for leaving Jerusalem and taking up his
quarters in that “ city of sumptuous palaces” (Conybeare and Howson, TZ'he
Life and Epistles of Paul, ii. 306) was the disgust felt in consequence of failing in
his project to remove Peter, Josephus (Ant., XIX. vii. 3, viii. 2) so far confirms
this as to state that while Agrippa “loved to live at Jerusalem,” he suddenly,
after reigning three years over all Juda, “came to the city of Cxsarea ” with
the obvious intention of residing there for a season. 2. The time when it
happened. Manifestly within a month or two after Peter’s deliverance, though
the precise date is not specified. The interval between Herod’s murder of James,
shortly before the Passover of a.p. 44, and God’s judgment on Herod, in
August a.p. 44, was sufficiently short to show that in the monarch’s overthrow
the martyr’s death was divinely avenged. 3. The occasion on which it took place.
According to Luke that was the reception of an embassy from the cities of Tyre
and Sidon, with which at the time Herod was displeased. The ground of this
displeasure, though not stated, may be assumed to have been the commercial
rivalry existing between those ancient ports and the newly founded harbour of
Cesarea. In consequence of this the Pheenicians, it may be supposed, had been
subjected to prohibitory measures which prevented them from obtaining supplies
of corn out of Palestine, and accordingly were aroused to embrace the opportunity
afforded them by Agrippa’s presence in Ceesarea to approach him with overtures
for peace, which were laid before him by a friend of theirs at court—viz., Blastus,
the king’s chamberlain. According to the story in the Acts Herod died, or at
least received his death stroke, on the day when the Pheenician ambassadors
were admitted to his presence, and while he himself, arrayed in royal apparel
and seated upon his throne, was making to them a bombastical harangue.
Josephus agrees with Luke in mentioning that Herod’s mortal malady seized
him in a crowded assembly ; and though the Jewish historian does not mention
Herod’s quarrel with the Phoenicians or the presence of their ambassadors in the
meeting, but ascribes the vast gatherings to a festival which at the time was
being held in the city ‘‘to make vows for his safety,” possibly in honour of his
return from Britain which took place that year, a.p. 44, nevertheless he
(Josephus) says nothing to contradict Luke’s account, while he concurs with
the sacred writer in affirming that the special flattery offered to Agrippa was
that of calling him a god. According to Luke the people shouted—‘“ The voice
of a god and not of a man!” According to Josephus, “his flatterers cried out
one from one place and another from another, though not for his good, that he
was a god,” adding, ‘“‘ Be thou merciful to us, for although we have hitherto
reverenced thee only as a man, yet shall we henceforth own thee as superior
to mortal nature.” Both forms of utterance may have been used, though
Josephus’s appears like a paraphrase of Luke’s. The result, however, will
remain unaffected, even if Luke should be held as having abbreviated the
exclamations of the people.

IJ. The cause and the reason of Herod’s death (ver. 23). 1. The cause was


272


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XII.








twofold. (1) The natural, material, instrumental, and visible cause was a violent
distemper of the bowels, which the sacred writer describes more particularly by
saying “ He was eaten of worms.” According to Josephus “ a severe pain arose
in his belly, and began in a most violent manner.” “The two accounts con-
sidered together,” writes Sir Risdon Bennett (Vhe Diseases of the Bible, p. 101),
* leave scarcely any room for doubt that the cause of death was perforation of the
bowels by intestinal worms, inducing ulceration and acute peritonitis,” instances
of which, he adds, are well known to medical science. ‘“ Without doubt,” says
Leyrer, “one must think of abscesses and worm ulcers (alcera verminosa), out
of which, when they break up, maggots creep forth” (quoted by Keil, Biblische
Archeologie, p. 564). To the same effect speaks Kamphausen in Riehm’s
Handwéorterbuch, art. Krankheiten) :—“ It is well known that masses of round
worms can break through a place in the bowels which has been rendered thin by
suppuration, or even through stoppage of the bowels lead to a horrible death ;
nor is it less certain that through ulcer holes worms can empty themselves out.”
(2) The supernatural, immaterial, direct, and invisible cause was the hand of God
to which Luke points by writing, ‘‘‘An angel of the Lord smote him.” If Josephus
does not introduce an angel into his report, it would almost seem as if by his
story of the ill-omened bird, the owl, which Herod saw in the theatre (see Ant.,
XIX. viii. 2), he intended to suggest the direct interposition of Heaven in bring-
ing about Agrippa’s death ; and, indeed, according to Josephus, Agrippa himself
regarded it in this light, and exclaimed when he saw the bird, “I, whom you
call a god, am commanded presently to depart this life ; while Providence thus
reproves the lying words you just nowsaid to me; and I, who was called
immortal, am immediately to be carried away by death.” 2. The reason.
‘* Because he gave not God the glory,” writes Luke ; which Josephus confirms by
saying, ‘‘ Upon this the king did neither rebuke them nor reject their impious
flattery.” He, a Jew, to whom it was a foremost article in religion that Jehovah
alone was God, and that to set up a creature alongside of Him was blasphemy and
worthy of death (Matt. xxvi. 66), had allowed himself to suck in and drink down
the adulation of puny mortals, and had actually began to consider himself a
superior being, if not a veritable God; and so Jehovah, who is a jealous God
(Exod. xx. 5), smote him till he died.

III. The effect and consequence of Herod’s death.—1l. The people rejoiced.
““When it was known that Agrippa was departed this life, the inhabitants of
Cesarea and Sebaste forgot the kindnesses he had bestowed upon them, and
acted the part of his bitterest enemies. . . . They also laid themselves down in
public places and celebrated general feastings, with garlands on their heads, and
with ointments and libations to Charon, and drinking to one another for joy
that the king was dead” (Jos., Ant., XIX. ix. 1). What a commentary—and
not selected from the Bible—on the vanity of popular applause, and the insin-
cerity of popular adulation! 2. The word of God grew and multiplied. Grew
in weight and influence upon the hearts of those who listened to it; grew in the
extent and circumference over which it travelled; grew in its power of over-
coming difficulties and in making friends. Multiplied itself by multiplying the
number of believers, by drawing towards the young Church crowds of men and
women who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and cast in their lot with His
cause.

Learn.—1. The certainty that God will avenge the blood of His martyrs
(Deut. xxxii. 43; Luke xviii. 7). 2. The vanity of attempting to war with God
(Isa. xxvii. 4; compare Jliad, V. 407, ‘ By no means is he long lived who fights
with the immortals”). 3. The wickedness of doing anything to rob God of
His glory (Isa. xlii. 8, xlviii. 11). 4. The ultimate triumph of the gospel over
all ebstacles (Isa. xi. 9; Mark xiii. 10).


T 273


CHAP. XII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 20-23. The Sin and Punishment
of Herod.

I. How the measure of his iniquity
was filled up.—It was pride that did it.
1. He picked a quarrel with his neigh-
bours, the men of Tyre and Sidon.
2. He displayed before them his royal
grandeur. 3. He accepted from them
their senseless flattery. 4. He glorified
himself above them as a god.

II. How the wickedness of his con-
duct was punished.— He who had killed
James and would have slain Peter was
himself destroyed. 1. The agent in
his destruction was no less than an
angel. The angel of the Lord who
smote Peter on the side for life now
smote the guilty Herod in the heart for
death. 2. The instrument of Herod’s
destruction was no more than a worm.
The body in the grave is destroyed by
worms, but Herod’s body putrefied
while he was yet alive, and bred the
worms which began to feed on it be-
times. See (1) what weak and con-
temptible creatures God can make the
instruments of His justice when He
pleases; and (2) how God delights to
bring down proud men in such a way
as is most mortifying, and pours most
contempt upon them.—A/fter M. Henry.


Herod’s Death.
I. A proud man humbled.

II. A wicked man punished.
III. A powerful man weakened.
Vers. 1-23. God alone King.
Proved :—

I. In the early death of James.

II. In the miraculous deliverance
of Peter.

ITI. In the horrible end of Herod.—
Gerok.

Vers. 2-23. The Deaths of James and
of Herod.

I. (The apostle died) by the violence
a ane (the king) by the visitation of

od.


II. (The apostle), mature in grace;
(the king), ripe in sin.
274


III. (The apostle,) lamented by his
brethren; (the king) execrated by his
subjects.

IV. (The apostle,) to ascend to glory;
(the king) to go to his own place.


Ver. 24. The Progress of the Gospel
in Apostolic Times.

I. The opposition it encountered.—
From—l. Jewish prejudices. 2. Hea-
then superstitions. 3. Human learn-
ing. 4, Satanic influence.

II. The success it achieved.—1. It
was widely published. 2. Its influence
was extensive. 3. Its converts were
multiplied.

III. The causes which enabled it to
overcome opposition and attain suc-
cess.—1l. The power of the Spirit.


2. The zeal of its preachers. 3. The
holy lives of its disciples. 4. The
unity of the Church. 5. The perse-


cutions it suffered.


Ver. 24. The Progress of the King-
dom of God.

I. It has its origin in a seed.—
“The kingdom of heaven is like unto
a grain of mustard seed” (Matt. xiii.
31, 32). That seed is the truth of the
gospel, which is: 1. Divine. Being the
word of God (Luke viii. 11; 1 Peter
i. 23; 1 John iii. 9), 2. Vital. Other-
wise it would not spring up (Mark
iv. 27) and operate (Heb. iv. 12).
3. Small. Only a word, a gospel, a
message of glad tidings, not a philo-
sophy or a science, or elaborated system
of truth.

II. It advances by growth.—Like
the seed which extracts nutriment from
the soil, the kingdom of God absorbs
into itself that which makes it
expand by attracting through the
power of the gospel souls from the
outside world.

III. It lives by reproduction.—As
the seed multiplies according to its
kind, so do believers who constitute
the Church, as it were, reproduce
themselves in other believers who are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XII.





added to the congregation of the
faithful.


Ver. 25. The Home Coming of the
Messengers.

I. After a mission well executed.

Il. With a fresh recruit to their


ranks.

III. In readiness for further
service.

The History of John Mark.


I. His family connections.—1. The
son of a pious mother. Mary was a
disciple. In this respect Mark re-
sembled Timothy (xvi.i.). While grace
does not run in the blood, there is an
antecedent presumption that the piety
of parents will reappear in their off-
spring. Mothers especially have an
innate tendency to transmit their
characters to their sons. How much
pious mothers have in this way bene-
fited both the Church and the world
may be inferred from the annals of
both, but will never be known till the
day reveals. 2. The cousin of Bar-
nabas (Col. iv. 10). Not sister’s son,
in which case his father may have
been the father of Barnabas; but
cousin, so that his father and Barnabas’s
may have been brothers, if the cousin-
ship did not come through his mother.
In any case, it was to Mark’s advantage
that he stood so closely related to the
Son of Consolation.

II. His excellent character. —1.
Fundamentally good. Like his mother
he was a Christian disciple, having
probably been converted by Peter, who
afterwards affectionately regarded him
as his son (1 Peter v. 13), though of
course the term “son,” as applied by
Peter to Mark, may have referred to


- career.


the service rendered by Mark to Peter.
and this Mark may not have been
John Mark, but either an actual son
of the apostle’s (Bengel), or Mark the
evangelist (Eusebius). 2. Constitu-
tionally timid. As much as this may
be feasibly inferred from his desertion
of Paul and Barnabas at Perga (xiii. 13),
on account probably of the hardships
and dangers of the way. Grace does
not all at once revolutionise a man’s
natural temperament. Indeed, many
good Christians have to struggle against
constitutional infirmities all their lives:
3. Ultimately steadfast. This shines
out conspicuously in his subsequent
None reading of his after
labours can doubt that Mark overcame
his youthful indecision and became a
splendid soldier of the cross. Youthful
faults and indiscretions should not be
allowed to hinder future usefulness or
progress. Neither should they be used
by others to disparage later merit.

III. His honourable career.—1. An
attendant of Paul and Barnabas on
their first missionary journey (xiii. 5).
Decidedly a good beginning, though it
speedily came toa termination, for which
he should not now be too severely
judged. A colleague of Barnabas, after
he and Paul had parted (xv. 37, 39).
Barnabas must have discerned in him
elements of good notwithstanding his
former lack of fortitude. 3. 4 com-
panion of Paul in his imprisonment at
Rome (Col. iv. 10, 11; 2 Tim. iv. 11;
Philemon 24); so that even Paul had
come to recognise his true nobility of
soul and to set a high value on his
ministerial and friendly assistance. A
lesson that old saints should not be tor
severe in judging the faults of young
Christians,


CHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





PART II.


THE CHURCH OF CHRIST AMONG THE GENTILES; OR, ITS PRO-
GRESS FROM ANTIOCH TO ROME—THE ACTS OF PAUL.


CHAPTERS xiii.-xxviii,





CHAPTER XITI.
Tae First MisstonaRY JOURNEY (PAUL AND BARNABAS)—COMMENCED.


§ 1. Barnabas and Saul at Antioch; or, the Departure of the First Gentile
Missionaries (vers. 1-3).

§ 2. The Conversion of Sergius Paulus; or, the Gospel in Cyprus (vers. 4-12).

§ 3, A Sabbath Day in Pisidian Antioch ; or, Paul’s Sermon in the Synagogue
(vers. 13-43).

§ 4. A Second a bigth in Pisidian Antioch; or, the Gospel carried to the
Gentiles (vers. 44-52).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. In the Church that was at Antioch.—Better at or in Antioch, in or throughout, or
for the benefit of the Church, xard having all these different meanings, Certain should be
omitted. Prophets (see on ii. 17) and teachers (1 Cor. xii. 28).—Named together (Rom. xii. 6;
Eph. iv. 11), yet not the same, though both functions might be united in one person—as, ¢.7.,
in Paul (Gal. ii. 2; 2 Cor. xii. 1) and John (Rev. i. 1,9). Barnabas, named first, appears to
have held at Antioch a position corresponding to that of Peter at Jerusalem (Holtzmann).
Along with him Simeon and Lucius were prophets. Manaen and Saul.—Most likely teachers.
(Holtzmann). Brought up with.—cdrrpogos. Might mean educated along with (2 Macc.
ix. 29), but better rendered collactaneus, nourished at the same breast (Xen., Mem., ii. 3, 4).

Ver. 2, Ministered refers to the rites of Christian worship, as prayer, exhortation, and
fasting (Rom. xv. 27), They may signify the prophets and teachers, or the congregation or
church in general. The Holy Ghost said.—Perhaps, as in xi. 28, xx. 23, through the lips of
the prophets, or by the still small voice whispering to each of the leaders, as in viii. 29. The
work whereunto I have called them.—Though not stated, doubtless understood by all to be
that of carrying the gospel to the heathen (xiv, 26, xv. 38), as had already been intimated to
Saul at his conversion (ix. 15),

Ver. 3. Fasted and prayed.—Compare x. 30, xiv. 23, which show that the two were
frequently practised in conjunction by both individuals and the Church. This fast was
special, in preparation for the ordination of the missionaries. They—i.e., the prophets and.
teachers—laid their hands on them, without the co-operation of the Church members (against
Overbeck). They—i.e., the Church—sent them—the missionaries—away—rather, gave them
leave to depart, i.e. ‘released them from their regular duties and bade them ‘ God-speed’ ”
(Ramsay). In ver. 4 they are represented as having been sent forth by the Holy Ghost.

Ver. 4. Seleucia.—“ Civitas potens, septa muris neque in barbarum corrupta sed conditoris
Seleucia retinens ” (Tac., An., vi. 42). The port of Antioch, three miles west of the city and
two hours’ journey from the mouth of the Orontes, was founded almost contemporaneously
with Antioch, B.c, 300, by King Seleucus I. (Nicanor). The harbour is mentioned according
to Luke’s custom, xiv, 25, xvi. 11, xviii. 18 (Ramsay).

Ver. 5. Minister.— Attendant, or assistant ; in what capacity is not told.

Ver. 6, The best MSS. read the whole island. They probably made “a complete tour of
the Jewish communities in the island, preaching in each synagogue ” (Ramsay).

Ver. 7. The deputy of the country should be proconsul, dv@Jmaros. Long supposed that
Luke had here erred in designating the governor of Cyprus proconsul, but now recognised
that Luke is correct (see explanation in “ Homiletical Analysis”). Bar-jesus = son of Jesus
or = Barjesuvan, son of readiness (Klostermann, Ramsay who for Elymas would read “Browos).

Ver. 8, Elymas.—Arabic for “wise” (like Turkish Ulemah), and interpreted by Luke as


276


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  omap. xu.





equivalent to sorcerer or magician. Note.—The above story of Elymas is supposed (Bamr,
Zeller, Holtzmann, and others) to have been influenced by the parallel narrations about
Simon Magus (viii. 20-24) and Ananias and Sapphira (vy. 1-10) ; but see ‘‘ Hints” on ver. 8,

Ver. 9. Saul, who also is called Paul.—That from this point onward in the narrative the
apostle ceases to be designated Saul, and is always called Paul, has been explained by the
hypothesis that the apostle, either from Sergius Paulus, or his friends, received, or himself
adopted, the Roman title Paul in commemoration of the proconsul’s conversion (Jerome,
Augustine, Bengel, Olshausen, Meyer, Ewald) ; but against this stand these considerations :
1. That Luke introduces the change of name before the conversion is recorded. 2. That
while customary for a pupil to adopt the name of a teacher, it was not usual for a teacher to
appropriate the name ofa pupil. 3. That if Paul actually did assume the governor’s name,
it might at least look as if he attached more importance to the conversion of a distinguished
than to that of an obscuré person, Wherefore the more probable theory is that the apostle
originally had the two names—Saul among the Jews, and Paul among the Gentiles (compare
John Mark, xii. 25; Jesus Justus, Col. iv. 11)—and that, as hitherto, while preaching to the
Jews his Jewish name was used, so henceforth, when evangelising among the Gentiles, his
Gentile designation should be employed (Weizsicker, Holtzmann, Wendt, Lechler, Hackett,
Spence, Ramsay). The notion that Saul assumed the name Paul to express his personal humility
is unlikely ; the suggestion that Luke at this point began to use memoirs in which the apostle
was called Paul (Alford) is little better. Still less correct is the hypothesis that Luke only
invented the name from Paul’s connection with Sergius (Baur, Zeller, Hausrath). The
derivation of the name Paul from the Hebrew xbp = mirabilis, wonderful, in allusion to
the miracle wrought by the apostle (Otto, Zockler), appears somewhat fanciful.

Ver. 12. Read the proconsul instead of the deputy as above. Believed.—Baur, entirely
without reason, thinks the conversion of the proconsul has “only a very slight degree of
probability.”

Ver. 13. Paul and his company.—Note the two changes—first of Saul’s name, which is
henceforth Paul, and next of Paul’s position in the mission as leader rather than as follower,
as principal rather than as subordinate. ol repl Tlaf\ov (compare al rep! MdpOay kal Mapidp,
Textus Receptus), The phrase perhaps hints that Paul had other unnamed companions
besides Barnabas and John. Instead of loosed from read hawing set sail from; and for
departing from them, having withdrawn from them, For the reasons which caused John
Mark to return to Jerusalem, see ‘‘ Homiletical Analysis.”

Ver. 14. They now signifies Paul and Barnabas without John. Antioch of Pisidia.—So
named by Strabo, “The chief city of inner Pisidia, a Roman colony, a strong fortress, the
centre of military and civil administration in the southern parts of the vast province called
by the Romans Galatia” (Ramsay).

Ver. 15. The law and the prophets.—The higher critics say this should have been the

hets and thelaw. Christ agrees with Luke (Matt. xxii. 40). Men and Brethren, Brethren
(B.V.), “Gentlemen, Brethren” (Ramsay).

Ver. 16. Then Paul stood up.—Dr. Murphy thinks Paul found the occasion for his chrono-
logical exordium in the lessons which he heard read in the synagogue, and that these were—
the Parasha, Exod. x. 13-16, xii. 40, 41, xiii. 3-16, and the Hapbtara, Jer. xlvi. 13-28 (see The
Homiletical Quarterly, Oct. 1877, pp. 490, 491). Others (Farrar, Plumptre, Ramsay),
think the passages read were Deut. i. and Isa. i. Baur (Paul, His Life and Works,
i., pp. 104 77) objects to the credibility of this speech on the grounds (1) of its resemblance
to the speeches of Peter, and (2) of its lack of atruly Pauline character. But (1) why should
Paul not have been as well acquainted with the history of his people as Peter—both being
Jews ? and (2) how can the speech be un-Pauline when on Baur’s own admission it contains
the doctrine of justification by faith ? (vers. 38, 39).

Ver. 18. Suffered He their manners in the wilderness.—érporoddpycev, the reading of the
best MSS., though some ancient authorities read érpopopépyncev, meaning “ carried them as a
nurse ”—i.¢,, sustained them and cared forthem. ‘“ Both readings occur in the LXX. render-
ing of Deut. i. 31, to which passage reference is evidently made here. . . . But there can be
no reason for questioning the genuineness of the reading of the text” (Westcott and Hort,
The New Testament in Greeh, ii., Appendix, 94, 95).

Ver. 19. The seven nations are named in Deut. vii. 1. Divided their land to them by lot
should according to the best MSS. be gave them their land for an inheritance, tle verb
karexAnpovdunoey being substituted for xarexhypodérncev. The former verb occurs only here,
and is a translation of Deut. iii. 28 (see Josh. xiv. 1-5).

Ver. 20. After that, or these things, signifies after the conquest and occupation. About the
space of four hundred and fifty years.—This undoubtedly implies that the interval of the
Judges was 450 years, which agrees with the chronology of Josephus (Ant., VIII. ii. 1,
X. viii. 5), who gives 592 years as the time that elapsed between the Exodus and the build-
ing of Solomon’s temple. Deducting 4 years of Solomon’s own reign, 40 of David's, 40 of
Saul’s, 25 for the leadership of Joshua, and 40 in the wilderness—ie.,4 + 40 + 40 + 2h +


277


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee T.,g>°—°;°;0 Ooo


40 = 149, the remainder is 443 (592-149), sufficiently close an approximation for Paul to
put 450 years as the period of the Judges. This, however, does not harmouise with the
statement (1 Kings viii.) that the building of the Temple began in the 480th year after the
Exodus, which would give only 480 — 149 = 331 years for the era of the Judges—a dis-
crepancy which cannot easily be removed. A better reading, which connects about four
hundred and fifty years with the preceding verse (R.V.), appears to obviate the difficulty by
making the number 450 signify the space of time between the giving of the land for an
inheritance and the occupation of the land at the conquest—which space is thus made up—
from the birth of Isaac, when it may be assumed the promise was given, to the birth of
Jacob, 60 years; from Jacob’s birth to his descent into Egypt, 130 years ; the sojourn in
Egypt, 215 years ; from the Exodus to the settlement in Canaan, 47 years = in all 452 years.
If this reading (Westcott and Hort) be adopted, the next clause will read, “ And after these
things He gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.” is

Ver. 21. A man of the tribe of Benjamin, to which Paul also belonged (Phil. iii. 5). Forty
years.—The duration of Saul’s reign is not mentioned in the Old Testament, which only
states that Ishbosheth, his youngest son (1 Chron. viii. 33), was forty years at the time of
Saul’s death (1 Sam. ii. 10), and that Saul himself was a young man when he ascended the
throne (2 Sam. ix. 2). Josephus (Ant., VI. xiv. 9) speaks of Saul as having reigned eighteen
years before and twenty-two years after Samuel’s death. iy

Ver. 22. I have found David the son of Jesse a man after Mine own heart, which shall fulfil,
or who shall do, all My will, or wills.—The first clause is cited from Psalm Ixxxix. 20, which
has “ My servant,” and omits “the son of Jesse”; the second is taken from 1 Sam. xiii. 14,
where David in comparison with Saul is described as one who was faithful to Jehovah’s com-
mandments and ordinances. The third clause found in Isa. xliv. 28, with reference to Cyrus,
may be held as included in the words “ My servant,” spoken of David. Alford thinks these
citations form “a strong presumption that we have Paul’s speeches verbatim as delivered by
him, and no subsequent general statement of what he said, in which case the citations would
have been corrected by the sacred text” ; though Plumptre arrives at the opposite conclusion,
that “it is possible we have, as it were, but the précis of a fuller statement.” Schwanbeck
speaks of an old biography of Barnabas, Olshausen of a special missionary report drawn up
by Barnabas and Saul, Bleek of an independent document, Zockler of an old separate account
by an unknown author as the original source of Luke’s information.

Vers. 23, 24. The promise was made not to David only, but to the fathers (ver. 32). The
names of Jesus and John were widely known among the Jews of the Dispersion. His coming
meant His entrance upon His public ministry.

Ver. 25. Fulfilled should be was fulfilling. Whom think ye that I am?%—Better, what
suppose ye me to be? The question, not found in the gospel accounts of John’s ministry, is yet
virtually implied in Matt. iii. 11; Johni. 20,21. The rendering, He whom ye suppose me to
be I am not (Calvin, Luther, Grotius, Kuinoel, Holtzmann), is not so good. But behold, etc.
are John’s words in Luke iii. 16.

Ver. 27. Because they knew Him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets. —The inhabitants
of Jerusalem and their rulers failed to recognise who Christ was because they misunderstood
their own prophetic Scriptures.

Ver. 28. No cause of death in Him,—The Sanhedrim pronounced Jesus guilty of blasphemy,
which involved a capital sentence (Matt, xxvi. 66), but they were unable to establish the
accusation except by extorting a declaration from His own lips (Matt. xxvi. 60). In all other
respects His judges were constrained to acknowledge His innocence (Matt. xxvii. 24; Luke
xxili. 22).

Ver, 29. They laid Him in a tomb,—His disciples—in particular Nicodemus and Joseph of
Arimathea (John xix. 30)— did. Paul did not deem it needful to discriminate the individuals
by whom the interment of Christ was carried out; yet the statement is literally accurate,
since Nicodemus and Joseph were both rulers.

Ver. 31, Them which came up with Him from Galilee were the apostles.

Ver. 33. The second psalm is the preferable reading, the first psalm, found in Western
MSS., having been probably inserted as a correction by a Western scribe who had been
accustomed to read the first and second psalms as one (Westcott and Hort, The New Testa-
ment in Greek, ii, 95, Appendix), or who regarded the first psalm merely as an introduction
to the rest. The allusion in the psalm is (here as in Heb. i. 51) not to the incarnation, but
to the resurrection and exaltation of Jesus (compare Rom. i. 4).

Vers. 34-37. The sure mercies of David should be the holy things of David, the sure—i.e., I
will give to you the holy things of David (which have been promised, Isa. lv. 3, and)
which are sure; one of which holy and sure things was the promise that God’s Holy One
should not see corruption, a promise which could not apply to David, who, after having
served his own generation by the will of God, or after having in his own generation served
the will of God, fell on sleep, or by the will of God fell on sleep, and was laid unto his fathers
—an expression generally distinguished from burial, and implying the existence of the soul


278


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS, cmap. xu.








in a future state (Gen. xxv. 8, xxxv. 29; 2 Kings xxii. 20)—and saw corruption. Christ who
had been raised from the dead saw no corruption (compare ii. 25-33),

Ver. 41. Behold, ye despisers, etc.—Taken from Hab. i. 5, where it is used with reference
to an approaching Chaldean invasion, this citation follows very closely the LXX., but agrees
essentially with the Hebrew. For “among the nations” in Hebrew the LXX. read “ des-
pisers,” and for “‘ wonder marvellously,” “ wonder and perish.” Paul followed the Septuagint,
either because it was best known, or because it was sufficiently accurate for his purpose, or,
because he believed it to correctly render the spirit of the ancient prediction.

Ver. 42, The more correct reading of this verse is given in the R.V.: “ And as they, Paul
and Barnabas (Hackett, Lechler) rather than the congregation (Alford), went,” or were going,
“out, they,” the rulers probably (Hackett and Lechler), rather than the congregation (Alford),
““besought that these words might be spoken to them the neat Sabbath day,” els rd werakd
odBBarov, not during the middle of the week, but on (lit. wnto, as the limit) the Sabbath
between the days, as ver. 44 shows.

Ver, 43. For congregation read synagogue. The Jews and religious proselytes represented
two distinct classes.

Ver. 45. Contradicting and blaspheming.—The best MSS. omit “ contradicting ” (Lachmann,
Westcott and Hort); but as it is neither superfluous nor Hebraistic (Hackett), and defines
more exactly the nature of the opposition (Zéckler), it may be retained.

Ver. 46. It was necessary.—Compare Luke xxiv. 47 ; Rom. i. 16, ii. 10.

Ver. 47. I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles —This citation from Isa. xlix. 6
(LXX.) represented the apostolic mission as a continuation of Christ’s (see Luke ii. 32).

Ver. 48. Ordained to eternal life.—verayuévor eis funy aidviov. Cannot be rendered—those
who believed were appointed to eternal life, or those who were disposed, i.e., inclined, to
eternal life believed. The words mean what they say—‘‘as many as were ordained to eternal
life believed” (Calvin, Kuinoel, Olshausen, Meyer, Winer, De Wette, Hackett, Spence, and
others)—the ‘ordained to eternal life” being those who are “chosen” (Eph. i. 4), and
“ foreordained” (Rom. viii. 29), though it need not be doubted that this Divine “ choosing,”
“electing,” “foreordaining,” does not destroy, but is compatible with and realises itself.
through the complete freedom of the human will.

Ver. 49. Implies a certain lapse of time; how long, uncertain.

Ver. 50. The devout and honourable women, or devout, honourable women—i.e., devout
women of honourable estate (R.V.)—were Gentile females who had embraced Judaism (see
on xvii, 4). The influence here attributed to women “is in perfect accord with the manners
of thecountry. In Athens, or an Ionian city, it would have been impossible” (Ramsay), The
chief men of the city were probably their husbands or kinsmen.

Ver. 51. Shook off the dust of their feet (compare xviii. 6), as directed by Christ (Matt.
x. 14), for a testimony against their persecutors (Luke ix. 5).

Ver. 52. The disciples—1.e., at Antioch—were filled with joy, notwithstanding the persecu-
tion which raged against them (xiv. 22).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—3.


The Church at Antioch; or, the Designation and Dispatch of the First
Missionaries.

I. The names of the missionaries.—1. Barnabas. Originally called Joses.
Styled Barnabas, meaning Son of Consolation or of Exhortation, either from
his sympathy or from his eloquence, or perhaps from both. A native of Cyprus,
a Levite, who stood high in the esteem of the Church at Jerusalem on account
of his self-sacrificing liberality, and who had lately arrived in Antioch on a
mission from the mother Church in the metropolis (iv. 36, 37, xi. 22, which see).
2. Saul, a native of Tarsus, a scholar of Gamaliel, a participator in the murder
of Stephen, a persecutor of Christians, a convert of Jesus, a powerful evangelist,
recently introduced to the Church at Antioch by Barnabas (vii. 58, viii. 1-3,
ix., xi. 25, 26, which see).

II. Their standing in the Church at Antioch.—1l. Their offices. Prophets and
teachers. All prophets were teachers, though all teachers were not prophets.
A prophet was one who authoritatively uttered Divine communications, whereas
a teacher was one who had the gift of teaching and explaining what the prophet
uttered (see 1 Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11). Both offices were held by Barnabas
and Saul, though Saul and Manaen it has been thought (Besser) were designed
to be regarded as teachers; Barnabas, Simeon, and Lucius as prophets (see


279


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.











“ Oritical Remarks”). 2. Their colleagues. (1) Simeon, called Niger, and so
distinguished from both Simon Peter and Simon the Canaanite. Otherwise
unknown, though probably a Jew who received the Roman appellation from the
Gentiles. Whether a native of Africa who had become a proselyte (Alford)
cannot be told. (2) Lucius of Cyrene. Supposed by some to have been the
writer of the Acts (see i. 1), and by others with greater likelihood Lucius,
Paul’s kinsman (Rom. xvi. 21). On the place of his birth see ii. 10. (3) Manaen
= Menahem (2 Kings xv. 14) occurs only here. Whether he had simply been
brought up with, i.e, educated along with, Herod the tetrarch, a son of Herod
the Great, an uncle of Herod Agrippa, the murderer of John the Baptist
(Matt. xiv. 11), and the derider of our Lord (Luke xxiii. 11), or nursed with
him at the same breast, cannot be decided by expositors. The former notion
(Calvin, Grotius, Baumgarten, and others) derives support from the circumstance
that it was “ common for persons of rank to associate other children with their
own for the purpose of sharing their amusements and studies, and by their
example serving to excite them to greater emulation” (Hackett); the latter
(Kuinoel, Olshausen, Tholuck, and others) might have easily occurred if
Manaen’s mother had been Herod’s nurse. And this is not unlikely if Manaen’s
father or grandfather was the Essene prophet mentioned by Josephus (Ant., XV.
x. 5), who in the early youth of Herod the Great foretold his future elevation to
the throne.

III. Their call to be missionaries.—1. Zo whom given. (1) Without question
inwardly to the missionaries themselves. The narrative (ver. 2) seems to
indicate that Barnabas and Saul had already become conscious of an inward
prompting to undertake a Gentile mission. Without this it might have been
difficult to persuade them to undertake so arduous an enterprise ; with this their
path of duty would be immeasurably clearer. No man should enter on the office
of a minister or missionary without an inward conviction that he is called of
God (Heb. v. 4). (2) As certainly in outward form to the Church, without
whose authorisation the evangelists should not proceed. The work of carrying
the gospel into regions beyond may be executed by private individuals, but the
duty of sending the gospel into all the world rests with the Church in its cor-
porate capacity. Hence ambassadors should be sent abroad in its name and
with its sanction. Nor should private individuals readily regard themselves as
called to be ministers or missionaries, if they cannot obtain the concurrence of
the Church. 2. When given. While they, the prophets and teachers, ministered
to the Lord and fasted. Whether by themselves or in company with the mem-
bers of the Church is not stated; but this may be inferred, that either the
whole body of the Church or its leaders were at this time seeking heavenly
light and guidance on this very point, the carrying of the gospel into regions
beyond. When God desires to stir His people up to enter on some “ forward
movement” for the glory of His name and the extension of His cause and
kingdom, He usually pours out upon them the Spirit of grace and supplication.
3. By whom given. By the Holy Ghost, the invisible but ever-present and
Divine representative of Jesus Christ, whom Christ promised to send as His
Church’s teacher and guide after He Himself had withdrawn His bodily presence
(John xiv. 16, 17, xv. 26, xvi. 7-14). The same Spirit still must call forth the
Church’s ministers and missionaries. 4. Jn what form given. (1) To the mis-
sionaries themselves, probably, in a clear presentation to their minds of the claims
of the heathen world, and a strong conviction wrought within their hearts that
they should yield to those claims by going forth as messengers of the cross. (2) To
the Church by a still small voice, probably, which simultaneously spoke in each
prophet’s and teacher’s heart, and seemed to say, “Separate now for Me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them ”—the work not


280


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuapr. xt.





being mentioned because it was understood, either as having formed the subject
of their thoughts and the object of their prayers, or as being universally recog-
nised in the Church that the Spirit’s office was to organise and extend the
kingdom of Christ.

IV. Their ordination to the missionary office—1. By whom ordained. (1) By
the whole body of the Church. Whoever the agent, the act was that of the
entire Christian community. (2) By the prophets and teachers. Whether
others besides these participated in the solemnities of the occasion, not being
stated, will be differently replied to by different readers and interpreters.
2. How ordained. (1) By fasting and prayer. In these religious services the
entire body of Christian people may have taken, and probably did take, part.
(2) By laying on of hands. This symbolical rite was most likely performed by
the Church’s leaders, the prophets and teachers ; but whether by all or only by
representatives cannot be decided. 3. To what ordained. Not to the work of
the ministry, since Paul was a minister already (Gal. i. 1), nor to the apostle-
ship (Lightfoot), since “the apostle was always appointed by God, not by the
Church” (Ramsay), but to the special business of carrying the gospel to the
Gentiles. The mission-field, the high place of honour in the Christian Church,
calls for men of the clearest intellect, the largest heart, and the bravest spirit—
in short, for men of the type of Barnabas and Saul.

V. Their departure from Antioch.—Simply told, “they,” the Christians at
Antioch, “sent them,” Barnabas and Saul, away (see Critical Remarks). 1. On
aholy errand. To carry the light of truth and life into darkened understandings
and benighted hearts, to proclaim the message of salvation to a lost and ruined
world, to bring all nations to the obedience of the faith (Rom. i. 5). An errand
more sublime imagination cannot well conceive. 2. With fervent prayers. Com-
mending them to heaven for protection on their journeys, for assistance in their
labours, for suecess in their enterprise. 3. In hope of a triumphant return.
Looking forward doubtless to the time when those who were setting forth would
come back with tidings of what great things God had done by their hands
(compare Psalm cxxvi. 6), which they did (xiv. 27).

Learn.—1. That a Church may consist of different congregations. 2. That in
the Church exist various orders of office-bearers. 3. That the presiding person-
ality in the Church of Jesus Christ is the Holy Spirit. 4. That no one can
legitimately exercise office in the Church without the Spirit’s call. 5. That
fasting and prayer prepare the human soul for the Spirit’s communications.
6. That the Church of Christ should ever regard itself as a great missionary
society. 7. That the Church should follow with its prayers those who represent
it in mission-fields,


HINTS AND


Vers. 1-3. The Church at Antioch a
True Church.

I. Its chief president was the Holy
Ghost.

Il. Its ministers were various.—
Prophets, teachers, missionaries (pos-
sibly elders had not yet been appointed,
though already they existed in Jerusa-
lem) (xi. 30).

Ill. Its membership was mixed—
not confined to one class, but composed
of Jews and Gentiles.


SUGGESTIONS.


IV. Its doctrine was evangelical,
consisting of the tenets of the gospel.

V. Its worship was scriptural—
fasting and prayer.

VI. Its spirit was missionary—it
sent forth the first evangelists to the
heathen.


Vers. 2, 3. The Indispensable Re-
quirements of a True Minister or
Missionary.

I. A call from the Holy Ghost.

281


CHAP. XIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee


TI. Ordination from his brethren.
IIT. Recognition by the Church.
IV. A definite sphere of labour.


Ver. 3. The Best Travelling Attendance
for a Missionary on his Departure.
I. The Divine call concerning him.
II. The Spirit’s impulse within him.
III. The Church’s prayers behind
him.
IV. The sighing of the heathen
world before him.—Gerok.


Vers. 1-3. The Forward Movement
at Antioch.

I. The contemplated character of
this movement.—Not the consolidation
of the Church’s own membership, the
elaboration of the Church’s worship,
the systematisation of the Church’s
doctrine, the development of the
Church’s resources, the completion of
the Church’s order—all of which were
praiseworthy objects; but the exten-
sion of the gospel throughout the
heathen world—the greatest movement
that can occupy the thoughts of
Christ’s people.

II. The felt necessity for the move-
ment.—Hardly remarkable that this
was first recognised not in Jerusalem,
the city of exclusive theocratic privi-
lege, of religious conservatism, of
haughty spiritual pride, of compara-
tive poverty, but in Antioch, a city
of mixed population, of intellectual
liberality, of commercial enterprise, of
large wealth.

IIT. The earnest preparation for the
movement.—In proportion to its vast


importance and herculean difficulty,
it required to be gone about with
caution. Not only had fitting agents
to be selected and proper fields to be
marked out for their labours, but the
approbation of the Holy Ghost and
the concurrence of the Church had to
be secured. Accordingly it was not
surprising that the Church’s leaders
gave the whole scheme prolonged and
serious consideration, and in company
with the Church’s members, it may be
supposed, spread the matter out before
the Lord.

IV. The actual initiation of the
movement.—This was done by the
Holy Ghost, whose province alone it
was to sanction such a forward step,
and without whose approbation the
Church authorities would not have felt
warranted to stir. Only when they
got His signal could they see their way
to advance; when that came they
could no longer hold back.

V. The practical execution of the
movement.— This was entrusted to
Barnabas and Saul, than whom no
better evangelists have ever unfurled
the banner of the cross. Were all
heathen missions conducted by two
such captains, fewer failures and more
successes would be recorded. Barnabas
and Saul present the types of men the
Church should seek for her mis-
sionaries.

VI. The faithful historian of the
movement.—Not Lucius of Cyrene, but
Luke, the beloved physician, who in
his unadorned and artless chronicles
has supplied an admirable model for
missionaries’ reports.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 4—12.


Barnabas and Saul in Cyprus; or, the Commencement of the First Missionary
Journey.

I. The journey to Cyprus.—l. By land to Seleucia. This town, sixteen miles
distant from Antioch, to which it served as a seaport, stood upon the coast five
miles north of the mouth of the Orontes. ‘ Seleucia united the two characters of
a fortress and a seaport. It was situated on a rocky eminence, which is the
southern extremity of a range of hills projecting from Mount Amanus. . . . The
harbour and mercantile suburb were on level ground towards the west,” and
were protected by ‘strong artificial defences” (Conybeare and Howson, The Life
and Epistles of Paul, i. 132). ‘In addition to splendid buildings and temples,

282


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  oftap. xut.





the city possessed other advantages. The climate was excellent, and the soil
around uncommonly fruitful. Its geographical position, before the gate of
Antioch, between Cyprus, Cilicia, Syria, and Pheenicia, made it a seat of
extraordinarily lively and profitable commerce” (Hertzberg in Riehm, art.
“ Seleucia”). “A village called Antakia and interesting ruins point out the
ancient site” (Hackett). 2. By sea to Cyprus. Conybeare and Howson offer
four reasons why the missionaries turned in the first instance towards this island.
It was separated by no great distance from the mainland of Syria; a vessel
sailing from Seleucia to Salamis was not difficult to procure, especially in the
summer season; Cyprus was the native land of Barnabas, a consideration which
would naturally weigh with the Son of Consolation (compare John i, 41, 42,
xi. 5); and some of the Cypriotes were already Christians (xi. 20). As the Holy
Spirit is not said to have prescribed the route, these suggestions may serve as an
explanation of the missionaries’ movements, at least till better can be found.

II. The work in Salamis.—1. The city and its inhabitants. Situated near the
modern town of Famagousta, the ancient city stood “on a bight of the coast to
the north of the river Pedizus.” ‘A large city by the sea shore, a widespread
plain with cornfields and orchards, and the blue distance of mountains beyond,
composed the view on which the eyes of Barnabas and Saul rested when they
came to anchor in the bay of Salamis” (Conybeare and Howson, i.135). “When
the apostles stepped ashore upon one of the ancient piers, of which the ruins
are still visible, it was a busy and important place, and we cannot doubt that
Barnabas would find many to greet him in his old home” (Farrar, The Life and
Work of St. Paul, i. 347). 2. The synagogues and their worshippers. Since
there were “synagogues,” the Jewish population must have been considerable ;
and one can easily understand how “the unparalleled productiveness of Cyprus,
and its trade in fruit, wine, flax, and honey, would naturally attract them to the
mercantile port” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 135). Hitherto it had been Saul’s
custom to begin his work by visiting the synagogues ; and from this practice,
neither he nor Barnabas as yet departed. 3. The missionaries and their occupa-
tion. Whatever else they did, their time was mainly spent in preaching or
proclaiming the word of God to their fellow-worshippers in these synagogues,
who would of course be Jews with a mixture perhaps of heathen proselytes.
(On synagogue worship, see ver. 15.) What measure of success they obtained is
not reported. 4. Their attendant and his duties. By name John Mark (see on
xii. 25); but whether he assisted Barnabas and Saul in preaching and baptising,
or confined his attention to secular matters, such as making arrangements for
the travel, lodging, and sustenance of the company, cannot be determined. That
John Mark is introduced in this “curiously incidental” way, was probably
designed, in view of what was to happen in Pamphylia, to show that “he was
not essential to the expedition, had not been selected by the Spirit, had not
been formally delegated by the Church of Antioch, but was an extra hand taken
by Barnabas and Saul on their own responsibility.”—-Ramsay, St. Paul the
Traveller, ete., p. 71.

III. The arrival at Paphos.—1l. The town. New Paphos, on the west coast
of the island, a hundred miles from Salamis; then a bustling haven, the city of
Aphrodite (Venus), whose infamous rites long continued to be celebrated in its
temple, and the residence of the Roman proconsul; now a decayed and
mouldering village, the modern Baffa. 2. The governor. (1) His name—
Sergius Paulus, of whom nothing more is known. Galen mentions a Sergius
Paulus who flourished more than a century later, and was distinguished
for philosophy; while Pliny (4.p. 90) names a Sergius Paulus as his chief
authority for some facts in natural history which he relates, and in particular
for two connected with Cyprus. ‘A Greek inscription of Soloi, on the north


283


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
ee ee


coast of Cyprus, is dated in the proconsulship of Paulus, who probably is the
same governor that played a part in the strange and interesting scene to be
described” (Ramsay, St. Paul the Traveller and the Roman Citizen, p. 74).
(2) His character—* prudent,” or “a man of understanding.” One who in-
termeddled with all knowledge, a philosopher like his namesake above
referred to. Out of this thirst for learning may have arisen his acquaintance
with Bar-jesus; it was a better proof of the sincerity of his desire for en-
lightenment that he summoned Barnabas and Saul to his palace to hear from
them the word of God. (3) His office—‘deputy of the country,” or rather,
proconsul. That Sergius Paulus should have been so styled was formerly
regarded as an error on the part of Luke, but is now proved to be in ac-
cordance with absolute historical accuracy (see “Critical Remarks”). 3. The
sorcerer. (1) His personal designation. Bar-jesus, the son of Jesus (see
“Qritical Remarks”). (2) His professional title. A certain magician.
He had assumed the appellation Elymas (from the same root as the Turkish
Ulemah), meaning, “the wise man” or wizard. (3) His correct description.
A false prophet. ‘He was a fortune-teller, but his art was an imposition ”
(Hackett). (4) His national derivation. A Jew. Hackett thinks he may have
been born in Arabia or lived there for some time.

IV. The encounter with Bar-jesus.—1. The conduct of the sorcerer, He ‘ with-
stood Barnabas and Saul, seeking to turn away the deputy or proconsul from
the faith.” A statement which shows—(1) That the governor's reception of
the apostles took place not in private, but in public, at least to the extent of
being in presence of the inmates of his household, including Elymas, who was
apparently established in the service of Sergius. (2) That the exposition of the
gospel given by the apostles had made a manifest impression on the governor’s
heart, which promised to result in his conversion. (3) That the false prophet
interposed with a view of preventing his master and patron from yielding to the
eloquence of the missionaries. How Elymas sought to weaken the force of the
apostles’ preaching and deaden its influence upon Sergius is not told, but it is
probable “he spared neither argument nor insult in his endeavour to persuade
Sergius of the absurdity of the new faith ” (Farrar)-—perhaps reviling Christ as
a crucified malefactor, and denouncing Him as an enemy of Moses. 2. The action
of Saul. Significant that not Barnabas but Saul steps into the arena against
Elymas and for the rescue of Sergius—a heroic deed which, by its success, for
ever established Saul’s precedence over Barnabas, and, as some conjecture, won
for him his new and now world-renowned name of Paul (see, however, ‘Critical
Remarks”). (1) The secret impulse which pushed Saul] into the foreground came
from the Holy Ghost, who then presided and still presides in the Church, who —
then selected and still selects His agents, and who then directed as He still directs
their steps. ‘Saul, filled with the Holy Ghost.” (2) The searching glance with
which Saul transfixed the wizard (compare iii. 4) showed how completely the
wizard’s character and motives were understood, and how indignantly the
apostle’s soul flamed out against them. Saul’s eyes were illumined by the Spirit of
the Lord, which searcheth all things (1 Cor. ii. 10).. Ramsay finds in the power
of the apostle’s eye an indirect proof that the apostle’s “stake in the flesh ”
was not “impaired vision” (Jbid., p. 97). (3) The denunciation uttered by
the apostle must have told the detected impostor that his career of wickedness
was at an end. In three terrific ejaculations the apostle revealed to him his
depraved character, telling him first that he was “full of all guilt and of all
villainy,” deceit and rascality, cunning and criminality; next, that instead of
being a Bar-jesus—.e., a son of the salvation of Jehovah—he was a veritable son
of the devil (compare John viii. 44); and thirdly, that he was an enemy of all
righteousness, thus making him “ equal to the father of lies” (Stier), “ pierced


284





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xt.





through with hatred against the good” (Besser). In a short, sharp question the
apostle unfolded to him the wickedness of his present behaviour : “ Wilt thou not
cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?” ‘ The ways of the Lord aim directly
and rightly at the salvation of all men (Deut. xxxii. 4; Hosea xiv. 9), and the
two preachers of the gospel have just explained to the Romish governor these
ways; ... and Paul sees that the false prophet will not cease to crook the
straight paths of the Lord and to turn them away from Sergius Paulus that he
may not believe and become blessed” (Besser). (4) The appalling judgment
invoked upon the sorcerer—‘ Behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee,” etc.—
was a richly merited retribution for his heinous wickedness in having sought to
prevent the salvation of a soul. Yet was it mingled with fourfold mercy. In
the first place it was a bodily infliction, whereas it might have fallen on his soul,
as with Judas (i. 25). Secondly, it spared his life, whereas it might have cut
him off, as it did Herod (xii. 23). Thirdly, it was only blindness, whereas it
might have been loss of reason, as in the case of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 34).
And fourthly, it might have been for the whole term of his natural life, whereas,
as with Zacharias (Luke i. 20), it was only for a season. 3. The impression on
Sergius. (1) What he saw. The judgment taking instant effect. ‘“ Im-
mediately there fell on Elymas a mist and a darkness,” etc. (2) How he felt.
He was astonished at such a display of spiritual power. (3) What he did.
“ He believed.” “ How far his belief was deep-seated or otherwise we have no
evidence which would enable us to judge. But the silence of Luke would seem to
indicate that he was not baptised, and we can hardly look upon him as a deep
and lifelong convert, since otherwise we should, in the rarity of great men in
the Christian community, have as certainly heard of him in their records, as we
hear of the very few who at this period—like Flavius Clemens or Flavia
Domitilla—joined the Church from the ranks of the noble or the mighty”
(Farrar, Zhe Life and Work of St. Paul, i. 355). With this pronouncement one
may reaschably disagree. It is too much to expect that all great men who are
converted should have their names and doings paraded in Church chronicles.

Learn.—-1. The highest sign of wisdom—desiring to hear the word of God.
2. The grossest act of wickedness—perverting the right ways of God, or
opposing the salvation of others. 3. The sorest of all earthly calamities—the
falling on one of God’s hand for judgment. 4. The noblest trophy of a preacher’s
power—the conversion of a soul.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 4-12. The First Missionary Ship.

I. Its bold crew.—l. The great
Paul. 2. The noble Barnabas. 3.
The youthful Mark.

Il. Its first wind—1. The east
wind filling its sails. 2. The breath
of the Holy Ghost inspiring its teachers.

III. Its favourable anchorage.—
The renowned Cyprus with its natural
beauties and sinful abominations,

IV. Itsgreat prizes.—1. The sorcerer
vanquished. 2. The governor con-
verted.—Gerok.


Ver. 6. The Story of Bar-jesus.
I, His name—good.


II. His character—bad,
III. His profession—vile.
IV. His sin—great.

V. His punishment—severe,


Vers. 6-12. Hlymas, Sergius, and
Saul; or, Three Sorts of Wisdom.

I. Elymas, the representative of
false wisdom, the subtilty inspired by
the devil (ver. 10).

II. Sergius, the representative of
earthly wisdom, the wisdom which the
world admires (ver. 7).

III. Saul, the representative of true
(as opposed to false) and celestial (as
distinguished from earthly) wisdom,


285


CHAP. XIIi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


.. = es r


the wisdom which the Holy Ghost
teaches (ver. 9).


Ver. 7. Sergius Paulus.

I. A man of understanding, and
yet the dupe of a sorcerer.

IT. An anxious inquirer opposed by
a pretended ‘“ wise one.”

III. An astonished spectator of a
suddenly inflicted judgment.

IV. Apromising convert, whoaccepts
the teaching of the Lord.


Desiring to hear the Word of God.
Might proceed out of —

I. Curiosity, as in the case of Herod
and the Athenians.

II. Thirst for knowledge, as with
Sergius Paulus.

III. Eagerness to believe, as was
true of the Gentiles in Antioch.

IV. Determination to oppose, as with
the unbelieving Jews.


Sergius Paulus, a Prudent Man.

J. The nature of true prudence.—It
is not craft or cunning, it is not self-
conceit or self-wisdom, it is not a
cautious avoidance of the dangers that
lie in the path of duty. It is the
adaptation of our line of action to the
proprieties of time, and place, and
persons. It is practical wisdom.

II. The cases to which it applies.
1. To the preference of objects accord-
ing to their comparative value. 2. To
the due improvement of all oppor-
tunities of doing good and getting
good. 3. To the foresight of all future
events that may be anticipated. 4. To
the control of the temper. 5. To the
government of the tongue.

III. Its advantages. 1. It prevents
many evils. 2. It sweetens all the
charities of social life. 3. It increases
the means of doing good. (1) Cherish
a deep sense of its inestimable value ;
(2) Cultivate it by prayer, and an
intimate acquaintance with the Bible.
—G. Brooks.


Ver. 8 with vii. 9. The Two
Sorcerers ; or, Simon Magus and Elymas
Bar-jesus.

I. Compare.—In being—1. Men. 2.


286


Magicians. 3. Hearers of the gospel.
4, Guilty of heinous sin—the one seek-
ing to purchase the gift of God with
money, the other to hinder the work
of God in others, doubtless for the sake
of money. 5. Subjects of apostolic
denunciation.

II. Contrast.—1l. The one (Simon
Magus) an Oriental, the other (Elymas)
a Jew. 2. The one a willing, the
other an involuntary hearer of the
gospel. 3. The one a baptised believer,
the other a malignant opponent of the
truth. 4. The one an adherent of
Philip, the other an enemy of Saul.
5. The one simply denounced, the other
signally punished. N.B.—These points
of contrast sufficiently dispose of the
allegation of the Tiibingen critics that
Paul’s contest with Elymas is simply
an imitation, without any historical
foundation, of Peter’s struggle with
Simon Magus.

III. Suggest.—1. That there is not
much to choose between an insincere
disciple and an open enemy of the truth.
2. That nothing short of genuine
conversion will secure salvation. 3.
That the punishments of sinners are
always less than they deserve. 4. That
it is dangerous to oppose or disbelieve
the gospel.


The Sorcerer, the Proconsul, and the
Apostle ; or, a Triangular Contest.

I. Elymas and Sergius, the sorcerer
and the proconsul, the pretended wise
man and the earthly savant; or the
deceiver and his dupe.

II. Sergius and Paul, the proconsul
and the apostle, the vicegerent of
Cesar and the ambassador of Christ,
the impersonation of human prudence
and the bearer of heavenly wisdom ;
or the scholar and his teacher.

III. Paul and Elymas, the true
prophet and the false, the servant of
Jesus and the son of the devil; or the
preacher of righteousness and his
satanic opponent.


Ver. 10. Perverting the Right Ways
of the Lord.

I. The ways of the Lord are right.
—1. The ways of the Lord Himself are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIII.





right—always in accordance with holi-
ness and truth (Hosea xiv. 9). 2. The
ways the Lord prescribes to men are
right—always like His own, conform-
able to law and justice (Psalm xix. 8,
exix. 75).

II. The right ways of the Lord
may be perverted.—1. Not God’s ways
for Himself—which never can be other
than pure and upright (Psalm cxlv.
17). 2, But God’s ways for man—
which may be turned aside (1) by
false teaching (2 Peter ii. 1), (2) by bad
example (2 Tim. iii. 5, 6), (3) by sin-
ful temptation (2 Peter ii. 15),


III. To pervert the right ways of
the Lord is offensive.—It is—1. Pre-
sumptuous on the part of a creature.
2. Sinful, being contrary to Divine law.
3. Dangerous, as incurring the just
judgment of God.


Vers. 11, 12. The Judgment on Ely-
mas and its Effect on Sergius a Type of
the Double Work of Christianity.

I. It blinds those who (like Elymas
think they) see (John ix. 39).

II. It imparts sight to those who
(like Sergius confess they) are blind
(John ix. 39).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 13—43.


A Sabbath Day in Pisidian Antioch ; or, Pauls Sermon in the Synagogue.

I. The missionaries in the city—1. Their journey thither. It is apparent
from the narrative that Paul and Barnabas did not make a prolonged stay in
any of the places which they visited on this journey. Having completed their
visit to Cyprus, which probably extended over two months, and having set sail
from Paphos, they landed at Perga in Pamphylia, situated on the Cestrus about
seven wiles from its mouth-—a city, the ruins of which survive to this day in the
shape of ‘‘ walls and towers, columns and cornices, a theatre and a stadium, a
broken aqueduct encrusted with the calcareous deposit of the Pamphylian
streams, and tombs scattered on both sides of the site of the town” (Conybeare
and Howson, i. 153). In Perga they did not linger many days—not longer than
to settle the dissension caused by the proposal to cross the Taurus (Ramsay).
The natural beauty of the city and its celebrated temple of Artemis (Diana)
possessed for them no attractions. Accordingly they hastened on to Antioch in
Pisidia, perhaps because the season of the year rendered it expedient to prosecute
their journey into the interior then rather than at a later period. “ Earlier in
the spring the passes would have been filled with snow. In the heat of summer
the weather would have been less favourable for the journey. In the autumn
the disadvantages would have been still greater from the appreaching difficulties
of winter.” Besides, “at the beginning of the hot season people move up from
the plains to the cool basinlike hollows on the mountains”; and “if Paul was
at Perga in May, he would find the inhabitants deserting its hot and silent
streets” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 156, 157). Ramsay (Zhe Church in the
Roman Empire, pp. 62, 63) suggests that Paul caught fever in Perga, and was
obliged, for health’s sake, to proceed into the more elevated region of the
interior (see ‘‘ Hints” on ver. 13), selecting Antioch as their destination because
of its commercial importance and numerous Jewish population (Jbid., p. 19;
compare St. Paul the Traveller, etc., pp. 89 ff). 2. What occurred upon the way.
John Mark. departing from them at Perga, returned to Jerusalem. The
reasons, not stated and not approved by Paul (xv. 38), were probably mixed.
(1) Mark was young and not inured to hardship, and may have shrunk
from the perils of the enterprise (Grotius, Holtzmann, Zéckler), (2) His natural
temperament may have been somewhat unsteady (Alford). (3) He may have
resented the growing ascendency of Paul, which was thrusting Barnabas,
his uncle, into a second place. (4) He may have been doubtful of the liberal


289


cHar. xt. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


_—<—<—<$<—< $$ ——_.'— CV Oo


theology which Paul was everywhere preaching. (5) He may have grown
somewhat. apprehensive about the safety of his mother, whom he had left
behind at Jerusalem: “either he did not like the work or he wanted to go
and see his mother” (Henry). (6) He may have regarded the proposal to
cross the Taurus as an unwarranted deviation from the original plan (Ramsay).
3. How they acted on arrival. They doubtless made themselves acquainted with
the aspect of the city and the character of its inhabitants; Antioch was a
flourishing commercial city, which lay about a week’s journey north of Perga,
up the valley of the Cestrus, on the central table-land of Asia Minor, on the
confines of Pisidia and Phrygia. It had been built by Seleucus I., the founder
of the Syrian Antioch, and was then an important emporium for the trade of
Asia Minor in wood, oil, skins, goat’s-hair, and Angola wool, besides being a
Roman colony. Its true position, at a place now called Yalobatch, was dis-
covered by Mr. Arundell in 1833, its identity having been rendered certain by
coins and inscriptions. On the Sabbath they visited the synagogue, which
appears to have been the only one, and must therefore have been large.

II. Sabbath worship in the synagogue.—1l. Zhe day. It said a good deal for
the missionaries that they remembered the Sabbath day to keep it holy, and
more for their good sense that they devoted its hours to worship. The Sabbath
was meant by its Lord for the double purpose of resting man’s body from the
toils of the other six days, and refreshing man’s soul through communion with
heaven. To neglect either of these ends—to devote the entire day to physical
repose but not to worship, or to worship in such a fashion as to fatigue the body
—is to violate the day and misapprehend its use. To give it neither to worship
nor to rest, but wholly to labour in business or in pleasure, is to turn it to the
worst possible account. 2. The synagogue.—“ A low, square, unadorned building,
differing from Gentile places of worship by its total absence of interior sculp-
ture”; “on one side a lattice-work partition, behind which sat a crowd of veiled
and silent women”; “in. front of these the reader’s desk, and in its immediate
neighbourhood, facing the rest of the congregation, those chief seats which
Rabbis and Pharisees were so eager to secure” (Farrar, The Life and Work of
St. Paul, i. 365, 366). 3. The worship. ‘“ Each as he entered covered his head
with the Tallith, and the prayers began. They were read by the Sheltach, or
‘angel of the synagogue,’ who stood among the standing congregation. .. .
After the prayers followed the first lesson, or Parashah,” which was “read in
Hebrew, but translated or paraphrased by the interpreter. The Chazzdn, or
clerk of the synagogue, then took the Zorah roll from the Ark and handed it to
the reader. .. . After the Parashah, was read the Haphtarah, or the second .
lesson, from the prophets, the translation being given at the end of every three
verses. After this followed the Midrash, or sermon, which was not delivered by
one set minister,” but might be given by any distinguished stranger who might
happen to be present (Farrar, i. 366, 367). (See an excellent account of
synagogue worship in Stapfer’s Palestine in the Time of Christ, pp. 338-343.)
4, The invitation. In accordance with this custom Paul and Barnabas, who had
doubtless not selected the chief seats in the synagogue (Matt. xxiii. 6), but sat
among the ordinary worshippers (1 Cor. xiv. 16, 23, 24; James ii. 2-4), were
asked if they had any word of exhortation for the people, in which case they
might say on. Possibly some rumour had reached the synagogue that they
were preachers; but whether or not, Paul and not Barnabas responded to the
invitation.

III. Paul’s sermon to the congregation—1. The exordium. In manner re-
spectful— he stood up,” and serious—‘“ he beckoned with his hand”; in matter,
brief, consisting solely of a request for attention: three characteristics which
improve all sermons in which they are found. 2. The contents, There were


288


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cHap. XII.





three main divisions in his discourse. (1) The goodness of God to Israel, which
culminated in sending them a Saviour according to His promise—a kind of
“ captatio benevolentiz ” (Holtzmann) (vers.'16-25). Beginning with their earliest,
history, he rehearsed Jehovah’s gracious acts towards them—ten in number: the
choice of their fathers ; their exaltation in Egypt, meaning thereby their multi-
plication into a numerous and powerful people (ver. 17) ; their deliverance from
bondage by His own right hand (ver. 17); their preservation in the wilderness,
notwithstanding much unbelief and disobedience (ver. 18); their settlement in
Canaan after destroying seven nations therein (ver. 19); their government by judges
for a space of four hundred and fifty years (ver. 20); their reception from God of
a king in answer to their request (ver. 21); the removal of Saul and the estab-
lishment of the throne in David and his seed (ver. 22) ; the appearance of Christ
as a descendant of David, and in fulfilment of ancient promise (ver. 23), when
the Baptist, His distinguished forerunner, had closed his career, or was fulfilling
his course (ver. 24), Thus the history of Israel in its three chief moments—the
formation of the covenant, the settlement in the land, and the institution of
the theocracy—was depicted as a preparation for the appearance of Christ.
(2) Jesus of Nazareth proved to be the Saviour by His death and resurrection
(vers. 26-37). The condemnation of Jesus by the Jewish leaders had been a
literal fulfilment of Old Testament prophecy (ver. 27). Besides dying an
innocent death, He was actually laid in a sepulchre (ver. 29), Taken down from
the tree, He was buried, not by the rulers, it is true, but by Joseph of Arimathea
(John xix. 30), Paul not deeming it necessary to discriminate as to the agents,
though his statement was literally accurate (see “ Critical Remarks”). Yet God
raised up Jesus from the dead, and showed Him alive to His disciples, in
particular to those of them who had come up with Him from Galilee to
Jerusalem and who then were His witnesses to the people. This resurrection
had been foretold in the second psalm (ver. 33), in the fifty-fifth chapter of
Isaiah (ver. 34), and again in the sixteenth psalm (ver. 35), which could not
possibly refer to David, as he had died and seen corruption, whereas ‘“‘ He whom
God raised again saw no corruption” (ver. 37). (3) The proclamation of free
forgiveness or of justification by faith through Jesus Christ (vers. 38, 39), a
blessing which had not been attainable through the law of Moses. 3. The
application. In the form of a solemn warning drawn from words used by
Habbakuk, he cautioned them to beware of rejecting the gospel and so
involving themselves first in the guilt and then in the doom of those who per-
sistently refused to see the hand of God in the events which were taking place
around them (vers. 40, 41). 4. Zhe result. (1) As they, Paul and Barnabas,
were leaving the synagogue, the rulers, perhaps interpreting the wish of the con-
gregation, requested them to repeat their preaching on the following Sabbath
(see ‘ Critical Remarks”). (2) When the synagogue was dispersed, many of the
Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, no doubt express-
ing their desire to hear more of the good tidings to which they had listened.
(3) Speaking to them Paul and Barnabas urged them to continue in the grace
of God.

Learn.—1. That no man having put his hand to the plough in connection
with Christ’s kingdom should, like John Mark, draw or even look back. 2. That
Christ’s disciples, like Paul and Barnabas, should honour the Sabbath and the
sanctuary. 3. That ministers of the gospel, like Paul and Barnabas, should
embrace every opportunity that opens to them of publishing their good news of
salvation. 4, That the gospel when frankly, fully, and fearlessly preached will
seldom fail to make a good impression. 5. That a chief point in the gospel is
the doctrine of free forgiveness, or of justification by faith.


U 289


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. The Incident at Perga ; or,
John Mark’s Departure. A Sermon on
Weariness in Well-doing (but see ‘‘ Homi-
letical Analysis”). Weariness in well-
doing.

J. A common occurrence.—Seldom
justified by good and sufficient reasons.
Plausible excuses often offered; but
men never give the right reason for
doing a wrong thing.

II. An unfortunate example.—Dis-
couraging to fellow-workers, deterrent
to those who might become workers,
hurtful to the individual worker him-
self. Bad examples much more con-
tagious and much more easily set than
good ones.

III. An irremediable mistake.—
Men who lay down a good work cannot
always take it up again at the point
where they laid it down or at the time
when they wish. Mark found this to
be so with himself.

IV. Anirreparable loss.—Those who
grow weary in well-doing miss the
reward which is promised to and laid
up for them who labour on and faint
not.


Ver. 14. Passing through Perga ;
or, Paul's Supposed Illness at Perga.—
‘* Every one who has travelled in Pam-
phylia knows how relaxing and ener-
vating the climate is. In these low-
lying plains fever is endemic; the land
is so moist as to be extraordinarily
fertile, and most dangerous to strangers.
Confined by the vast ridges of Taurus,
five thousand to nine thousand feet
high, the atmosphere is like the steam
of a kettle, hot, moist, and swept by
no west winds. Coming down in July
1890 from the north side of Taurus for
a few days to the coast of Pamphylia,
I seemed to feel my physical and
mental powers melting rapidly away.
I might spend a page in quoting
examples, but the following fact bears
so closely on our present purpose that
it must be mentioned. In August
1890 I met on the Cilician coast an


290


English officer on his way home from
three years’ duty in Cyprus ; previously
he had spent some years in Eastern
service. He said that the climate of
the Cilician coast (which is very similar
to that of Pamphylia, and has not any
worse reputation for unhealthiness)
reminded him of Singapore or Hong-
Kong, while that of Cyprus was infi-
nitely fresher and more invigorating. ...
We suppose then that Paul caught
fever on reaching Perga (the Rev.
Mr. Daniell, who travelled with Spratt
and Forbes, the author states in a
footnoot, died of fever at Attalia, a few
miles from Perga). Here it may be
objected . . . that Paul was used to the
climate of Cilicia and Syria; why
should he suffer in Pamphylia? In
the first place, no one can count on
immunity from fever, which attacks
people in the most capricious way. In
the second place, it was precisely after
fatigue and hardship, travelling on foot
through Cyprus amid grcat excitement
and mental strain, that one was pecu-
liarly liable to be affected by the sudden
plunge into the enervating atmosphere
of Pamphylia. The circumstances im-
plied in Galatians iv. 13 are therefore
in perfect keeping with the narrative
in the Acts; each of the authorities
lends additional emphasis and meaning
to the other” (Ramsay, The Church in
the Roman Empire, pp. 62, 63). Pro-
fessor Ramsay not only assigns this
malarial fever as the cause of Paul’s
passing through Perga, but afterwards
uses it as a confirmatory argument in
support of his thesis that the Galatian
Churches which Paul subsequently
visited, and to which he wrote the
Epistle to the Galatians, were not in
North but in Southern Galatia—were,
in fact, the Churches of Antioch,
Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe (see on
xvi. 6). He also maintains that this
malarial fever became chronic and was
regarded by Paul as his “stake in the
flesh” (St. Paul the Traveller, etc,


p- 94).


Vers. 17-19. The Story of Israel; a
Type of the Church's History.

I. Chosen.—As Jehovah selected
Abraham’s descendants to be a people
for Himself (Exod, xix. 5, 6; Deut.
vii. 6; Isa. xliv. 1; Psalm xxxiii. 12),
so did Christ elect His apostles the
representatives of His Church (John
xv. 16), and so were Christians chosen
by Divine grace (Eph. i. 4).

IT. Exalted.—As Jehovah looked
upon the low estate of His people and
exalted their horn when in Egypt
Psalm exlviii. 14), so has He exalted
or lifted up His believing people from
their sin and misery because of His





grace and mercy (Luke i. 52; Eph. |


ii. 6).

Til. Emancipated.—As Israel was
led forth from Egypt by the mighty
hand of God (Exod. xv. 13; Isa.
lxiii, 12), so has the Church of Christ
been redeemed from the bondage of sin
and death (John iii. 16, 17; Gal.
iii. 13).

IV. Borne.—As Israel was carried
and upheld during the wilderness
wanderings (Deut. i. 31, xxxii. 10-12;
Isa. xlvi. 3), so has the Church of
Christ and so have individual believers
been supported during their earthly
pilgrimage (Matt. xvi. 18; Luke
xxl, 18; 2 Thess, iii. 3).

V. Endured.— Exactly as Jehovah
had to exercise much long-suffering in
dealing with Israel in the wilderness
(Psalm evi. 43-46), so has He still to
bear with Christians as_ individuals
and with the Church as a whole (Rom.
ii. 4; 2 Peter iii. 9, 15).

VI. Protected.—As Israel’s enemies
were destroyed (Deut. vii. 1), so have
been and will be the Church’s and the
saints’ foes (1 Peter iii. 13).

VII. Settled.—As Israel was estab-
lished in the earthly (Josh. xxiii. 4), so
will the whole body of believers be in
the heavenly Canaan (John xvii. 24).


Vers. 20, 22. Judges and Kings.

J. All forms of government are
legitimate—i.e., are of God.

II. No form of government is en-
itled to count on permanency.— What


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XIII.


suits one age may not be adapted
to another.

III. Jehovah is superior to all
governments, and may establish or
remove them at pleasure.

IV. The government that does God’s
will will last longest.—'The people that
refuse to serve Him will be destroyed.


Ver. 21. Old Testament Prophets.—
These were—
I. Religious seers.
II. Foretellers of the future.
III. Political statesmen.
IV. Social reformers.


Ver. 23. The Saviour Jesus.
I. Promised to the fathers (ver. 32).
II. Heralded by John (ver. 24).
III. Manifested to the Jews (ver.


27).
Dy. Crucified under Pilate (ver. 28).
V. Raised from the dead (ver. 30).
VI. Received up into glory (ver. 31).
VII. Preached unto the world (vers.
26, 32).
VIII. Believed on by the Gentiles
(ver. 48).


Ver. 26. This Salvation.

I. What it is.—l.
2. Eternal life.

II. Whence it comes.—From God,
its sole author.

III. Through whom procured.—
Jesus.

IV. To whom offered.—l. To the
Jews first. 2. Also to the Gentiles.

V. On what condition.—-As a free
gift.


Forgiveness.


Ver. 27. The Criminality of the
Jewish Rulers.

I. In being ignorant of their own
sacred books.

II. In not recognising Christ when
He appeared.

IIJ. In condemning Him when no
cause of death had been found in Him.

IV. In rejecting Him after He had
risen from the dead.—Show how far
the criminality of the Jewish rulers
may be reproduced in Christemlcm
to-day,


291


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i a ea ane


The Voices of the Prophets.

J. An important question.—‘ Upon
what grounds are we to rest the
authority with which the prophets
spoke —an authority which - still
breathes in their writings?”

II. A provisional reply.—‘‘ With
one consent they would say that the
thoughts which arose in their hearts
and the words which arose to their lips
were put there by God.”

III. A requisite interrogation.—
“What guarantees have we that they
were not mistaken? Howdo we know
that they are not projecting their own
thoughts outside of themselves, and
ascribing them to an external cause?”

IV. A _ decisive answer.—“ We
believe it on the strength (1) of the
glimpses which the prophets give us
into their own consciousness on the
subject; (2) of the universal belief of
their contemporaries ; (3) of the extra-
ordinary unanimity of their testimony ;
(4) of the difficulty of accounting for
it in any other way; and (5) of the
character of the teaching in which this
Divine prompting and suggestion results
—a character which is not only not un-
worthy, but most worthy of its source”
(Sanday, Jnspiration, pp. 145-147).


Ver. 33. The Witness of the Second
Psalm to Christ.

I. A proclamation of the Divine Son-
ship of Christ.—Neither—1. Physical,
with special reference to His miracu-
lous or supernatural birth (the Naza-
renes, Socinus, Beyschlag). Nor—
2. Hthical, as marking the excep-
tional perfection of His moral nature
(Theodorus, Paul of Samosata, Strauss,
Baur, Ewald). Nor—3. Official,
signalising the theanthropos or God-
man as the theanthropic king by
pre-eminence, the Messiah (Weiss).
But, without denying that the phrase
may sometimes appear to bear one or
more of these significations, 4. Meta-
physical, as descriptive of the essential
relationship subsisting between Christ’s
higher pre-existent nature and the
deity (Gess, Godet, Luthardt, Calvin,
and others).


292


II. A demonstration of the Divine
Sonship of Christ.—‘‘This day have I
begotten Thee.” Probably signifying
the same thing as, “ Thou art My Son,”
these words may, nevertheless, be
understood as having received iliustra-
tion and confirmation in—l. The
incarnation (Heb. i. 5, which some
interpreters regard as alluding to the
birth in Bethlehem). 2. The resurrec-
tion, as in the text. 3. The exaltation
(Heb. v. 5). (See Whitelaw’s, How is
the Divinity of Jesus depicted ? pp. 66,
67.) ’


Ver. 34. The Blessings of David
I. Promised.

II. Gracious.

III. Great.

IV. Holy.

_V. Sure.

VI. Divine.


Ver. 35. God’s Holy One.—See on.
ii, 27.


Ver. 36. The Life, Death, and Burial
of David.

1. His life——1. Useful. He served
his own generation. 2. Pious. He
served the counsel of God (to adopt
the reading of R.V.). 3. Planned
and determined for him by God. He
served his generation by the will of
God, or in accordance with the Divine
purpose or plan. 4. Measured. He
served his generation, and then passed —
away.

Il. His death.—l. Appointed. He
fell on sleep by the will or counsel of
God, according to a third reading.
2. Timely. He fell on sleep after he
had served his generation—i.e., after,
not before, his work was done.
3. Peaceful. He fell on sleep.

III. His burial—l. His body was
deposited in the tomb and saw corrup-
tion. 2. His spirit was gathered to
his fathers, and continued to exist in a
future state (see “ Critical Remarks”).


Ver. 36. Our Day.
I. The words suggest the thought,
that a man’s earthly history is a very


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIII,





limited period.—‘ His own generation.”
We are accustomed, almost reconciled,
to the brevity of our earthly career,
but perhaps this attribute of it is more
remarkable than we commonly feel it
to be. The large portion of past
human history which a man must needs
miss when he only comes into it in the
course of its seventh millennium,—this
would still have left him much if then
it had been possible for him to abide
in the midst of human history until its
consummation. The period of earthly
life is in many ways an inadequate
period—scanty, even to unnaturalness,
from the merely terrestrial pcint of
view. Fifty years of work in this
world, then—that is the utmost we can
reasonably look for, after we are equipped
and before we are weary unto death.
There is not much time to lose; our
own generation is a quantity that is
frugal of opportunity, so far as
opportunity consists in continuance.
Yet it is one great opportunity from
first to last, and its very brevity
accentuates its greatness. To live and
work in a world like ours, after such a
manner as grace can empower us to do;
to bear and battle our way through it,
with any credit and any success, ere
we look back upon it out of a higher
existence; to stand for God and
righteousness, with the sterling bravery
of a good conscience, that is an oppor-
tunity which must be in many ways
unique, and has elements in it of
heroism, with touches of tragic signifi-
cance, which gather upon us _ the
interest of multitudes of invisible well-
wishers. Perhaps the opportunity is
long enough if it be -strenuously
employed; for then, with all its
wondrous cheer, it is not a little
arduous.

II. The words suggest the thought,
that a man has a lasting personal
relation to the time upon which his
earthly history is cast. “His own
generation.” All generations of man-
kind, it is true, belong to the man who
has given himself to God, and such a
man belongs to all the generations.
But the period of the world’s history


upon which our relations centre them-
selves, and to which they stand for
ever intimate, shall be the period in
whose history we ourselves took part.
It was that generation which most of
all put its impress upon us, and it was
that generation which most of all bore
away the marks of whatever influence
our own personality exerted upon men
and things beneath the sky. Many
steamers cross the Atlantic, and many
trains wheel their way across the
American continent; let a man cross the
one or the other but once only—then,
as long as he lives, that steamer, that
train, by which he himself travelled,


- with its passengers and its incidents,


is “his own” steamer, “his own”
train ; and it is still this upon the
lips of his children after he is gone.
So our experience of world-life and
world-history, brief as it is, and
passing rapidly from successor to
successor again, is for ever bound up
with the circumstances of our own one
journey, and has abidingly gathered
into it the memories, the complexion,
and to some extent the type, which
those circumstances determined. All
this takes on a firmer emphasis accord-
ing as we let in the consideration of
duty and privilege, both of them having
their ultimate source in Jesus Christ,
the Sovereign of the human ages. The
true man is the Christian man. It is
he alone who is the genuine unit in
world-life, the authentic link in the
continuity of true world-history within
his limits. The Christian man lives
his life—more wisely indeed for himself
than any unchristian man, yet straight
in the Jine of liberating his whole feel-
ing and action from the dominion of
self-seeking. He lives his life for God
in Christ ; he lives it for other men in
Christ’s name. He “ keeps himself ”—
in spirit, in mind, in body—and finds
he has a goodly task on hand in so
doing ; but it is not for himself that
he keeps himself; it is for Christ, and
for the will of Christ. The will of
Christ is the weal of men—my own
weal, and the weal of all around me.
My “own generation”—the set of


293


-CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


$$


things which touches me on all sides,
and is touched by me at many points—
is the element within which I may, I
must, directly fulfil the will of Christ
as a will for this world in which He
lived and died.

III. The words suggest the thought,
that a man is called to note and to
know the peculiar character of his
own time.—‘‘ His own generation.”
There is a certain individuality about
every generation. It has its own
disposition, temperament, moods,
capabilities, opportunities, not all of
which are shared in the same. measure
by any other generation. Each genera-
tion has something in it of every
generation that has been; but it has
also somewhat in it which is original
enough to give a special tone to itself
and to its effect upon the generations
following. Intelligence about the past
is mostly of value according as it helps
us to be intelligent about the present.
He will not fail to note, that his
generation is one of unwonted activity
—activity intense, ingenious, adventur-
ous, daring—activity of hand, of
tongue, of pen, of thought; yet a
generation of special thinking rather
than of general thoughtfulness, and
eager rather than earnest—having
much of the tug and bustle of strain,
which has need to soothe itself into a
more settled and self-controlling energy.
He will scarcely overlook that His
generation, more distinctly still, is one
of scientific progress and material
advancement—of rapid secular civilisa-
tion. If now our youthful observer,
all but ready to step forth into the
arena of his generation, turn his eye
more intently upon its moral and
religious aspects, he may still find much
that ought to stir his interest. He
will note, that Christian truth, as truth
which holds the supernatural, and at
its centre the great Biography which
means all that is supernatural, is
emerging from trials that have been
severe—emerging from them, and with
only new clearness in her eye and new
stability in her bearing. He will mark,
nevertheless, that Christian truth is


294


not past all her trials. On the other
hand, he will be free to mark, that in
the face of all this his generation
displays not a little of evangelic force
and evangelistic fervour, and even some
willingness to devise methods for over-
taking the multitudes among us who
are virtually beyond the contacts of
Christendom.

IV. The words suggest the conclud-
ing thought, that a man is summoned
to do the best for his own time.—There
is no young man with the right spirit
in him, and with the most ordinary
preparation for his world-career, who
will fail to recognise that this genera-
tion of his is waiting for him, and gives
some occasion for his best work on its
behalf. As he is getting him ready to
step forth into the thick of his time, he
will be resolving to look beyond the
legitimate interests of self and of
family, and onwards to the wider
interests of ‘truth, of Church, of
country, of race. It may look more of
a paradox than it is, if we say, that
in order to be anything worth while.
for our generation, we must conserve ©
our own individuality, and must con-
firm the personal independence of our
own conscience and will. Among the
forces of the time we must get in good
measure to be masters of ourselves, and
must refuse to let any of them be
handling us very much without our
consent. More than this: we shall do
most for our time by developing all
that is worthy of development in our
own type of character, whether moral
or intellectual, social or religious ; so
that it shall still be our very selves,
and more of our very selves, with all
the advantage of natural confluence of
power, who are at work upon the
materials of the time. And among
the multifarious claims of a complicated
time like ours, it seems in place to say
that it were not well to scatter our
energies by attempting too many things,
but rather to make our energies tell
by bringing their weight to bear upon
one or two selected points. Your
selection will be determined by circum-
stances, by capabilities, by tempera-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. xttt,





ment—that is, by providence, more or
less fixed and cordially accepted. To
some of us will fall a larger share of
contest and demolition, to others of us
a larger share of cherishing and con-
struction : in the issue, none the less,
it is all of it construction still. But
we cannot, perhaps, look abroad upon
our own generation, in the light of the
past, without a feeling that combat
with untruth and evil, hand to hand
and weapon to weapon, is more and
more evidently inadequate, and that
something other and further must be
endeavoured than to smite uprising
error in the face, or to meet wrong-
going with confronting argument and
point-blank effort which ought to com-
pel it into rightness. The real strength
of all wrong things is not in their
front, but in their flank and rear:
their fronts are only the special facings,
ever varying’ and ever new, which are
evolved out of one or two principles,
steady and old, that are lurking strong
and vital behind the fighting-line. It
is these that we ought above all to
spend our lives in striving to reach and
to enfeeble. It is ours to root around
us as we can the living love of God in
Christ. It is ours to take the strength
out of the admiration of what is
material by promoting a sense of what
is spiritual. It is ours to throw our
energies upon making the Church
more ready of heart and hand for all
her duty, and upon ridding her from
the hesitancy and feebleness and
reservation of human sympathy, which
still so greatly limit her power.—J/. A.
Kerr Bain, M.A.


A Mode of Life.—There is a bio-
graphy in this brief epitaph. It isa
“Life” flashed into vividness by a
lightning sketch. The text conducts
us to the master-secret of a great
career. There is no time wasted over
events and details. We are introduced
at once to the purpose, the method,
the spirit of the man commemorated.
This is essentially the man’s life. All
other matters—the time and place of
his birth, the character of his educa-





tion, his social environment, his plans
and difficulties, his conflicts and achieve-
ments—are but incidents and episodes,
the arena on which he pursues his pur-
pose, the instruments by which he accom-
plishes his will. Our text gives us the
right estimate. It is not the pious
fraud of a charitable epitaph-writer.
It is essentially just when, passing over
exceptional episodes and penetrating
to the normal mood of the life, it
depicts this man as one who served his
God and his generation. But our text
is of more than historical interest.
While it embalms a memory, it indi-
cates an ideal. It is a philosophy as
well as a biography. It presents life
and death in their higher aspects;
one as an unselfish yet self-rewarding
energy, the other as in no sense an
accident or disaster, but an ordered
and gracious dispensation. It links
the character of a man’s death to the
character of his life, and both to the
righteous dominion of God.

I. A good model of life-—*He
served his own generation by the will
of God.” 1. Now, in analysing this
account of a great career, three promi-
nent characteristics immediately arrest
our attention. The first is that it was
a life of service. It was not one of
idleness, whether ornamental or fussy ;
not one of ease, either cultured or
coarsely luxurious. It was an active
life of service whose zeal was as broadly
unselfish as it was intelligent and in-
cessant. The full significance of that
fact is only perceived when we re-
member that this serving-man was a
king. Girt with the authority of
power, gifted with the self-delighting
resources of genius, housed amid the
wealth and luxury incident to regal
station, this man served. That is a
noteworthy point. It emphasises a
truth not always clearly perceived, that
whatever be a man’s station or resource
he does not escape the common obliga-
tion of service. To whom much is
given, from him much shall be re-
quired. The king owes, because he
can render, a larger loyalty to the
subject than the subject owes to the


295


CHAP. XIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


king. The master is greater debtor to
the servant than the servant to the
master. Among rich and poor alike
it is a common sentiment that the
higher a man climbs in the social scale
the further he gets from the thrall and
burden of work. God’s law expresses
and exacts the very opposite conclusion.
God looks for the broadest and best
servants of humanity not among the
necessitous at the bottom, but among
the free and favoured at the top. This
Divine distribution of debt finds recog-
nition, theoretically at least, even
poetically, it may be said, in our
English titles of distinction. Etymo-
logically, the king is the able kinsman
of his brethren, ‘called to loftiest station
because most fit to serve. The duke,
as the word indicates, is the leader,
the man who can see furthest ahead,
with courage enough to stand at the
front, capable not only of showing
the way, but of giving and taking the
first blows in the battle of progress,
The earl is the elderman or alderman.
the man of funded experience and
accumulated wisdom, as eminent in
grace as in vigour, the counsellor and
shield of the people. The highest
official in our Executive Government
we call Prime Minister, which means
head servant. The doctrine of Christ
admits of no doubt on thissubject. It
denies to any man, whether rich or
poor, the right to be an idler amid the
ceaseless tasks of humanity. It aims
at sweeping away parasites and ex-
crescences of all kinds and degrees.
But in doing this it is careful to dis-
tinguish itself from a mere gospel of
industry. It is more than a law of
labour. It is a law of service. Labour
may be, and often is, utterly selfish.
It is careful of its own products. It
aims at its own aggrandisement. What
we do for our own bread and comfort
is labour. Service is the unselfish ex-
penditure of talent in behalf of others,
And Christ’s gospel is one of service,
which means that it is one of human
brotherhood. In nothing, perhaps,
does the practical beneficence of our
Christian gospel shine so luminously
QoL


as in the victory it has won for this
nobler philosophy of life. Men are
beginning, as never before, to see that
nothing in life is held in absolute
ownership, that time and talent are
possessed under a stewardship whose
obligations are broad and ceaseless.
2. A second essential of noble living,
as indicated in the example we are
considering, is the element of contem-
poraneousness—the ability to see and
seize the opportunities of the day.
David not only served; he served his
own generation. He discovered, that
is to say, in the circumstances and
claims of life around him, an ample
field for all his energies, a primary and
sacred call upon his various resource.
Therein lay the secret of his greatness.
The sign of all true wisdom and heroism
is the ability to take occasion by the
hand and translate it into beneficent
achievement ; to see what needs doing,
and right zealously to do it. That is
what our fathers used to call judicial
wisdom, the highest because the lowliest
wisdom, the wisdom most profound
because most perceptive and most prac-
tical. To be, in any adequate sense,
a leader or teacher of the time, one
must be a student of all times—past,
present, future. No man can read
the lesson of to-day who did not learn
his alphabet amid the events of yester-
day. He will make sad mistakes in
his handling of current opportunities
who casts no prescient glance towards
the indications of to-morrow. The
combined genius of history and of
prophecy can alone interpret and guide
the spirit of the time. It is as true of
humanity as it is of the physical uni-
verse ; it is a grand and vital unit, not
a kaleidoscope of broken fragments.
And to understand where we are and
whither we ought to tend we must
know whence we have come and to
what goal the growing indications
point. A pitiable spectacle of noisy
incompetence is the man who imagines
that to serve his own generation he
must cut himself adrift from all con-
sideration and reverence of the past.
Of no use to his age is the fussy experi-


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIII.


3
Ee EE


menter, the declared opportunist, who
boasts that he never looks more than
a fortnight ahead in his manipulation
of affairs. The crown of all true
wisdom is service, and to serve the age
a man must be alive to its evils and
possibilities, to its laughter and its
tears. The danger of judicial blind-
ness, however, the failure to see and
do the duty of the day, does not beset
the leaders alone, but very palpably
surrounds and afflicts the humbler
occupants of the ranks. In one man
it takes the form of regretful and
debilitating reminiscence. His heart
is in the “ good old days.” Life was
worth living then. There was some-
thing to be done, and room to do it.
Things are different now. Life is
too crowded, too vulgar, too complex.
Poetry is gone. Chivalry is out of
date. Heroism is impossible. This
man is blinded by memory. Another
is blinded by forecast. He believes
there is work to be done, somewhere ;
he believes he is the man to do it, some
time; but he waits his opportunity.
His dream of great deeds fills him with
enthusiasm, but he must bide his time.
Thus, from one cause or another, men
are apt to overlook or underrate the
present task, They are dreamers,
idlers, pessimists, in some cases pietists
who despise the world’s problems even
while they live by the world’s problem-
making labour. 3. The third element
in a truly noble life is the feature
of Divine inspiration and submission.
David not only served—he not only
served his own generation—but he
served it according to the will of God.
That means, in a word, that while he
served his own age he did not serve
at its bidding, by its direction, for its
reward. He stood above its prejudices
and passions, above its noisy voices and
its alleged interests. While in the
world he was not of it. He was God’s
servant, working out in God’s name
and by His direction the sacred tasks
of the day. That feature of his life
suggests two important remarks. In
the first place, it helps us to distinguish
between a time-server and one who


struction of the text.


serves his time. Do not think, then,
that in order to serve your own genera-
tion you must needs bow down to all
its demands and favour all its schemes.
Not the age, but God, is your Master ;
only as you make Him your Inspiration
and Guide can you win liberty for
yourself and success for your work.
But another point is brought into pro-
minence by this association of God’s
and man’s service. It is clearly indi-
cated that the true service of God is
the true service of man. This identi-
fication of work and worship as twin
elements of piety is suggested by the
curiously balanced grammatical con-
In, the A.V.
the text reads, “ After he had served
his own generation by the will of
God”; but it places in the margin an
alternative reading, “ After he had
in his own age served the will
of God.” The R.V. gives us, with a
slight verbal alteration, both these
translations, only it places the
text of the A.V. in its margin.
and the marginal reading in its text.
The sentence can be construed with
equal accuracy either way, and so can
its sense. For when we ask, What is
the substantial difference between
serving our generation by the will of
God and serving the will of God in our
generation? we cannot discover it. We
can only see variously accentuated ex-
pressions of the same thought. Do not
mistake me. IJ am not saying God has
no delight in our songs, our prayers,
our orderly and regular occasions of
praise. He is pleased with them, and
makes them means of grace to us.
They are properly described as Divine
service. But should I not be right if
I called them occasions of self-service
as well as of Divine praise? We get
a great deal more than we give when
we enter the sanctuary. We get a
vision of God; a renewal of grace. I
will tell you when the real Divine
service begins—when the preacher has
ceased to speak, and the organ has
finished its noble notes, and the lights
are put out, and the doors of the sanc-
tuary are closed, and you are out yonder


297


CHAP. XIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a ——


in the street, and you turn about to
find an outlet for the inspiration of the
house of prayer in the feeding of the
poor, in the succouring of the helpless,
in the attacking of some gaunt wrong,
in the advocacy of justice, sobriety,
truth. That is God's service, Divine
service, and it makes for the peace and
joy of His kingdom! Such is the
model life set before us in the text.

II. A fine conception of death.—
“ He fell on sleep.” 1. The death of
the godly man is an ordered and
gracious dispensation. For it was
after David had served that “he fell
on sleep”; not before nor during his
submissive fulfilment of the work God
gave him to do. 2. The death of the
godly man is a peaceful sinking into
rest. What a beautiful phrase is that,
“‘ He fell on sleep”! There is nothing
repulsive or fearsome about sleep.—
C. A. Berry, D.D.


Ver. 38. A Sermon on Forgiveness.


I. The burden of the gospel
message.
Il. The result of a Divine act of


justification.

III. A blessing secured for man
through the work of Jesus Christ.

IV. Attainable by all on condition
of believing on Christ.


Ver. 43. Continuing in the Grace of
God.
I. The best evidence of conversion.
II. The requisite condition of salva-
tion.
III. The essence of Christian duty.


Ver. 39. Paul's Doctrine of Justifica-
tion.

I. The meaning attached by Paul to
the term justification —1. Htymologi-
cally considered, the English word
“justification ” signifies to make just ;
but the Greek word, being strictly
a forensic term, does not mean to
make just, or infuse righteousness into
any one, but to declare one to be just
or righteous, to absolve one from any
charge or claim which the law might


298


have against him. 2. Legally viewed,
justification is the exact opposite of
condemnation, which also is a purely
forensic term, and does not make or
render any one brought before it
guilty, but simply declares or pro-
nounces such a one to be guilty, if
so be the evidence supplied has
established his guilt. 3. Theologically
regarded, justification is a declara-
tion or pronouncement on the part
of God, not that the sinner is
thenceforward personally innocent,
holy, blameless, but that, so far as
the Divine law is concerned, the sinner
is acquitted, freed from liability to
punishment, and contemplated as
having met all the laws just and
necessary demands upon him.

II. The ground upon which, ac-
cording to Paul, this sentence of
justification proceeds.—1l. Not the
original righteousness or faultlessness of
the so-called sinner, who has been im-
peached, but wrongly, at heaven’s bar.
Paul’s doctrine of justification rests
upon the antecedent doctrine of the
universal guiltiness and actual con-
demnation of the race in its totality
and in every separate member (Rom.
iii, 9-22). 2. Not the acquired right-
eousness of the individual sinner, who
by personal merit has undertaken to
wipe out his original and actual un-
righteousness. The Jews, and especially
the Pharisees, imagined that this could
be done by observance of the law of
Moses. Men in general conceive the
same thing attainable through good
works. But Paul repudiated and
repudiates all sort of personal merit
based upon the individual’s own
performances as a basis for the
Divine sentence of justification (Rom.
iv. 5; Eph. ii. 8; Titus iii. 5), 3. But
the imputed righteousness of Jesus
Christ, who, according to the view
taken by Him of Christ’s person and
work, occupied the room of sinful men
(2 Cor. v. 21), and in their stead ful-
filled the law’s requirements by His
obedience unto death (Phil. ii. 8), which
obedience unto death, having been pro-
vided by God’s free grace, constituted


Ps


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIII.





“His righteousness ” (Rom. iii, 25),
which He wrought out for man by
Jesus Christ, and manifested and set
forth and still manifests and sets
forth as an adequate and all-sufficient
ground, yea, as the only ground upon
which He either will or can justify the
nngodly (Rom. iii. 19-31).

Ill. The condition upon which,
according to Paul, this real act of
justification proceeds.—1. Not works,
inasmuch as these have been already
excluded (Gal. ii. 11), and if again
admitted would not only tei.d to im-
pair the all-sufficiency of Christ’s right-
eousness (2 Cor. v. 21), but would
inevitably introduce thoughts of per-
sonal merit into the individual’s mind
(Rom. iii. 27), and so far would militate
against the true character of justifica-
tion as a judicial act of acquittal
pronounced upon those who are them-
selves absolutely without righteousness
or merit of their own (Rom. iv. 5).
2. But faith, and faith alone, without
works (Rom. ii. 28), without merit,
without righteousness (Eph. ii. 9; Gal.
ii. 16), simply by believing in Jesus
Christ, and on Him who for Jesus’
sake justifies the ungodly (Rom. x.
4-11; Gal. iii, 8; Phil. iii. 9).


IV. The extent to which, according
to Paul, this justification prevails.—
“ All things from which a man could
not (and cannot) be justified by the
law of Moses,” whether moral or cere-
monial. 1. lé discharges the sinner who
believes from all responsibility for his
sins, past, present, and to come. It
relieves him of the sentence of condem-
nation which previously overhung him
(Rom. viii. 1). It blots out the hand-
writing which stood recorded against
him (Col. ii. 14). It places him in a
state of reconciliation towards God
(2 Cor. v. 18). It sets him in a con-
dition of peace before God (Rom. v. 1).
It practically pardons him fully, freely,
and for ever. 2. Jé furnishes the sinner
who believes with a righteousness that
can perfectly satisfy the law's demands
Jor obedience. It not only releases
him from the law’s penalty, but it
accepts him as righteous in its sight,
not on account of any righteousness
infused into him, but on account of
Christ’s righteousness imputed to him
(Rom. iv. 22-25, x. 4). While Christ’s
sacrificial death discharges him from
the guilt of his sin, Christ’s perfect
obedience constitutes his title to
eternal life,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSTIS.—Verses 45—52.


A Second Sabbath in Pisidian Antioch ; or, the Promising Situation changed.

I. Fierce opposition to the gospel on the part of the Jews.—Displayed in
ascending stages. 1. Jndignation.—They were filled with “ envy ” or “ jealousy,”
or better, boiling wrath, against the multitudes of Gentiles who on this second
Sabbath had crowded the synagogue and perhaps overflowed into the street, and
who everywhere manifested an eager desire to hear the word of God (ver. 45).
2. Contradiction. They interrupted the apostles while preaching by declaring
what they said about Jesus to be contrary to fact and therefore untrue, possibly
asserting that He was not the long-promised Messiah, was not God’s Holy
One, had never been raised from the dead, and could not be the author of
salvation to any. 3. Blasphemy. Hither reviling Jesus as an impostor and a
malefactor, or declaring Him to have been in league with Satan (compare
John x. 20). Perhaps also hurling opprobrious epithets and railing accusations
against the apostles (ver. 45). 4. Rejection. Rising into greater heat, they
appear to have openly and scornfully intimated their determination not to
believe in Christ or accept of salvation through His name, but to thrust away
from themselves the offer of eternal life (ver. 46). 5. Persecution. They stirred
up and urged on the devout women of honourable estate who were proselytes,
_along with the chief men of the city, most likely their husbands, to set on foot


299


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





a persecution against the apostles—a persecution Paul afterwards alludes to
(2 Tim. iii. 11). 6. Expulsion. So successfully did they work that the apostles
were forcibly ejected from their “coasts” or “cast out of their borders.” The
persecution, probably a tumultuous outbreak, obliged the apostles to retire
beyond the precincts of the city, to which, however, they returned on their
homeward journey (xiv. 21).

II. Solemn decision as to preaching on the part of the apostles.—1. Jts
purport. Not that they would henceforth discontinue preaching to the Jews,
and turn exclusively to the Gentiles, since they do not appear to have passed by
their countrymen in their subsequent ministrations (xiv. 1), but that there and
then they would leave their unbelieving brethren to their blind infatuation and
self-elected doom, and devote their attention to the Gentile inhabitants of the
city. 2. Its reason. It was necessary, both as according with Christ’s command
(i. 8; Rom. i. 16) and with their own natural instincts, that their countrymen
and kinsmen should obtain the first offer of the gospel ; but these, having judged
themselves unworthy of the everlasting life, having shown by their unbelief, but
more especially by their contradiction and blasphemy, that they loved the
darkness rather than the light (John iii. 19), had thus virtually made their
choice to seek no part or lot in the kingdom of God or the salvation of Messiah.
3. Its boldness. It was uttered in no half apologetic tone, but with courageous
manliness as became those who were conscious, not only of following the path.
of duty, but of being guided by the Spirit. 4. [és fimality. They shook off
the dust of their feet, as Christ had directed them (Matt. x. 14), not in contempt
for (Meyer), but as a testimony against, the unbelievers, and departed into
Iconium, presently called Konieh, a city variously located—at ninety (Plumptre),
sixty (Lewin), forty-five miles (Hackett) south-east of Antioch, the capital of
Lycaonia, and situated at the foot of the Taurus (see on xiv. 1).

III. Hearty reception of the gospel by the Gentiles—1. Hager listening.
Almost the whole city—the greater part of the congregation being the native
heathen inhabitants—came together to hear the word of God. (1) A sublime
spectacle, a whole city moved by a common impulse, more sublime when that
common impulse is to hear the gospel, most sublime when that common impulse
is yielded to. Compare the situation in Samaria (viii. 6). (2) A hopeful
attitude. When men will not hear their conversion is impossible, or at all events
improbable, since “faith cometh by hearing” (Rom. x. 17). Those who hear
the gospel, if not yet in, are at least near the kingdom. The word of the
kingdom received into the understanding may find its way to the heart and
conscience. 2. Harnest believing. Those among the listeners who were
ordained to eternal life and whose hearts the Lord opened (xvi. 14), believed,
received the truth in the simplicity of faith, and were thereby saved. (1) That
any believed was due to grace Divine. Whatever else is signified by being
“ordained to eternal life,” this is implied, that their faith proceeded not from
themselves, but was the gift of God (Eph. ii. 8). (2) That all did not believe
was due to the natural disinclination of the human heart (1 Cor. ii. 14). If it
cannot be supposed that all the Antiochians were converted, the impression
conveyed by the narrative is that many were. Had the majority been won
over, the persecution of the apostles would scarcely have been successful.
2. Triumphant rejoicing. The Gentiles were glad. (1) At the intimation of
the apostles that they were about to bear their gospel message to the heathen.
(2) At the announcement that Christ had been “set for salvation unto the ends
of the earth.” (3) At their own personal experience of the blessing of the
gospel, “they were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost.” 4. Adoring
gratitude. They glorified the word of God, or of the Lord, not simply by
listening to, believing in, and making experience of, but also in giving thanks


300


Pos


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XIII.





for it-—“‘for the mercy which had embraced them in the plan of salvation and
had given them this opportunity to secure its benefits.”
Learn.—1. That the duty of every one to whom the gospel comes is to accord


it a hearing, patient, unprejudiced, and respectful.


2. That the gospel cannot


be killed by contradicting and blaspheming either it or its messengers. 3. That


the first to hear the gospel are often the last to accept it.
lost except those who judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.
believe except those who are ordained to eternal life.


4. That none are
5. That none
6. That the same gospel


which fills some with rage fills others with joy. 7. That joy in a believer’s soul
arises from the inhabitation of that soul by the Holy Ghost.


HINTS AND S U GGESTIONS.


Ver. 44. A Marvellous Sight. ‘ Al-
most a whole city gathered together to
hear the word of Ged.”

I. Unusual.—Cities or the people
in them have so much else to engage
their attention, as, ¢g., business, plea-
sure, social duties, political engage-
ments, ete.

II. Wonderful.—_Not to see groups
of persons assembled to hear the word
of God, but to observe a whole city or
nearly so gathered for such a purpose.

Ii{. Sublime.—To look upona vast
multitude all absorbed in higher things
than those of time and sense, in things
pertaining to salvation and eternal
life.

IV. Desirable. — Few, who can
rightly estimate the value of the
gospel as God’s word in contradistinc-
tion to man’s, will deny that such a
spectacle as is here described is one
greatly to be longed for.

V. Hopeful.—W hat consequences of
good might be expected to result from
a whole city or the larger portion of it
turning out to hear the word of God!
Surely an immediate awakening would
follow with not a few, perhaps a mul-
titude of conversions.


Vers. 45-48. Jews and Gentiles ; or,
Gospel Hearers and their Different Atti-
tudes, Characters, and Destinies.

I. The Jews full of envy,
Gentiles full of gladness.

IJ. The Jews contradicting, the Gen-
tiles listening.

_ III. The Jews thrusting from them
the word of God, the Gentiles glorify-
ing the word of God.


the


IV. The Jews condemning themselves
as unworthy of eternal life, the Gen-
tiles believing to justification as worthy


of and qualified for eternal life—


Stier.


Ver. 47. Salvation.
I. Its nature—light.
Il. Its medium—“ Thee,” Christ.
III. Its destination—the Gentiles,
the uttermost parts of the earth.
IV. Its source —God.


Ver. 48. Ordained to Hternal Life.
I. The goal, cternal life.
Ti. The way thither, through faith.
Jil. The impelling power, Divine
grace.
IV. The plan in accordance with
which it works, foreordination.


Or thus :—

A Sermon on Foreordination.—Fore-
ordination. An act—

I. Divine.—Of necessity whatso-
ever comes to pass is known beforehand
to God. Whether foreordination is
grounded on foreknowledge (Arminius)
or foreknowledge on foreordination
(Calvin), makes no difference to the
issue. Whatever comes to pass is and
has been divinely arranged, reraypevov.

II. Sovereign.—This arrangement
has its basis in the good pleasure of
God, or the counsel of His own will
(Eph. i. 5, 11). his so, even should
it be that God in arranging has had
regard to foreseen faith and good works
in man.

III. Gracions.-—It is ordination, not


301


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





to condemnation, but to eternal life. If
men are lost, it is because they judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life ; if
they are saved, it is because Divine
grace has chosen them to eternal life
(Eph, i. 4).

IV. Rational. — Foreordination is
not an arbitrary or mechanical force or
decree that overrides the human will
and executes itself irrespective of the


nature of man, but a counsel of perfec-


tion that works towards its end by
making use of man’s free will and re-
sponsible intelligence.

V. Mysterious.—After all has been
said that can be said by metaphysical
theologians, it remains an impenetrable
secret how God can be sovereign and
man free. Yet Scripture, providence,
and individual consciousness attest that
both doctrines are true.


Ver. 52. Filled with Joy.

I. Desirable.—Cannot be desirable
to live in doubt, sadness, and fear aris-
ing from uncertainty as to personal
salvation.

II. Possible.—Proved by numerous
instances in Scripture; as, eg., the
Samaritans (viii. 8), the Corinthians
(2 Cor. viii. 2), the Thessalonians
(1 Thess. i. 6), the Eunuch (viii. 39),
the jailor of Philippi (xvi. 34).

III. Attainable.—1. By being filled
with the Holy Ghost (Rom. xv. 13;
Gal. v. 22). 2. By believing on Jesus.





Vers. 48, 49. How to glorify the Word
of God. By—
I. Listening to it.
II. Believing it.
III. Obeying it.
IV. Spreading it.


CHAPTER XIV.


Tue First MissionARy JOURNEY (PAavuL AND BaRNABAS)—CONTINUED AND
‘CONCLUDED.


§ 1. Paul and Barnabas at Iconium; or, continued Opposition from the Jews
(vers. 1-7).

§ 2. Paul and Barnabas at Lystra; or, the Gospel among Barbarians (vers.
8-20).

§ 3. The Homeward Journey of Paul and Barnabas; or, Back to Antioch in
Syria (vers. 20-28).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Iconium.—Presently styled Konich. Situated south-east of Pisidian Antioch, and
according to apocryphal legend the abode of the virgin martyr Thecla, who is said to have
been at this time converted by Paul. Whether Iconium was a Lycaonian (Cicero, Strabo,
Pliny), Phrygian (Xenophon), or Pisidian (Ammianus Marcellinus) city is debated by modern
writers (see ‘ Homiletical Analysis”). Together.—xard 7d at’ré, as in iii. 1, rather tian at
the same time (Holtzmann), or in the same manner (Wolf). §80,—Not with such power, but
with this result. The Greeks.—Having been in the synagogue these were most lhkely
proselytes (compare xiii. 43), and therefore a different class from those mentioned in xi. 20,

Ver. 2. But the unbelieving Jews.—Lit., but the Jews having disbelieved, when the others
believed, stirred up the Gentiles, etc. Better, stirred up the souls of the Gentiles and made
them evil affected. kxaxdw occurs in the New Testament only here. How the Jews incited
the Gentiles is not told; but see xiii, 45-50, xviii. 5-9. Only two of the persecutions
recorded in the Acts (xvi. 19, xix. 23) proceeded from others than Jews. The Bezan text
adds, “But the Lord gave peace quickly,” which Professor Ramsay is disposed to accept as
correct, in order to explain the “ long time” of next verse.


302


* HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cnap. xiv.


at


Ver. 3.—The best authorities omit and between “gave testimony” and “ granted.”
Spitta regards this verse as “(a scrap from an independent and complete narrrative ;”
Ramsay, as “an early gloss similar to the many which have crept into the Bezan text.”

Ver. 4. Divided.—The usual result of the gospel (see John vii. 43, x. 19; Acts xxiii. 7).

Ver. 5. An assault.—Should rather be an onset (R.V.), or better, “an impulse,” or
inclination towards such an onset (Meyer, Alford), a hostile agitation (Zéckler), since the
words “they were ware of it” seem to imply that the assault had not been made. Besides,
Paul was only once stoned (2 Cor. xi. 25), whereas had this evil intention been carried out
he would have twice suffered that indignity (see ver. 19).

Ver. 6, Lystra.—About six hours south-south-west from Iconium, at Khatyn Serai (Sir C.
Wilson), “on a hill in the centre of a valley,” “3,777 feet above the sea, and 427 above
Iconium” (Ramsay). Derbe.—‘ The frontier city of the Roman province on the south-east ”
(Ramsay). The site uncertain, placed by some (Lewin, Conybeare and Howson, Farrar)
twenty miles, by others (Sterrett) two miles distant from Lystra. Cities of Lycaonia.—
Ptolemeus reckoned these as belonging to Isauria, ‘ Lystra and Derbe were cities of
Lycaonia Galatica—i.e., that part of Lycaonia which was attached to the province Galatia,
while Iconium reckoned itself as a city of Phrygia, Galatia—z.e., the part of Phrygia
which was attached to the province Galatia” (Ramsay).

Ver. 7. And there they preached the gospel.—Codex Beze adds: “And the whole.
multitude was moved at their teaching ; and Paul and Barnabas abode in Lystra”; but this
cannot be accepted as original (Ramsay),

Ver. 8. Sat.—No doubt in some public place begging like the lame man in Jerusalem
(iii. 1). Not “dwelt” (Kuinoel).

Ver. 9. Steadfastiy beholding him.—Or, fastening his eyes upon him, as he did on Elymas
(xiii. 9), and as Peter did upon the cripple at the Gate Beautiful (iii. 4). Faith to be
healed,—Or, faith to be saved—.e., from his lameness, though the larger and higher mean-
ing need not be excluded. He had, no doubt, been listening to Paul’s preaching, and given
indication by his countenance that he believed the gospel message.

Ver. 10. With a loud voice.—Speaking in a tone higher than that in which he had been
preaching (compare iii. 6). Stand upright on thy feet.—Christ’s name not mentioned as by
Peter (iii. 6), because probablyu nnecessary. And he leaped:(one act) and walked.—Baur)
(Paul, his Life and Works,i.95) finds in this miracle and that of the judgmenton Elymas (xiii. 11
most undoubted tokens of an apologetic parallel with Peter, who healed a lame man at the
Gate Beautiful (ii, 1-8) and encountered a sorcerer in Samaria (viii. 9-24)—zi.e., on first
stepping out among the heathen. But as lame men and magicians were then plentiful, it is
not surprising that both apostles should have met such characters; while, if both apostles
were guided by the Holy Ghost, why should it be wonderful that He should lead Paul to
work similar miracles with those of Peter? And more especially if (as Baur admits) such
miracles were necessary to legitimate Paul’s apostleship? The Holy Ghost, one would
naturally reason, would be as likely as a second century writer to know what sort of works
Paul should do to secure his recognition as a Christian apostle.

Ver. 11. The speech of Lycaonia.—Supposed by some to have been an Assyrian dialect
(Jablonski), by others a corrupt form of Greek (Guhling), and by a third party a Galatian
tongue, has completely disappeared, though Stephen of Byzantium, in the fifth century,
reports it as then existing, and gives 6¢\Beva as Lycaonian for “ a juniper” (Farrar, i, 381).
For the chief cities of Lycaonia (ver. 6) see ‘‘Homiletical Analysis.” The gods are come
down to us in the likeness of men.—Compare Homer’s Odyssey, xvii. 484: kal re Oeol gelvorow
éouxdres dANOSaTrotow, mavToto. TeNéVovTes, éemioTpwPHwHa midnas, etc. “And the gods, like to
strangers from foreign lands, coming forth in all sorts of shapes, visit the cities, observing
both the insolence and the order (or good behaviour) of men”; and Ovid’s Metamorphosis,
viii. 626: Jupiter huc, specie mortali cumque parente, venit Atlantiades positis caducifer
alis. “Hither comes Jupiter in the form of a mortal, and with his parent comes herald
Atlantiades (Mercury) his wings laid aside.” Such conceptions were common in New
Testament times (Harnack). See further on ver. 11 “ Hints.”

Ver, 12. Barnabas was designated Jupiter or Zeus, probably because the older and more
dignified in appearance. Paul Mercurius.—Or Hermes, because he was the chief speaker.—
Lit., the leader of the discourse—7.e., because of his eloquence. ‘“ Paul is here the messenger
of the Supreme God: he says in Gal. iv. 14, ‘Ye received me as a Messenger of God ”’
(Ramsay).

Ver. 13. The priest.—Most likely the principal or high-priest of Jupiter or Zeus. Professor
Ramsay regards the reading “ priests” of Codex Bez@ as preferable, on the ground that the
oxen and garlands would not be brought by the priest himself, but by his attendants,
ministri. Which, rather, who, was.—T.e., had a statue or temple consecrated to him, before
their, or the, city. ‘‘The temple of the tutelary god stood often outside of the walls ”
(Hackett). Unto the gates.—Of the house where the apostles lodged (De Wette, Lewin,
Olshausen, Plumptre), of the temple, or most probably of the city (Meyer, Alford, Stier,


303


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








Holtzmann, Hackett, and others). According to the Bezan text which reads émdvew, the
proposed sacrifice was an extra beyond the ordinary ritual—a sense which though not
occurring elsewhere “ seems to lie fairly within the meaning of the compound ” (Ramsay).

Ver. 14. Rent their clothes.—From the neck downwards; the ordinary Jewish mode of
expressing horror at anything seen or heard (see Ezra ix. 3; Job i. 20, ii. 12; Matt. xxvii.
65). Ran in, leaped forth—¥rom the city or from the house in which they were.

Ver, 15. Men of like passions, or, natural properties with you.—Compare Peter’s address
to Cornelius, x. 26; and James v. 17.

Ver. 16. Times should be generations, and all nations, all the nations.

Ver. 17.—The best authorities read your instead of our.

Ver. 18. That they had not done sacrifice.—Better, from doing sacrifice unto them : rod uh
Obev avrois. Compare x. 47. ;

Ver, 19. Who persuaded, etc—Should be who having persuaded the multitudes and having
stoned Pawl—i.e., they persuaded the multitude to stone the apostle (see 2 Cor. xi. 25;
2Tim. iii, 11), This is the only occasion on which Paul was stoned, the intention in Iconium
(ver. 5) not having been carried out. Barnabas appears to have escaped their notice. It is
those who advocate their opinions who have to suffer for them.

Ver. 20. The disciples.—Among these probably stood Timothy, the apostle’s future associate
(see xvi. 1; 2 Tim. iii. 11).

Ver. 21. Taught many is better rend2red made many disciples (Matt, xxviii. 19), One of
these was probably Gaius of Derbe (xx. 4). Gaius of xix, 29 was a Macedonian; he of Kom.
xvi. 23 and 1 Cor. i, 14 a Corinthian.

Ver. 22. We must through much tribulation (many tribulations, R.V.) enter, etc. “This
is one of the few personal touches of the Acts,” which can in no way be accounted for “than
by supposing that Luke was composing his history during the time of special persecution,”
viz., during that of Domitian (Ramsay, St Paul, the Traveller, etc., p. 123). An interesting
remark but by no means a conclusive argument, since “we” might have been used by Paul
and only quoted by Luke.

Ver. 23, Ordained.—yeiporovet (2 Cor. viii. 10) signifies properly to stretch out or hold up
the hand, as in voting, hence generally to appoint (see x. 41). Whether the election was
made by the apostles (Olshausen, Holtzmann, Hackett, Spence, Plumptre), or by the Church
(Alford, Lechler, Calvin, Brown, Ramsay), is debated; tllough the example of vi. 2-6 would seem
to indicate that the apostles admitted into office by ordination those whom the people had
chosen by show of hands. Elders, presbyters—Those appointed in each Church to watch
over the disciples, and thence called “overseers” (xx. 28). In Jewish Churches these
officials were mostly styled ‘“ presbyters” or “elders,” in Gentile Churches “overseers” or
“bishops”; but that the two were exactly synonymous appears from their interchangeability
(xx. 17, 28; Titus i. 5,7). Elsewhere (Eph. iv. 11) they are designated pastors or shepherds
and teachers. Prayed with fastisg does not point to later liturgical use as its origin
(Holtzmann), but later liturgical use rests on apostolic practice, as here exemplified.

Ver. 25. When they had preached the word (some MSS. add of the Lord) in Perga.—This
they did not do on their outward journey (xiii. 13). What success, if any, attended Paul’s
labours is not stated, perhaps because it was not encouraging (Hackett). Attalia or Attaleia
(see ‘‘ Homiletical Analysis”) was sixteen miles distant from Perga.

Ver. 27. A door of faith.—A favourite metaphor with Paul (compare 1 Cor. xvi. 9; 2 Cor.
ii. 12; Col. iv. 3) which uke may have derived from him (Alford).

Ver. 28, Long time.—Lit., no little time. Calculations show this period to have embraced
the year A.D. 48 and 49 (see ‘‘ Homiletical Analysis ”).





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—7.


Paul and Barnabas in Iconium ; or, continued Opposition from the Jews.

I, Their occupation in Iconium.— 1. The town and its population. The town.
Compelled to retire from Antioch in consequence of the threatening attitude of
the Jews, who stirred up against them the principal inhabitants of the city and
their wives—in fact, expelled by these from their coasts, the apostles, Paul and
Barnabas, not without shaking off the dust from their feet as a testimony
against their co-religionists (Matt. x. 14), directed their steps towards Iconium,
now called Konieh, a city lying on the road between Antioch and Lystra, at a
distance of ninety (others say sixty) miles south-east from the former city
and forty north-west from the latter” (Plumptre). Whether it belonged
to the province of Lycaonia, or of Phrygia, or of Pisidia, appears to be as
much disputed by modern as by ancient writers (see ‘“ Critical Remarks”).


804


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xiv.








Perhaps the truth is that Iconium belonged originally to Phrygia but afterwards
became a city of Lycaonia. Professor Ramsay thinks it may have been in 63 B.c.
that according to Pliny (Wat. Hist., v. 25), “a tetrarchy of Lycaonia con-
taining fourteen cities, with Iconium as eapital, was formed,” and that it was
* given to King Polemo in 39 B.c. by Mark Antony” (The Church in the Roman
Empire, p. 41). If so, Luke’s statement that Paul and Barnabas, on leaving
Iconium, fled to Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, will require explanation ;
and this Professor Ramsay furnishes by saying that, while between 100 B.0. and
100 a.p. for administrative purposes Iconium was reckoned to Lycaonia, in all
probability the Iconians, true to their tribal feelings, and adhering to their old
nationality, “‘ continued to count themselves Phrygian” (Jbid., 38). In any case,
Iconium was the principal city of that district which was called by the Romans
Lycaonia, and was situated at the foot of the Taurus, like a green oasis in the
middle of bleak plains that were ‘‘ scoured by wild asses and grazed by countless
herds of sheep.” The modern city Konieh, says Captain Kinneir, “ extends to
the east and south over the plain far beyond the walls, which is about two miles
in circumference. . . . Mountains covered with snow rise on every side, except-
ing towards the east, where a plain as flat as the desert of Arabia extends far
beyond the reach of the eye” (quoted by Conybeare and Howson, i. 174).
(2) Its population. These, according to the writers just named, were a mixed
company: ‘A large number of trifling and frivolous Greeks, whose principal
place of resort would be the theatre and the market-place ; some remains of a
still older population, coming in occasionally from the country, or residing in a
separate quarter of the town ; some few Roman officials, civil or military, holding
themselves proudly aloof from the inhabitants of the subjugated province; and
an old established colony of Jews who exercised their trade during the week and
met on the Sabbath to read law in the synagogue (/bid., i, 174). 2. The apostles
and their ministry. (1) The place where this was exercised was in the first
instance at least the synagogue of the Jews on the Sabbath days and afterwards
during week days, probably in public thoroughfares and other places of
resort. (2) The form in which it was exercised was twofold—preaching or
speaking in the Lurd, 7.e., in the power of His Spirit—the theme of their preach-
ing being as elsewhere the doctrine of Jesus as Israel’s Messiah and God’s Son,
proved through His rising from the dead; and working miracles, though none
of these have been recorded—doing signs and wonders through which God gave
testimony to the word of His grace. (3) The time during which it was exercised
cannot be determined, though the words “long time” point to a considerable
stay, perhaps of some months, in this important town. (4) The manner in
which it was exercised is described as ‘‘ boldly,” their confidence increasing as
their convictions of the truth of the gospel deepened and as their observation of
its saving power widened. (5) The efficiency with which it was exercised was
revealed by the success which attended it. The apostles so spake, in such a
manner and with such a result, that ‘“‘a great multitude both of the Jews and
also of the Greeks believed,” so great a multitude indeed that the city seemed to
be split in twain (ver. 4).

Il. Their experience in Iconium.—l. The minds of the heathen population
were turned against them. Not of their own accord, but through the misrepre-
sentations of the unbelieving Jews, who, no doubt, employed similar tactics to
those employed by their co-religionists at Antioch (xiii. 45), perhaps vilifying the
persons of the apostles, putting a false colour on the object of their mission, and,
above all, traducing the character and name of Jesus whom they preached.
2. A threefold combination was formed against them. The Gentiles, the Jews (ir
both cases the unbelieving portion of them—‘ the carnal mind is enmity agains‘
God” (Rom. viii. 7), and their rulers—z.e., both the civic and the ecclesiastic, the


x 305


chap. xtv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a a eS


magistrates of the town and the officers of the synagogue conceived a design to
set on foot active measures of hostility against the apostles even to the length of
maltreating and stoning them—measures, however, which were never carried out
see ‘“ Oritical Remarks ”).

III. Their departure from Iconium.—1. Prompted by their knowledge of what
was being concerted against them. How they became acquainted with the evil
designs of their adversaries, though not related, need occasion no difficulty, since
they had numerous friends in the city who were interested in their safety, and
above all Him upon their side of whom it had been written, ‘‘ He preserveth the
souls of His saints, and delivereth them out of the hands of the wicked”
(Psalm xevii. 10), Advised of their peril, like prudent men they fled (Prov. xxii. 3),
acting on the counsel Christ had given to His disciples (Matt. x. 23). 2. Hffected
with complete success. In this case, as in a former (ix. 25), Paul’s enemies had
been outwitted. Whatever annoyance he and Barnabas had suffered, they were
not on this occasion stoned. Nor did they deem it necessary by remaining
longer in Iconium to become martyrs before their time. 3. Directed towards
the two adjoining cities of Lystra and Derbe. The exact sites of these cities are
unknown. “Lystra,” says Lewin (The Life and Epistles of St. Paul, i. 163),
“lay about forty miles to the south of Iconium, and was still upon the highroad
to Syria. It was situate in a hollow on the north side of a remarkable isolated
mountain rising out of the great plain, and now called Kara Dagh, or Black
Mountain. Lofty peaks looked down upon the town on all sides, except on the
north, where the valley opened into the plain of Iconium. The ruins of it
remain, and are called Bin-Bir-Kilisseh or the Thousand and One Churches, from
the traces still visible of the numerous sacred edifices with which it was once
adorned.” ‘“ Lystra,” says Hausrath (Der Apostel Paulus, p. 219), ‘must have
lain hard upon the confines of Isaurica, since Ptolemaus reckoned it to
Isaurica, and, indeed, according to him it was eight hours’ distant from
Tconium.” Professor Ramsay (The Church in the Roman Empire, pp. 47, 50)
locates Lystra ‘about six hours south-south-west of Iconium,” and identifies it
with the village of Khatyn Serai or ‘The Lady’s Mansion,’ situated “ about
3777 feet above the sea and 427 feet above Iconium.” ‘“ As a Lycaonian
town Lystra had been quite undistinguished; as a Roman garrison it was a
bulwark of the province of Galatia, and a sister city to the great Roman centre
at Antioch.” Derbe, according to Lewin, was “ about twenty miles distant from
Lystra, at the south-eastern corner of the great Lycaonian plain, and where
commence the highlands whichrun up to Mount Taurus.” ‘ Near by, but deeper
in the,mountain, on the boundaries of Cappadocia, find we Derbe,” writes
Hausrath. ‘ Derbe was the frontier city of the Roman province on the south-
east,” reports Professor Ramsay, who inclines to locate it at Gudelissin, three
miles north-north-west from Zosta, adding, ‘ Gudelissin is the only site in this
district where a city of the style of Derbe, the stronghold of ‘the robber
Antipater,’ could be situated.”

Learn.—1. The unwearied diligence that ought to be manifested by a faithful
minister of Jesus Christ. 2. The unsleeping hostility with which the gospel and
its ministers, when these are faithful, are pursued by the unbelieving world.


3. The watchful providence that continually guards Christ’s servants and Christ’s
cause.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. The Gospel the Word of God s II. Its message, grace.
Grace. a ‘ ITI. Its fruit, grace. _
I. Its origin, grace, IV. Its conditions, grace,
306


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIV.





Fellow-Workers in the Gospel. Christ
and His Apostles.

I. The work of the apostles (or min-
isters).—1. Preaching boldly in Christ’s
name. 2. Doing signs and wonders
(in the case of the apostles miracles,
both physical and moral; in that of
ministers only moral) in Christ’s name.

II. The work of Christ.—1. Giving
testimony to the word of His grace.
By His Spirit. 2. Granting power to
perform signs and wonders. Also by
His Spirit. 3. Watching over His ser-
vants while at their work. 4. Opening
up escapes for them when in danger.


Ver. 4. The Dividing Power of the .


Gospel.
I. In the world.—Separating be-


II. In the Church.—Separating true
disciples from hypocrites.

III. In the individual.—Separating
the soul from guilt and sin.

Vers. 1-7. The Preacher and his
Gospel.

I. What the preacher has to do with
his gospel.—1l. Preach it to those who
have not yet heard it. 2. In the face
of the fiercest opposition. 3. So long
as the Lord continues bearing witness
to his work.

II. What the gospel will do for the
preacher.—1. It will gain him con-
verts. 2. Rouse against him oppo-
sition. 3. Perhaps endanger his life.
4, Secure for him the co-operation and
commendation of the Lord.


lievers from unbelievers.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 8—20.


Paul and Barnabas at Lystra ; or, the Gospel among Barbarians.

‘I. The miracle at Lystra.—1. The subject. ‘‘ A certain man, impotent in his
feet, a cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had walked” (compare iii. 2).
“The three phrases are like three beats of a hammer; there is no fine literary
style in this device, but there is real force which arrests and compels the reader’s
attention. Luke uses the triple beat in other places for the same purpose—
é.g., xiii. 6, ‘Magian, false prophet, Jew’ and xvi. 6, 7, according to the true
text” (Ramsay, St. Paul, etc., p. 115). The cripple, who was obviously no
professional mendicant but one whose sad history was well known, was, besides
being a proper subject for benevolent assistance, manifestly one whom supernatural
aid alone could restore to health. 2. The place. Most likely in the street at
some public resort, as Lystra does not appear to have had a synagogue, the Jews
in that rude and uncultivated region being probably a mere handful. 3. The
time. When Paul was preaching and the cripple listening. “I, being in the
way, the Lord led me” (Gen. xxiv. 27). The Bezan text suggests that the lame
man had been a proselyte before he came under Paul’s influence. 4. The agent,
Paul, who had now taken complete precedence of Barnabas, who had already per-
formed a miracle of judgment on the sorcerer (xiii. 11), and who by the Lystrans
was recognised as the chief speaker. 5. The manner. (1) The apostle fastened
his eyes upon the cripple as Peter had done on the lame man at the Beautiful
Gate of the Temple (iii. 4), and as he himself had done on Elymas at Paphos
(xiii. 9). He had probably been arrested by the cripple’s eager look, and in turn had
searched his inner soul with that penetrating glance which belongs only to souls
filled with the Holy Ghost (xiii. 9, xxiii. 1). (2) Having perceived that the cripple
had faith to be healed (literally, saved, but whether more than from his physical
malady is impossible to tell), the apostle said with a loud voice, ‘‘ Stand upright on
thy feet!” Compare Peter’s address to the lame man (iii. 6), in which the name
of Christ is invoked. That Paul omitted Christ’s name may be explained either
by the brevity of the record, or by supposing Paul’s discourse had so clearly indi-
cated the source of healing that this required no further mention. (3) At once,


307


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








without delay, the cripple “leaped and walked.” J.e., thrilled with a Divine
power, he sprang to his feet (a single act like that in iii, 8), and began to step
out as he had never done before.

II. The conduct of the Lystrans. 1. Their exclamation. Like Welshmen
who, after listening to an address in English, revert to their mother tongue to
find. an outlet to their emotions, the Lystrans in their native dialect, the speech.
of Lycaonia (see “ Critical Remarks”), shouted forth, “ The gods have come down
to us in the likeness of men,” and proceeded to identify Barnabas with Jupiter
(Zeus) presumably on account of his combined majestic and benignant appearance,
and Paul with Mercury (Hermes), not because of his bodily insignificance
(2 Cor. x. 1, 10), but because cf his elcquence—“ he was the chief speaker.” The
belief that the gods were accustomed to visit the earth in human form widely
prevailed among the ancients; that such a belief, especially with regard to
Jupiter (Zeus), should have existed among the Lycaonians is not surprising con-
sidering that Lystra had a temple of Jupiter (Zeus) at its gates, and was thus, as it
were, placed under the tutelage of the “ Father of godsand men.” That Jupiter
(Zeus) should have been accompanied by Merenry (Hermes) accorded also with
their own traditions, one of which told of a visit made by these divinities to this
very region (see Ovid’s story of Baucis and Philemon, Aet., viii. 611, etc.).
2. Their action. The priest of Jupiter (Zeus), whether by himself or through his
attendants, having procured oxen and garlands, caused them to be fetched “ unto
the gates”—i.e., to the temple, and, surrounded by the excited populace, would
have offered sacrifice to the supposed divinities. Superstitious as the proposition
was, it rebuked, and still rebukes, the lack of enthusiasm on the part of those
who, though they know God, glorify Him not as God (Rom. i. 21).

III. The protest of the apostles—Il. The horror they displayed. Having
learnt what the priest and people were about, Paul and Barnabas, as might have
been expected of pious Jews, not to say enlightened Christians, with their strong
monotheism, “ sensitive conception of the awful majesty of the One True God,” and
instinctive shrinking from the least approach to idolatry, ‘“ rent their garments,
according to Jewish custom,” from the neck in front down towards the girdle
(see “ Critical Remarks”), and sprang forth—either from the city towards the
temple, or from the house in which they ledged into the street, if the procession
had not yet reached the temple—and dashed in among the excitcd and fanatic
crowd. 2. The words they uttered. (1) A question about the folly of the priest
and people—‘ Sirs! why do ye these things?” An expostulation that might be
addressed with propriety to many besides the Lystrans. (2) A declaration about
themselves and their mission, that they were ordinary mortals like the Lystrans,
whom besides it was the object of their mission to turn from these vanities to
serve the living God. These thoughts about ministers and their missions should
be kept in mind both by ministers themselves and their hearers. (3) A procla-
mation concerning God. His nature, as the living—i.e., self-existent and life-
bestowing God (Deut. v. 26; Psalm xlii. 2; Jer. x. 10; Dan. vi. 26). His
omnipotence, as the maker of the universe (Gen. i. 1; Neh. ix. 6; Psalm cii. 25).
His justice, in suffering the heathen to go their own ways seeing they had first
forsaken Him (compare vii. 42; Rom. i. 24). His forbearance (according to a
different interpretation of the verse) in allowing the nations to walk in their
own ways without any manifestation of righteous indignation against them (com-
pare xvii. 30; Rom. iii. 25). His goodness, in giving them witness of Himself by
sending them “rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with
food and gladness” (compare Matt. v. 45). On the course of the apostle’s argu-
ment, as illustrating his manner of dealing with the heathen, a remarkable light
is shed by the apology of Aristides (see ‘‘ Hints on Vers‘s 15-17”). 3. The success
they attained. They restrained, though with difficulty, the people from carrying


308


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. . cmap. XIVv.


out their design; that they obtained no deep hold on their hearts subsequent
movements showed.

IV. The interference of the Jews.—1l. Whence these cwme. From Antioch
and Iconium, where their hostility had been aroused and their rage baulked.
Nearly every persecution Paul suffered proceeded from the Jews. However
wrong, this was partly natural. No man likes apostates, and from the stand-
point of the Jews Paul was an apostate of the first water. 2. How they pro-
ceeded. They stirred up the crowds who, besides being fickle, as all crowds are
(compare Exod. xvi. 2, xvii. 4; Luke xxiii. 21), were probably in a sullen and half
hostile mood in consequence of having discovered that their visitors were not gods
but ordinary mortals, and therefore most likely magicians and impostors. 3. What
they effected. They so raised the mob that these “stoned Paul,” not beyond the
precincts of the town, as the Jews had done to Stephen (vii. 58), but in the streets,
where they were, “and dragged him out of the city, supposing he was dead.”
See Paul’s allusion to this experience (2 Cor. xi. 25). How Barnabas escaped
does not appear. 4. How far they failed. (1) They did not kill him as they
intended and supposed. ‘‘ As the disciples stood round him he” came to, “ rose
up and entered into the city.” (2) They did not detach from him all his friends
in Lystra. The disciples gained there stood round his mangled body, when, like
the carcase of a dead dog, it was thrown beyond the city, and received him into
their homes, when, having revived, he returned into town. (3) They did not
prevent the prosecution of his missionary work. ‘On the morrow he went forth
with Barnabas to Derbe.

Learn.—1. The power of the gospel to work moral miracles. 2. The credi-
bility of the doctrine of the incarnation. 3. The folly of idol worship. 4. The
power, majesty, and goodness of God. 5, The rewards of the faithful.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Faith to be saved.

I. Possible to all who need salva-
tion.

II. Requisite for all who wish sal-
vation.

IlJ. Observed in all who seek
salvation.

IV. Rewarded to all who obtain
salvation.


Vers. 8-10. The Lystra Cripple.

I. An object of sincere pity. Born
lame, he had never walked.

Il. A recipient of great privilege.
—He heard Paul speak concerning
Christ and salvation.

III. A subject of rich mercy.—He
was healed in body and saved in
soul.

IV. Amonument of Divine grace.—
All owing to grace that he had been
privileged to hear Paul, that his heart
had been touched, that faith had been
awaked, and that he had been healed
and saved,


Ver. 11. The gods are come down to
us in the likeness of man.

I. The error contained in this de-
claration. That there were “ gods,”
heathen divinities, to come down to men.

II. The truth foreshadowed in this
declaration. ‘The incarnation of the
Divine Son in the person of Jesus.

III. The lessons suggested by this
declaration. 1. That the human heart
instinctively believes in a gracious God
who can and will and does hold fellow-
ship with His creature man. 2. That
the doctrine of an incarnation is by no
means contrary to the intuitive con-
ceptions of the human mind, 3. That
the gospel of Jesus Christ the incarnate
Son can find a point of contact with
man’s soul in the most benighted
nations.


Grecian fables on the Subject of
Lycaonia.—1. The legend of Lycaon.
See Ovid, Met., i. 6. ‘The origin of
the name Lycaonia is unknown, but


309


CHAP. XIV.





as there happened to have been a king
of Arcadia, called Lycaon, Greek in-
vention soon discovered a connection.
It was said that Lycaon had been
warned by an oracle to found a city in
the region of Lycaonia (why, it does
not appear), and that the whole country
thence derived its appellation. But
further, Avxos, or Lycus, a wolf, was
so near in sound to Lycaon, that the
resemblance was to be accounted for,
and the ready-witted Greeks originated
the fable, that when the earth was
filled with wickedness Jupiter de-
scended from the skies to satisfy himself
of the fact, that he visited the house
of Lycaon, and that the people around,
when the god was recognised, were
for paying him adoration; but that
Lycaon mocked the servility of his
subjects, and questioned the divinity
of his inmate, and to put it to the test,
served human flesh at the table to try
the deity’s discrimination ; that Jupiter
was enraged at the attempt, and
metamorphosed Lycaon into a wolf”
(Lewin, The Life and Epistles of
St. Paul, i. 161). 2. The story of
Philemon and Baucis. See Ovid, Jet,
viii. 631, etc. According to this fable
Baucis and Philemon were an aged
couple who lived in a small cottage
in a penurious manner when Zeus
«(Jupiter) and Hermes (Mercury)
travelled in disguise over Asia. Having
extended to the wandering divinities
hospitable shelter which the wealthier
inhabitants refused, they had their
dwelling changed into a magnificent
temple of which they were constituted
priests, while an inundation swept
away the mansions of their churlish
neighbours. In addition they were
permitted to live happily to an extreme
old age, and to die at the same hour,
in accordance with their united request
to Zeus, that one might not have the
sorrow of following the other to the
grave. After death their bodies were
changed into trees before the door of
the temple.


Ver. 13. The Temple of Jupiter at
Lystra. Concerning this, Professor


310


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Ramsay writes: “Much may yet be
discovered at Lystra. We should be
especially glad to find some indepen-
dent proof that a temple of Jupiter
before the city (Ais Ipomd\ews) ex-
isted there. From the many examples
of such temples quoted by the commen-
tators on Acts (see “Critical Remarks”),
it seems highly probable that there
was one at Lystra. The nearest and
best analogy, which is still unpublished,
may be mentioned here. At Claudio-
polis of Isauria, a town in the moun-
tains south-east from Lystra, an
inscription in the wall of the medizval
castle records a dedication to Jupiter
before the town (Aw IIpoacriw). .. .
‘“‘ There is every probability that some
great building once stood beside the
pedestal in Lystra, dedicated to Augus-
tus.” ... “There is every probability
that the worship of the Imperial
Founder was connected with the chief
temple, and that the pedestal was
placed in the sacred precinct of Zeus,
as at Ephesus the Augusteum was
built within the sacred precinct of
Artemis.” ... Very little excava-
tion would be needed to verify this
identification, and probably to disclose
the remains of the temple, in front of
whose gates the sacrifice was prepared
for the Apostles” (Zhe Church in the
Roman Empire, pp. 51, 52).


Ver. 15. Sirs ! why do ye these things ?
Idolatry. -

I. Indefensible in reason, since the
gods of the heathen are “ vanities.”

II. Degrading to man, since man is
superior to the object of his worship,
when that is an idol.

III. Insulting to God, since He
alone is, 1. The living God. 2. The
creator of the universe. 3. The pro-
vidential ruler of the world. 4. The
benefactor of His creature and child
man.


All men alike.
I. In their origin.—1. From God.
2. From the dust.


II. In their nature.—1. Soul. 2.
Body.


III. In their character.—1. Sinful.
2. Mortal.

IV. In their destiny.—I. To die.
2. To live for ever.


Ver. 17. God's Witness of Himself.
I. Beneficent in character.
II. Universal in extent.
ITI. Constant in duration.
IV. Despised by its recipients.
V. Condemning in its judgments.


Vers. 15-17. The Light of Nature.

I. Its excellences.—It reveals—l1.
The existence of a supreme Being.
2. His perfection in wisdom and
power. 3. His supreme and absolute
dominion. 4. His moral government.
5. His universal beneficence.

II. Its uses.— Various. 1. To show
men their duty. 2. To convince them
of sin. 3. To encourage them in re-
pentance. 4, To vindicate God’s cha-
racter as a moral governor. 5. To
prepare for the gospel of His grace.

III. Its defects.—1. It illuminates
but a small portion of the things of
God. 2. Is but dim and feeble. 3.
Exercises little influence on men’s
hearts and lives. 4. Can discover no
effectual relief for guilt and sin.

Note.—The lightshed by the Apology
of Aristides, a document composed in
the second century (A.D. 120) in Athens,
on the method commonly adopted by
sub-apostolic writers in dealing with
the heathen, is well worthy of attentive
study. ‘“ Aristides,” says Professor
George T. Stokes, D.D., “begins his
address to the Emperor (Hadrian) by
stating, as St. Paul often does, the effect
of the contemplation of nature upon his
own soul, teaching him the eternal
power and godhead of the Author
thereof. In the very opening of his
argument he attacks that subtle
Pantheism, with its belief in the
eternity of the material universe,
which characterised the religions of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XIV.


Greece and Rome. ‘O King, by the
grace of God, I came into this world,
and having contemplated the heavens
and the earth and the sea, and beheld
the sun and the rest of the orderly
creation, I was amazed at the arrange-
ment of the world; and I compre-
hended that the world and all that is
therein are moved by the impulse of
Another, and I understood that He
that moveth them is God, who is
hidden in them and concealed from
them; and this is well known that
that which moveth is more powerful
than that which is moved. And that
I should investigate concerning this
Mover of All, as to how He exists, and
that I should dispute concerning the
steadfastness of His government, so as
to comprehend it fully, is not profit-
able for me; for no one is able per-
fectly to comprehend it. But I say,
concerning the Mover of the world,
that He is God of all, who made all
for the sake of man; and it is evident
to me that this is expedient, that one
should fear God and not grieve man.’
The argument of Aristides in this
passage is just the same as St. Paul’s
at Lystra, or in that great indictment
of paganism contained in the First
of Romans, an indictment which
Aristides amply confirms in all its
awful details.” — Modern Discoveries
and the Christian Faith, Sunday at
Home, 1891, December, p. 107.


Ver. 19. The Stoning of Paul.

I. A hideous crime.—On the part of
the Jews who stirred up the Lystrans.

II. A pitiful spectacle—For the
disciples and friends of the apostle.

III. A strange experience.— Which
must have recalled to the apostle’s
mind the stoning of Stephen.

IV. A powerful argument.—Per-
haps impressing the heart of Timothy
as Stephen’s stoning did that of Saul.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 20—28.


— The Homeward Journey of Paul and Barnabas ; or, Back to Antioch in Syria.
I, The turning point.—Derbe (sce on verse 6). 1. The character of the apostles’


work in Derbe. Preaching the gospel.


Thus early were Paul’s mottoes, ‘“ This


Bll


CHAP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a


one thing I do” (Phil. iii. 13); “ whom we preach” (Col. i, 28) ; “Jesus Christ
and Him crucified (1 Cor. ii. 2). 2. The acceptance of the apostles’ work in Derbe.
No persecutions encountered here (see 2 Tim. iii. 11). The omission of Derbe
from the list of places in which persecution was experienced strikingly confirms
the narrative of Luke (Paley, Hore Pauline, iv. 9). 3. The success of the
apostles’ work in Derbe. They made many disciples, amongst them probably
Gaius of Derbe (xx. 4). 4. The duration of the apostles’ work at Derbe. Not
stated, but may be inferred to have been some weeks.

Il. The way back. 1. Vhe route indicated. First to Lystra, twenty miles ; next
to Iconium, forty miles; after that to Antioch in Pisidia, sixty miles; then to
Perga in Pamphylia; then across the plain for sixteen miles to Attalia (the
modern Satalia), founded by Attalus Philadelphus, king of Pergamus, a seaport
on the Pamphylian Gulf and near the mouth of the Catarrhactes ; and finally
thence to Antioch in Syria. 2. Zhe work done. (1) Confirming the souls of the
disciples. Not by outward rites, but by instruction and encouragement,
‘‘exhorting them to continue in the faith,” and reminding them “ that through
many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God.” (2) Appointing
elders in every Church. These elders or presbyters were not modern diocesan
bishops, but presiding overseers of different Churches. The mode of their election
is not sufficiently clear. Whether by the stretching forth of the hands of the
congregation or of the apostles is disputed. If the method adopted in the
election of deacons (vi. 5, 6) was followed here, then the congregation would
elect and the apostles ordain, the service being accompanied with fasting and
prayer, in which the chosen office-bearers were commended to God for their
work. (3) Preaching the gospel. This, doubtless, would not be neglected in any
of the towns visited on the homeward route, but it is specially mentioned that
they spoke the word in Perga, because they had not done so on the outward
journey (xii. 13; which see for the reason of this omission).

III. Home reached.—1. Their arrival in the city. From Attalia they sailed
to Seleucia, “ saw once more the steep cone of Mount Casius, climbed the slopes
of Corypheus, and made their way under the pleasant shade of ilex and myrtles
and arbutus, on the banks of the Orontes, until they crossed the well-known
bridge, and saw the grim head of Charon, staring over the street Singén, in
which neighbourhood the little Christian community were prepared to welcome
them with keen interest and unbounded love (Farrar, The Life and Work of
St. Paul, i. 390). 2. Their meeting with the Church. (1) This was proper,
seeing they had been by the Church recommended (or committed) to the grace
of God for the work they had fulfilled (xiii. 3). Nothing could have been more
becoming than that they should report to the Church how the work had fared.
(2) Interesting, since they rehearsed all that God had done with them—i.e., their
experiences, and in particular how God had opened a door of faith unto the
Gentiles—z.e., the success which had attended their labours. (3) Encouraging,
as showing the wisdom of the step which had been taken in despatching a mission
to the heathen. 3. Their stay with the disciples. “ A long” or “no little time.”
The exact duration of the first missionary journey can only be approximately
calculated. If it began in March a.p. 45, we are hardly at liberty to suppose
that it occupied much more than a year (Farrar), in which case the return of
Paul and Barnabas to Antioch would fall in all probability about the spring
of a.D 46, Professor Ramsay gives April 45—July 47 (or 46—48) as the
period over which the first journey extended. From the close of the journey
they remained in Antioch till the outbreak of controversy concerning the terms
on which the Gentiles should be admitted to the Church required their presence
in Jerusalem (xy. 2).

Learn.—1. The duty of persevering in the work of the Lord. 2. The necessity

oi2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS. CHAP. XIV.





of abiding in the faith. 3. The only way of entering the kingdom. 4. The


Seripturalness of Church order.
foreign missions.


5. The interest Christians should take in


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 21, 22. The Pastoral Office—its
True Function.
I. To preach the gospel.
Il. To make disciples.
III. To confirm believers.
IV. To comfort the suffering.


Ver. 22. Scriptural Confirmation.

J. Not an external (bodily) rite, but
an internal (spiritual) grace.

If. Not performed by the laying on
of hands, but by the utterance of
exhortations and consolations.

III. Not doing a work of establish-
ment, for others, but instructing others
to do this for themselves.


Ver. 22. The Way into the Kingdom.

I. Painful —Through much tribula-
tion or many tribulations,

Il. Necessary.—We must. Un-
avoidable by any, indispensable for all.

IIT. Certain.—It leads into the
kingdom. No qucstion about whither
it conducts.

IV. Blessed.— The terminus to
which it tends is the kingdom of God.


Entering the Kingdom.

I. Heaven a kingdom. —1. Its
sovereign, God. The great king who
built it, the architect of the universe,
the Lord of Hosts. 2. Its subjects.
(1) In nature diversified, angels and
redeemed men. (2) Incharacter, holy
and without blemish, (3) In condition,
free from overy defect and possessed
of every felicity. (4) In number, a
multitude which no man can number
and constantly increasing. 3. Its
permanence. It will never be destroyed
and never pass away.

II. The believer's entrance into the
kingdom. — Effected—1. Jn __ time
through regeneration, a work of gra-
cious renewal upon his heart, which ipso
facto at once constitutes him a subject
of the kingdom, 2. At death, when


the soul, having been purified and
perfected through much tribulation,
taking its departure from the body,
passes through the vale and joins the
company of the spirits of just men
made perfect. This entrance certain y
follows on the first after an interval,
longer or shorter, of prepavation.


Continuing in the Faith.

I. The danger of declining from the
faith—Arising from—l. Incwelling
sin. 2. The fascinations and tempta-
tions of the world. 3. The ills and
tribulations of life. 4. False teacheis
and erroneous teaching. 5. The self-
righteousness and spiritual pride cf
even converted hearts.

II. The necessity of abiding in the
faith —i. Christ’s express command.
2. Continuance in the faith the best
evidence of having ever been in the
faith. 3. Without this the prize of
eternal life cannot be won.


Ver. 23. The Office of the Eldership.

I. Its authority.._Derived from the
Head of the Church (Ephes. iv. 11).

II. Its function-—To superintend
the membership of the Church (xx. 28).

IIL. Its selection.—By the members
of the Church. Christian people should
elect their own office bearers.

IV. Its ordination.—By the apostles
in the first instance (2 Tim. i. 6),
afterwards by the laying on of the
hands of the presbyters (1 Tim. iv. 14).

V: Its efficiency.— Dirived from the
Lord, on whom the elder has believed.

VI. Its sphere.— Within the Church.
Purely a spiritual office.

VII. Its qualification—The elder
must himself be a believer. Ovher
qualifications are set forth in the
pastoral epistles.

Vers. 26, 27. The First Recorded
Missionary Meeting.

I. The place where it was held.—

313


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ea ee ae


In Antioch of Syria, which had sent
forth the first pair of evangelists to
proclaim the gospel to the heathen.
An unperishable renown which never
can be taken from Antioch.

II. The congregation which assem-
bled.—The company of believers in the
city, or the Church. That all the
Christians who could be were present,
that all were interested in the pro-
ceedings, and that all were eager to
see the men who had hazarded their
lives for the name of Jesus Christ
(xv. 26), can hardly be doubted.

III. The story told by the mission-
aries.—Paul and Barnabas related all
that God had done with them, and how


He had opened a door of faith unto
the Gentiles.


Ver. 27. The (or a) Door of Faith.

I. Divinely constructed.—Salvation
by faith a scheme, not of man’s in-
inventing, but of God’s appointing.

II. Widely opened.—By the publi-
cation of the gospel, inviting all who
will to enter.

III. Easily reached.—Requiring no
distant or difficult pilgrimage to get
near it: “The word is nigh thee,” etc.
(Rom. x. 8).

IV. Freely entered.—By all whocome
in the exercise of simple faith, trusting
in the mercy of God for Jesus’ sake.








CHAPTER XV.


Tur First Curistran Councit; or, THE TERMS oF CuuRCH MEMBERSHIP FOR
THE GENTILES DEFINITELY SETTLED.


§ 1. Judaising Teachers at Antioch; or, the Circumcision Controversy Raised
(vers. 1-5). ‘

§ 2. The Couneil at Jerusalem ; or, the Controversy Settled (vers. 6-21).

§ 3. The Apostolic Letter; or, the Publication of the Settlement (vers. 22-35).

§ 4. The Second Missionary Journey commenced ; or, the Separation of Paul and
Barnabas (vers. 36-41).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Certain men which came down from Judea.—Lit. having come down from Judea.
These were not the emissaries who came from James (Gal. ii. 12), but the “false brethren
unawares brought in” (Gal. ii. 4), most likely Christianised Pharisees from Jerusalem, who
in their zeal for the Law, had undertaken a mission to Antioch, perhaps on the invitation of
some of the same class in the Syrian capital. According to Epiphanius their leaders were
Cerinthus and Ebion., With this party Paul was in conflict all his life. Taught the brethren.
teaching consisted mainly in an assertion of the necessity of circumcision for salva-

ion.

Ver. 2. Dissension.—In their views. The word ordois (compare xxiii. 7, 10), used by
Thucydides (iii. 82) and Aristotle (Polét., v. 2) to express political faction, suggests that
parties, in accordance with those views, had begun to be formed in the Church at Antioch.
Discussion, or guestioning, about the points in dispute (xxv. 20). They,—i.e., the brethren, or
the Church, in a public meeting, and by formal resolution, determined, appointed, or arranged.
Certain other of them.—Not named, but see “‘ Homiletical Analysis.” Should go up to Jerusa-
lem.—This, the apostle’s third visit to Jerusalem (Gal. ii. 1), took place fourteen years after
his first, that to Cephas and the other apostles to whom he was introduced by Barnabas
(ix. 27; Gal. i. 18). His second visit was made shortly before the Gentile mission (xii, 25).

Ver. 4. The Church, the apostles and elders.—The reception of the deputies from Antioch
took place in a public convocation of the Christian disciples in Jerusalem.

Ver.5. The sect of the Pharisees.—First mention of any converts from this body and of the
Pharisees as a sect. The name (“Separated Ones”), probably bestowed on them by their


314


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. citar. xv.





opponents, expressed the same idea as their self-chosen designation, Chasidim (“ Holy Ones”)
—viz., separation, not so much from their fellow Jews as trom the heathen world. Their
practical obligations, were to observe with strictness all the ceremonial ordinances of the Law
of Moses, and to be scrupulous in payment of tithes as well as in discharge of all religious
duties. Originating in a genuine impulse towards superior sanctity, Pharisaism in our Lord’s
time had degenerated into dead formalism, and become little better than a cloak for
hypocrisy (Matt. xxiii.; Luke xi. 37-52). In Josephus’s day the association numbered six
thousand members.

Ver. 6. The apostles and elders came together.—Not alone, but in presence of and with the
Church (see ver. 23). How many were present cannot be conjectured.

Ver. 7. Much disputing, questioning, or debating, concerning the point of controversy. A
good while ago.—Lit., from early days. Comparatively speaking (compare “in the beginning,”
xi. 15); not an exaggeration, in order to take from the conversion of the heathen the aspect
of novelty (Wendt). The phrase has a parallel outside of Scripture (Polyk. ad Phil., 1, 2;
é& dpxalwy xpdvwy). Peter referred to the conversion of Cornelius, which had taken place
while Paul was at Tarsus (ix. 30), probably about fourteen years previous. Baur (Paul, his
Life and Works, i., 130), in the interest of his tendency theory, considers that Peter could not
have appealed to what took place with Cornelius, or have talked in so Pauline a manner as
he here does: but such an assertion will convince none except those who have decided,
a priori, that an impassable theological gulf separated the two apostles. Impelled by a like
motive, Weizsacker (The Apostolic Age, i., 208), asserts that ‘‘ Peter was not the pioneer of
the mission to the heathen, but entirely and solely the apostle of the Jews,” and accordingly
impeaches the credibility of the whole Cornelius story, By my mouth.—Peter did not mean
that never before had the gospel been preached to a Gentile (see viii. 35), but that the cir-
cumstances under which he preached to Cornelius were such as to show that God wished the
door of faith to be opened to the Gentiles.

Ver. 8. God who knoweth the hearts.—Therefore looks hot upon merely outward and acci-
dental marks, such as one’s nationality, but upon the inner moral and spiritual quality of the
soul. Compare i. 24.

Ver. 9. Purifying their hearts by faith_Therefore not by circumcision or works of any
kind. “ The thought is quite as much Petrine (compare ili. 16, 19) as it is Pauline (xiii. 38;
Rom, iii. 24 #7) or Johannine (1 John i. 8, ii. 2; Rev. vii. 14)’ (Zockler).

Ver. 10. To put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples— Compare Gal. v. 1. Decidedly
Gentile-Christian and universalist sounds this statement of Peter; yet is it not on that
account improbable. “Through frequent conversations with Paul and Barnabas, which,
according to ver. 4and Gal. ii. 3, must have taken place, Peter was unquestionably once
more relieved of all his perhaps temporarily cherished doubts, and completely carried back
to the standpoint of apostolic freedom which he had taken after Cornelius’s baptism, and
which he had asserted in opposition to the party of James” (Zockler).

Ver. 11. Even as.—Better, in like manner, or in the same way, even as they—viz., the
Gentiles ; i.¢., through grace alone, by faith without works. Compare Rom. i. 7, v. 15;
1 Cor. i. 3; 2 Cor. i. 2, xiii. 13; Eph. i. 2.

Ver. 12. The multitude.—JZ.e., the Church, consisting, no doubt, of members and adherents,
or believers, enjoying full ecclesiastical status and catechumens. Kept silence,—Having
been tranquillised by Peter’s speech. Out of this statement, and the similar one concerning
James (xii. 17), Catholic expositors infer, but wrongly, that only clergy are entitled to speak
at Church councils.

Ver. 13. James.—Not the apostle, but our Lord’s brother (xii. 17), who was ‘‘ a pillar” in
the Jerusalem Church (Gal. ii. 9), its chief elder, and probably its president.

Ver. 14. Simeon.—The Hebrew name of Peter (2 Pet. i. 1), who is never again mentioned
in the Acts, though he is found later at Antioch (Gal. ii. 11), and perhaps at Babylon
(i Pet. v. 13). According to tradition, not well founded, he ended his career at Rome.

Ver. 15. The words of the prophets are cited from Amos ix. 12, and conform closely to the
LXX.—the Hebrew text reading, “ That they may possess the remnant of Edom and of all
the heathen who are called by My name,” or “ upon whom My name is called” (compare
James ii. 7); so that they are also in the highest sense God’s children. If James, who spoke
in Greek (Alford), or in Aramaic (Holtzmann), followed the LXX., it may be reasonably
supposed that he regarded it as expressing with sufficient accuracy the essential idea of the
Hebrew.

Ver. 16. The tabernacle of David which is fallen down meant the divided and sunken state
into which the theocracy had lapsed since the days of Rehoboam.

Ver. 18. Known unto God are all His works from the beginning of the world.—Taken from
A. D. Vulgate and Syriac, The original words, “known from the beginning,” have been
enlarged by the addition of “unto God are all His works,” in order to make a complete
sentence. The best reading (N BC) may be thus rendered: Saith God, who maketh thes.
things known from the beginning, or who doeth these things which are known from the


315


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


en —_— ee


beginning. In either case the sense is the same. Whether James found these words, “ known
from eternity,” in another text of the Hebrew prophet which was circulating in Palestine, or
added them of his own accord, to express the idea that nothing could take place in the
development of the plan of salvation without the Divine foreknowledge (Bengel, De Wette,
Overbeck, Wendt, Holtzmann, Zockler), cannot be determined.

Ver. 20. Pollutions of idols.—Ze., Sacrificial victims, regarded as polluted by being offered
to idols rather than such defilements as arose from unlawful contact with idols (Holtzmann).
'The word for pollutions (ddoynudrwv = eldohobiTw, ver. 25), occurring only here, should not be


viewed as governing the four succeeding genitives, but restricted to the first. ‘‘The James
clauses represent no arbitrary selection of historical material, but correspond with the regu-
lations for Israel as these at the time existed in the Old Testament.” .. . They belong,


therefore, “to the earliest time of the Church” (Holtzmann). Fornication.—Has been
understood here of “ forbidden marriages,” as in Lev. xviii. (Baur, Zeller, Ritschl, Overbeck,
Wenat, Holtzmann, Zéckler), but should probably be taken in the wider sense of uncleanness
generally (Bengel, De Wette, Weiss, Alford, Hackett, and others).

Ver. 22. To send chosen men should be, having chosen men from among themselves to send
them.

Ver. 23. The apostles and (lit. the) elders and (lit. the) brethren. Signifying three separate
bodies, as in ver. 22. The best MSS., however, read, “‘ The apostles and the elders, brethren,”
which may signify, ‘“ The apostles and the elder brethren” (R.V.), or “The apostles and the
elders (who are) brethren” (Holtzmann), or “‘and the brethren who are elders.” This reading
is justified by Wordsworth on the grounds (1) that Paul and Barnabas are said to go up to
the apostles and elders (ver. 2); (2) that the apostles and elders are said to have come
together to consider this matter (ver. 6); and (3) that Paul is said to have delivered to the
Churches the decrees determined by the apostles and elders (xvi. 4); and by Alford, who
thinks “and the” before “ brethren” may have been inserted to make the text harmonise
with that in ver. 22. On the other hand it may be argued (1) that the whole Church was
present at the deliberations of the apostles and elders (vers. 4, 6, 12); (2) that the whole
Church is represented as having at least acquiesced in the finding of the court (ver. 22),
which certainly implies that they possessed the power to modify, if not reject, the same,
and (8) that the words kai oi before ddeAgol might just as easily have been dropped from the
text at a subsequent period in order to justify the exclusion of the laity from all share in
Church Synods. Upon the whole it seemed reasonable to conclude that in apostolic times
the entire membership, either directly or through representatives, enjoyed the right, if not
of initiating measures, at least of voting on them. Who have hazarded their lives.—Not.
“dedicated themselves soul and body to the service of our Lord the Messiah” (Hess), but
exposed themselves to the perils of death, as at Damascus (ix. 24), Antioch (xiii. 50), Iconium
(xiv. 5), and Lystra (xiv. 19).

Ver. 27. Who shall also tell you the same things by mouth, or by word of mouth.—Not the
same things—+.e., truths and doctrines that Barnabas and Paul have taught, as if the teaching
of these beloved brethren required confirmation; but the same things that we now write.

Ver. 28. It seemed good unto the Holy Ghost and to us.—The combination of the Divine
and human authors of the ecclestical decree is instructive. The expression shows that the
apostles and elders claimed for themselves that they had been guided in their deliberations
by the Holy Ghost, and for their conclusions that these possessed the authority of an inspired
and infallible decision. Necessary things.—Not demanding abstinence as wrong in them-
selves (except the last), but in obedience to the law of charity (Rom. xiv. 15), which required
Christians to avoid what might offend weaker brethren.

Ver, 33. Unto the apostles.—The best authorities read, wnto those that had sent them forth.

Ver. 34 is omitted by the best texts. It was probably inserted to explain ver. 40. Ramsay
(St Paul, etc., p. 175) thinks it must have formed part of the original text and been “at
some period omitted, from the mistaken idea that ver. 33 declared the actual departure of
Judas and Silas,” whereas, he continues, “the officials of the Church in Antioch simply
informed Judas and Silas that their duties were concluded and that they were free to return
home,” a permission of which Silas did not avail himself. In any case, if Silas did depart.
he must have soon after returned, on receiving Paul’s invitation to join him in a second
missionary tour.

Ver. 36. Some days (as in xvi. 12; compare 7udpar ixaval, ix. 23) might be weeks or months.
After.—Subsequent to the departure of Judas or Judas and Silas from Antioch. In visit our
brethren substitute the for “our.” How they do?—J.e., how they fare, spiritually. The
clause requires an antecedent supplement, and see.

Ver. 37. Determined.—éBovdevoaro. The oldest MSS. have éBot%Aero, wished, which some
consider a correction, with a view of softening down the altercation between Barnabas and
Paul (Alford and Hackett),

_ Ver. 39. The contention was so sharp between them.—Better, there arose a severe conten.
tion, If the incident described in Gal, ii. 11 had occurred in the days preceding this


“316


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XV.





contention (Alford, Lechler, Conybeare and Howson) that incident would help to explain
the hotness of the dispute between the two missionaries ; but it seems improbable that such
a reaction in favour of Judaism as that scene at Antioch represents could have taken place
so soon after the decision at Jerusalem (Hackett). They departed asunder one from the
other.—Not in friendship, but in service. Barnabas.— Not named again in Acts, but reported
by one tradition to have proceeded to Milan, and died as first bishop of its Church; and by
another to have spent some years in Rome and Athens. Took Mark, who afterwards gained
Paul’s esteem (Col. iv. 10; 2 Tim. iv. 11), and sailed to Cyprus, his native city (iv. 36), where,
according to the second of the above traditions, he suffered martyrdom. ‘The aut-enticity
of the well,known Epistle of Barnabas cannot be defended.

Ver. 40. That Paul and Silas, on setting forth, were commended by the brethren to the grace
of God suggests that the Church at Antioch espoused the side of Paul, as no similar com-
mendation appears to have been given to Barnabas and Mark.

Ver. 41. Confirming the churches.—Not candidates for admission to, but those already in,
them (xiv. 22). Of the founding of these churches in Syria and Cilicia no account has been
preserved, but they most likely dated from the time of Paul’s visit to those regions (ix. 30;
Gal, i, 21). One of these churches was probably located at Tarsus.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—5.


Judaising Teachers at Antioch ; or, the Circumcision Controversy Raised.

I. The Judaising teachers and their doctrine.—1. The teachers. Certain men
from Judea. Not those who afterwards came from James (Gal. ii. 12), but
those who were brought in unawares (Gal. ii. 4). Possibly converts from the
Pharisaic party in Jerusalem who had been invited by their co-religionists within
the Church at Antioch. 2. Their doctrine. That salvation was impossible with-
out circumcision. That the way into the Church of Christ led through the door-

way of Judaism. That without submission to this carnal ordinance the spiritual
blessing of the gospel could not be enjoyed. 3. Their activity. They taught the
brethren. Not content with merely suggesting the doubt as to whether even
Gentile Christians could disregard the Mosaic ritual—a doubt which would, at
least, have been not unnatural in a narrow-minded and bigoted Pharisee —or
with expressing their opinion that the Law God had given to Moses could not
safely be set aside, they confidently laid down the dogma that circumcision was
imperative: “ Except ye be circumcised,” etc.

II. The Christian Church and its resolution.—1. The Church.— Was (1) divided
into factions. ‘‘ There was no small dissension.” The word points to the rise of
parties inthe Church. Even had all the Gentile Christians remained upon the
side of freedom, there remained still the Jewish Christians (xi. 19), who espoused
the doctrine of the false teachers ; while it is possible that not a few of the Gentiles
may have allowed themselves to be overawed by the seeming and perhaps assumed
authority of the Judean emissaries. (2) Rent by disputation. Impossible that it
could have been otherwise. To have admitted the tenet of the Judaisers would have
been to subvert the gospel of Christ (Gal. v. 2-4). Hence Paul and Barnabas felt
themselves impelled to stand forth in defence of Christian liberty against those
Pharisaic legalists who desired to bring the Gentiles into bondage. “To whom
we gave place by subjection,” do you say? exclaims Paul. “No! not for an
hour” (Gal. ii. 5). 2. Jts resolution. ‘To refer the controversy for decision to
the Mother Church at Jerusalem. This determination was not necessary in the
sense that the Church at. Antioch possessed no authority to compose the quarrel
had it been able. But it was clearly unable. Hence the reference to Jerusalem
was a wise procedure, partly because the troublers had come from Jerusalem and
may have represented that they spoke with the authority of the apostles and
elders there, and partly because a decision by the mother Church would un-
doubtedly carry greater weight.

III. The delegates and their journey.—1. The delegates. Paul and Barnabas,
with certain others, not named, but most probably chosen from among the
prophets and teachers that were in the Antioch Church (xiii. 1), and the men of


317


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Cyprus and Cyrene, whose labours had founded the Church (xi. 20). Titus
(Gal. ii. 3), most likely accompanied Paul asa representative and specimen of the
sort of converts that had been made among the Greeks. 2. Their journey.
(1) Its object. Whilst the delegates had in view the execution of the Church’s
commission which had been entrusted to them—viz., the submission of the dis-
puted question to the apostolic tribunal—Paul informs us (Gal. ii. 2) that he
went up by revelation; which may be harmonised with the statement of Luke
by supposing that the revelation instructed Paul either to propose or to agree to
the reference to Jerusalem ; and indeed, without some such inward intimation of
the will of his Divine Lord it would not have been surprising had Paul hesitated
to submit the decision of this vital question to the mother Church, out of which
the very parties had come who had attempted to fetch away from Gentile
believers the liberty they enjoyed in Christ. ‘‘ We need not be surpriscd if we
find that Paul’s path was determined by two different causes: that he went up
to Jerusalem partly because the Church deputed him, and partly because he was
Divinely admonished. Such a combination and co-operation of the natural and
supernatural we have observed in the case of that vision which induced Peter to
go from Joppa to Cxsarea” (Conybeare and Howson); and, the same writers
add, in Paul’s escape from Jerusalem to Tarsus, which was urged on him by the
brethren (ix. 30), and at the same time commanded by Christ, who appeared to
him in a trance (xxii. 17, 18). (2) Its commencement. The delegates were
accompanied a portion of their way by the Church, asa mark of honour to them-
selves and as an indication of the interest the Church took in their mission (com-
pare xx. 38, xxi.5; 3John6). (3) Itsprogress. They passed through Pheenicia
and Samaria (see on xi. 19, and viii. 5). As Galilee is not mentioned, it may be
concluded that they travelled along the coast as far south as Ptolemais (xxi. 7),
and then crossed the plain of Esdrelon into Samaria. (4) Its accompaniments.
The delegates, wherever they appeared, declared the conversion of the Gentiles, and
caused great joy unto all the brethren. (5) Its termination. They came to
Jerusalem, within whose gates seldom had a more important embassy arrived.

IV. The mother Church and its procedure.—l. The reception given to the
envoys. (1) By the whole Church, with the apostles and elders at its head, the
various congregations having come together for this purpose. (2) With the utmost
cordiality : this implied in the verb used to express the ceremonial. (3) In patient
hearing of their story, when they rehearsed all things that God had done with
them. That Paul laid not before the collective Church the gospel which he
preached among the Gentiles, with its doctrine of salvation without “ the works
of the Law,” but reserved this for a private interview with the Church leaders,
one naturally infers from Gal. ii. 2. Had he done so, instead of confining himself
to a simple narration of his Gentile mission, ne would most likely have prema-
turely kindled a conflagration. As it was, his address acted like a spark thrown
into a heap of combustible material. It awoke the slumbering prejudices of his
Judaising hearers. 2. The opposition developed against the envoys. (1) This
proceeded, in all probability, from the party that had despatched the emissaries
to Antioch—viz., the sect of the Pharisees who believed, and who may have felt
their doctrinal position to be in danger through the enthusiasm aroused by the
orations of the missionaries. (2) The form it assumed was a reassertion of the
false and pernicious doctrine which had brought the delegates to Jerusalem—
“that it was needful to circumcise the Gentiles and to command them to keep
the Law of Moses.”

Learn—1. The persistence of outworn creeds. 2. The celerity with which
error intrudes itself intothe Church. 3. The duty of Christian teachers to resist
every attempt to corrupt the simplicity of the faith, 4. The function of the
Church, as a whole, to guard the truth,


318


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





CHAP. XV.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1, 5. Wo Salvation without
Circumcision.

I. An old-time truth.—Under the
Mosaic dispensation it was true that
no Israelite could be saved who, in
unbelief and disobedience, repudiated
circumcision, though, from the nature
of the case, submission to the rite was
not left in the hands of the individual.
Hence it is doubtful if, even under the
Old-Testament economy, circumcision
was of universal obligation as an in-
dispensable condition of salvation.
Certainly submission to the bodily
ceremonial was no absolute guarantee
of the soul’s forgiveness and renewal,
or of its future enjoyment of eternal life.

II. A plausible doctrine. — Like
many another mistaken theory, it had
some considerations to advance on its
behalf. It was by no means surprising
that a Jew should have argued that
circumcision must have been designed
to be of permanent and perhaps also
universal obligation, considering that
Jehovah Himself had imposed it on
the fathers of Israel, that it had de-
scended from a hoar antiquity, and
that its value as a religious ordinance
had been recognised by so many even
of the Gentiles themselves.

III. A dangerous error.—To assert
that circumcision was indispensable to
salvation was (1) directly to challenge
the sufficiency of Christ’s sacrifice as
an atonement for sin; (2) virtually to
impair the fulness of salvation as a
gift of grace, by imposing an external
condition of enjoying the same; (3)
practically to teach the doctrine of
salvation by works, against which the
gospel is a vigorous and uncompromis-
ing protest; (4) certainly to destroy
all hope of Christianity ever becoming
a world-wide religion; (5) absurdly
to exalt a positive enactment to the
same level, in respect of saving worth,
as a spiritual precept ; (6) foolishly to
maintain that a positive institution
could never be abrogated or set aside
by its founders; (7) sinfully to corrupt
the truth of God which had been re-


vealed through the gospel of Jesus
Christ.

iV. An exploded heresy.—Nobody
now within the Church of Christ thinks
of maintaining the necessity of circum-
cision; though unfortunately the same
error survives in spirit among those
who teach the doctrines of baptismal
regeneration aad sacramental grace, or
the impossibility of being saved unless
one has been baptised and partaken of
the Lord’s Supper.


Ver. 2. How to Deal with Heretics.

I. Endeavour to convince them by
reasoning (Titus iii. 10).

II. Lay the matter in dispute before
the courts of the Church (Matt. xviii.
17):

III. Separate from such as refuse
to obey the decision of the Church
(1 Tim. vi. 5; 2 John 10).


Ver. 3. The Conversion of the Heathen
a Source of Joy to the Church of Christ.
(A Missionary Sermon.)

I. As a solid increase to the sum of
human happiness.—Every sinner saved
being a soul rescued from the guilt and
power of sin.

II. As an irrefragable proof of the
saving power of the gospel.—The pro-
gress of foreign missions the most
powerful apologetic of to-day.

ITI. As a valuable extension of the
Saviour’s kingdom. — Every convert
won from heathenism becomes a subject
of the empire of truth and love, of
salvation and eternal life.

IV. As a delightful prophecy of the
millennial era.—Each tribe and nation
brought under the power of the gospel
being a foreshadowing of that happy
era when “the kingdoms of the world
shall have become the kingdoms of our
Lord and of His Christ.”


Vers. 3, 4. Paul and Barnabas on
the Way to Jerusalem; or, what all
ministers ought to be.

J. Champions of orthodoxy.—J.e., of
the truth. Certainly men who claim


319


CHAP. XV,


to be Church teachers should not war
against the faith they profess, or pro-
pagate opinions contrary to the truth
they have been appointed to expound.

II. Messengers of peace.—Constantly
directing their endeavours towards
maintaining the unity of the Spirit
in the bonds of peace. As representa-
tives of the Prince of Peace, they
should themselves be lovers of peace.

III. Publishers of grace.—Heralds
of the good news of salvation through
the free grace of God in Christ—a
theme so great and glorious that none
other in the estimation of a true
preacher should for a moment be suf-
fered to dispute its claims on his atten-
tion.

IV. Dispensers of joy.—Such those
preachers and ministers cannot fail to
be who are mindful of their calling,
and unwearied as well as hearty in its
exercise.


Ver. 4. Paul’s Third Visit to Jeru-


salem.—Was this the visit recorded in
Gal. ii. 1% An affirmative reply seems
justified on the following grounds :—
I. The impossibility of synchronising
the Galatian visit with any other al-
luded to in the Acts.—Hither with
that recorded in xi. 30, which occurred
before the famine predicted by Agabus,
or that reported in xviii. 22, which
happened at the close of Paul’s second
missionary journey; all others being
practically out of the question. De-
cisive against the latter of the above
two is the circumstance that Barnabas
was not then a travelling companion of
Paul, as he was on the occasion of the
visit spoken of in Galatians; while
opposed to the former stand a number
of considerations, as, ¢.g.: 1. The dif-
ferent object of the xi. 30 visit, which
was to carry a benevolent contribution
to Jerusalem; whereas the Galatian visit
contemplated conversation with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








Church leaders about Paul’s gospel to
the Gentiles. 2. The date of the xi. 30
visit which coincided with that of
Herod’s death, not more than ten years
after Saul’s conversion, whereas the
Galatian visit fell at least seventeen
years after that event. 3. The unlikeli-
hood of an ecclesiastical council being
convened in Jerusalem during, or so
near, the time of the Herodian persecu-
tion. 4. The improbability of Paul
having attained, in the course of one
year’s labour at Antioch, to such pre-
eminence over Peter as he appears
in Galatians to have reached. 5. The
almost certainty that, if Paul’s mission
to the heathen had already been re-
cognised at the visit of xi. 30, there
would have been no need to undertake
a second journey to Jerusalem to obtain
another decision thereupon ; and (6) the
difficulty of harmonising this supposed
commission of Paul to the Gentiles,
received at the visit of xi. 30, with the
express statement of xiii. 1, that Paul’s
mission was entrusted to him after that
visit.

II. The obvious correspondence be-
tween the Galatian visit and this to
the Jerusalem council.—1l. The two
narratives assume that Paul and
Barnabas had already conducted a
gospel mission among the Gentiles.
2. In both journeys Paul is accom-
panied by Barnabas. 3. Both visits
have the same end in view—to obtain
a judicial settlement of the controversy
which had broken out at Antioch, con-
cerning the amount of liberty to be
accorded to Gentile converts. 4. The
settlement reported in both accounts is
practically the same—that the Gentiles
were not to be subjected to the yoke of
circumcision. 5. In both narratives
Peter and James appear as principal
parties in bringing about the deliver-
ance which restored peace to the
Church.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 6—21.


The Council at Jerusalem ; or, the Circumcision Controversy Settled.
I. The composition of the council.—l. The apostles. The twelve; Paul not


yet included in their number.


These, as having been chosen by Christ, were


naturally regarded as the heads of the Christian community, which accordingly


320


rs 1
HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XV.


Se ea ea ae ee ee Se eee a ee eS


looked to them for counsel in matters of Church administration, and especially
for guidance in circumstances of difficulty. 2. The elders. The presidents,
superintendents, or overseers, of the different Christian synagogues, or Churches.
How large a body the eldership formed cannot be surmised ; but all its members,
itis clear, stood on an equality as presbyters. 3. The brethren. The members
of the Church called “ the multitude” (ver. 12) ; “the whole Church” (ver. 22).
Whether these took an active part in the discussion cannot be answered without
knowing in what capacity James (ver. 13) spoke ; that they were associated with
the apostles and elders in the finding of the court the narrative distinctly states
(ver. 22). “The three bodies stood to each other as the Boulé or council,
Gerusia or senate, and the Ecclesia or assembly, in a Greek Republic”
Plumptre),

iT. The deliberations of the council.—1. Peter’s speech. After considerable
discussion, in which the “brethren” may have taken part, the Man of Rock,
Cephas, or Peter, asked a hearing from the court. (1) He reminded those
present of a series of facts with which all were familiar (see xi.): first, that
about fourteen years before God had specially selected him (Peter) to preacn the
gospel to the Gentiles, under such circumstances as evinced it to be the will of
Heaven, that they (the Gentiles) should be invited to believe, and so be received
into the Christian Church (see x. 34) ; secondly, that God Himself, who, from
His character as Heart Searcher, could be under no mistake concerning the
inward attitude of any toward the gospel, had borne witness to the genuineness
of their conversion, by granting them the Holy Ghost in the same manner as He
had done unto the Jews (see x. 44); and thirdly, that God had put no difference
between themselves (the Jews) and the Gentiles on becoming Christians—that in
the case of both, faith had operated in the same way, and produced the same
results—viz., had led to the purification of the heart from sin, or, in other words,
had made the nature holy. (2) He asked them a question which contained a
very powerful argument. Why they should seek to impose circumcision on the
disciples? First, to do so was to be guilty of tempting God—i.e., of presumptuously
putting Him to the proof by demanding additional evidences of His will, when
those already furnished, and just recited by Peter, ought to be enough. Secondly,
to do so would be to place upon the necks of the Gentile disciples a yoke which
the Jews themselves had found to be intolerable, irksome, burdensome, oppressive,
slavish in the extreme, as it could not fail to be when men came to regard it
(as the Jews unfortunately did, and now desired to teach the Gentiles that it
was) indispensable for salvation. Thirdly, to do so was to insist upon a ritual
which experience had shown to be altogether unnecessary. The Jews themselves
who believed had practically confessed that they could not be saved by the
ceremonies of the Law, and had turned to seek salvation by grace; if so, how
could it be other than inconsistent and ridiculous to impose upon the Gentiles
that in which the Jews themselves had lost faith. 2. Barnabas’s and Paul's
orations. One after the other the two missionaries addressed the House—
Barnabas preceding, presumably on account of age, and because the council had,
as yet, greater confidence in him. The subject handled by both was their
missionary travels. One can imagine the eloquence with which the “ chief
speaker” would dilate upon the thrilling tale of their experiences and of God’s
signs and wonders among the heathen, and almost see the bated breath—“ all
the multitude kept silence”—with which the thronged assembly would listen
to the story “of the greatest revolution the world has ever seen.” The speakers
appear to have confined themselves to an unvarnished narrative of facts.
3. James’s advice. The James who, after Barnabas and Paul had sat down,
claimed the attention of the meeting was the brother of the Lord (Gal. ii. 9),
‘“‘ who, from the austere sanctity of his character, was commonly called, both by


XY 321


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
—— — —eeeEeeEeESEeSeEEeFSSSSSSS nn ss eee es oo


Jews and Christians, James the Just” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 204). From
the circumstance that he spoke last it has been quite reasonably inferred that he
acted as president of the council, and that in all probability he was chief pastor
in the Church of Jerusalem. From his well-known character as a strong legalist,
his decision in favour of freedom, coming after Peter’s, could not fail to carry
great weight. The substance of what he said was (1) that the conversion of
the Gentiles, as rehearsed by Simeon (Peter's Hebrew name), was an exact
fulfilment of Old-Testament prophecy, the particular prediction cited being taken
from Amos ix. 11, 12; and (2) that, that being so, the conversion of the Gentiles
manifestly had a place in the plan and purpose of God, to whom all His works
were known from the beginning, so that nothing could occur by accident. After
this he proceeded to give judgment on the case, which judgment the court
unanimously adopted.

1II. The finding of the council.—1l. That Gentile Christians should not be
troubled about circumcision, or other Jewish ceremonies. Neither those who
already had turned, nor those who in future might turn, to God, by believing on
Jesus, should be molested, worried, or harassed about these beggarly elements ;
but all should be left alone in that liberty wherewith Christ had made His people
free (Gal. v. 1). 2. That Gentile Christians should be asked to abstain from
certain things. (1) Pollutions of idols. J.e., parts of sacrificial victims which
had not been used in sacrifice, and which the heathen sold in the market for
ordinary food, but which, as having been presented io an idol, the Jew regarded
as entailing upon him who ate them the guilt of idolatry (compare Rom. xiv. 15 ;
1 Cor. viii. 10). (2) Fornication. The heathen mind had become so corrupt as
to have practically lost all sense of chastity as a virtue ; and besides, in connection
with heathen festivals in honour of their deities, the most shameless licentiousness
was frequently practised: hence, both of these considerations called for stringent
prohibition of this sin. (3) Things strangled. J.e., the flesh of animals not put
to dcath in the ordinary way, which the Jews were not allowed to eat, because
it was not properly drained of blood (Lev. xvii. 13, 14; Deut. xii. 16, 23).
(4) Blood. This heathens often drank at their idolatrous feasts, and even at
other times, mingled with their food. 3. That the Gentile Christians should be
instructed as to the reason for this partial restriction of their liberty. ‘‘ For Moses
of old time (or from generations of old), hath in every city them that preach him,
being read in the synagogues every Sabbath.” Meaning that because of this
constant reading of the Law the feelings of such Jewish Christians as had not
broken with the synagogue would be wounded should Gentile Christians be
exempted, not only from circumcision, but from such restrictions as were wont to be
imposed on proselytes coming over from heathenism to Judaism. Hence, as a
compromise, the above-mentioned prohibitions, the so-called Noachian precepts,
were enjoined upon Gentile Christians.

Learn—1. The right of the Christian laity to take part in Church synods,
assemblies, and councils, 2. The propriety of conducting all Church deliberations
with decency and in order. 3. The wisdom of the Church membership giving
heed to the counsels of its leaders. 4. The duty of Church councils to depend on
nothing but moral suasion for the enforcement of their decrees,


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Vers. 6-21. The First Ecclesiastical III. The standard recognised.—


Assembly. God’s testimony in the Scriptures and
I. The question discussed.—Con- in providence.

cerning the conditions of salvation. IV. The decision given.—One of
II. The spirit manifested.—A spirit Christian wisdom, calculated to concili-

of love and truth, ateand promote union among the saved.


322


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Ver. 8. God's Knowledge of the Heart.
I, Immediate.

II. Constant.

III. Thorough.

IV. Gracious.


Ver. 9. No Difference between Us and
Them—i.e., between Man and Man.—In
respect of —

I. The need of salvation, The
hearts of all, being impure, require
cleansing.

II. The provision of salvation.
Christ’s atonement and the Spirit’s
grace designed for all.

III. The condition of salvation.
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

IV. The possession of salvation.
All who believe receive the Holy Spirit,
which is the earnest of our inheritance.


Heart Purification.

I. The heart is by nature unclean,
and requires cleansing.

Il, This cleansing can be effected
only by the indwelling of the Holy
Ghost.

III. The Holy Ghost always operates
through the faith of the individual.

IV. The faith of the individual rests
upon the truth of God.


Ver. 11. The Apostle’s Creed.

I. That Jews, as well as Gentiles,
alike need salvation.— Both being alike
under sin (Rom. ii. 9).

II. That for Jews, as well as Gentiles,
salvation can be only through the
grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. None
other name (iv. 12); only one Mediator
(1 Tim. ii. 5).

III. That as a consequence, Jews, as
well as Gentiles, can be saved in no
other way than by faith without
works.— By the works of the Law shall
no flesh be justified (Gal. ii. 16).


CHAP. XV.





IV. That Jews and Gentiles alike
are sure of salvation, if they do
believe. — “‘ Whosoever believeth ”
(John iii, 16).


The First Confession of Faith.

I. The error against which it guarded.
Salvation by works.

II. The ground on which it rested.
God’s word and Christian experience.

III. The spirit by which it was per-
vaded. Courage and humility; bold-
ness and love.

IV. The gospel which it proclaimed.
Salvation through God’s grace and
man’s faith.

V. The assent which it received. It
was embraced by all the office-bearers
and members of the Church.


Vers. 14-18. The Conversion of the
Gentiles.

J. An accomplished fact. — God
hath visited the Gentiles to take out of
them a people for His name.

II. A fulfilment of prophecy.—In
addition to Amos ix. 11, 12, such
passages as the following might have
been quoted: Isa. ii, 2, ix. 2, xi. 10,
egy, ( Nith We AGS shy OR Sanh IIe
Dan. vii. 14; Joel ii. 28; Zech. viii.
23.

III. A foreseen event.— Having had
a place in God’s eternal counsel, it was
known unto God from the beginning.

IV. A progressing work.—The re-
sidue of men are still sceking after
God. (See Hints on ver. 3.)


Vers. 17, 18. Old-Testament Views of
God.
I. The Father of Men.
II. The Lord of the Nations,
III. The Ruler of the Universe.
IV. The Omniscient Worker.
V. The Supreme Good of Mankind.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 22—35.


The Letter from the Church at Jerusalem ; or, the Publication of the Settlement.
I. The resolution of the Church.—1. Zo prepare an encyelical letter, to be sent


round the Gentile Churches.


This suggestion, made by James (ver. 20), was


formally adopted by the whole Church, under the visible leadership of the apostles
and elders (ver. 22), and at the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, the supreme


323


OHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


——————— TT a | Caer oo—wr—e ees =e


president of the assembly (ver. 28). 2. Zo forward it to Antioch, the missionary
centre, by chosen messengers, along with Paul and Barnabas. This addition to
James’s motion, by whomsoever proposed, commended itself to the sanctified
intelligence of the community as at once respectful to the brethren at Antioch
and expressive of their own high sense of the importance of the occasion.

II. The special messengers.—1. Their names. (1) Judas, called Barsabbas.
That he was not the apostle Judas Thaddeus his surname shows. That he was
a brother of Joseph Barsabbas, the candidate for the apostleship (Grotius) is an
unproved conjecture. It is enough to know that those who selected and sent
him were acquainted with his person as well as with his name. (2) Silas.
Silvanus in the Epistles. Paul’s companion on the second missionary journey
(ver. 40). Whether the bearer of the first epistle of Peter to the Churches of
Asia (1 Peter v. 12) cannot be decided. Not the writer of the Acts (see i. 1).
2. Their character. “Chief men among the brethren,” eminent disciples, had in
reputation perhaps both for piety and ability. The word translated “chief,”
meaning “leading,” may point to the fact that they were elders (Heb. xii. 17).
3. Their standing. Whether they had been among the seventy (Luke x. 1) may
be doubtful ; no uncertainty exists as to this: that they ranked as prophets
(ver. 32; compare xiii. 1). 4. Their companions. Barnabas and Paul, who
returned to Antioch bearing the affection of the whole Church at Jerusalem.
“Our beloved Barnabas and Paul” the letter styles them, and—knowing that
their splendid services in the cause of Christ had been acknowledged—“ men
that have hazarded their lives,” ete., it continucs. 5. Their selection. Rendered
necessary in order to authenticate the letter to the Churches, and to free Paul
and Barnabas from all suspicion of having tampered with the letter, or imposed
their views on the assembly.

III. The encyclical letter—1l. The reason for its sending stated. ‘That the
Church of Jerusalem had heard how the Gentiles in these Churches had been
troubled, even to the degree, in some instances, of having their souls subverted
by certain unauthorised teachers who had gone forth from their midst (and
perhaps pretending to their, authority). 2. Zo whom it was addressed. To the
brethren in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, which shows how widely these false
leaders had diffused their pernicious doctrines. That it was designed to be laid
before all Gentile Churches cannot be inferred (but see xxi. 25). 3. In
whose names it was despatched. Those of the apostles, elders, and brethren
(A.V.), or of the apostles and elder brethren (R.V.); ce. either of the
Church’s office-bearers alone (Presbyterianism) or of the Church member-
ship as well (Congregationalism). See Critical Remarks. 4. The writing i
contained. (1) After the opening salutation (ver. 23), in which the word
used for greeting points to James’s hand as that which drew up the docu-
ment (see Critical Remarks), and (2) the insertion of the abeve-stated reasons
(ver. 24), there follow (8) the names of the special envoys sent with Paul
and Barnabas (ver. 27), and (4) the decision of the council—its authorship
(the Holy Ghost, with the apostles and elders), and its contents (vers. 28, 29) ;
after which it closes with (5) a word of farewell (ver. 29). 5. The reception it
met with. Arrived at Antioch, towards which they had been solemnly dis-
missed, perhaps with religious services (see ver. 33, xiii. 3), and possibly an
escort for several miles of the way (ver. 3), Judas and Silas, having convened a
meeting of the Church, formally delivered into their hands the epistle, which,
when they had read (it may be, had heard read by Barnabas, the son of
consolation), they rejoiced, for the consolation it gave them by the happy settle-
ment of a hard question, which most likely, had it not been settled, would have


in troublesome, and even dangerous to the peace and prosperity of the
urch, ae


324


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XV.





IV. The return of the envoys.—1. After a period of happy service at Antioch,
in which they (Judas and Silas), themselves prophets, delighted to engage, and
in which they attained considerable success (ver. 32), exhorting the disciples
there with many words to cleave to Christ alone for salvation. 2. With a
parting salutation of peace, or with best wishes for their happiness and safety
(compare xvi. 36; Mark v. 34; Luke vii. 50). 3. Zo those who had sent them
forth—i.e., to the Church at Jerusalem, leaving Paul and Barnabas behind at
Antioch, to continue there the work of teaching and preaching the word of the
Lord ; though from the narrative (ver. 40) it may be gathered that Silas soon
after rejoined Paul at Antioch.

Learn—1. That wisdom and love combined are much required in dealing
with the difficulties of Christian members. 2. That Church courts should strive
to attain unity in all their decisions. 3. That the decisions of supreme eccles-


jiastical courts should always be announced with tenderness.


4, That only


persons of approved piety should be entrusted with special missions for the


Church:
essentials.


5. That the Holy Ghost requires unity among Christians only in
6. That decisions of ecclesiastical assemblies, if come to under the


Holy Spirit’s presidency, may be fitly regarded as His decisions.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 22. “Chief men among the
brethren ;” or the prominent leaders in
the first Christian council.

I. Two apostles.—1. Peter. One of
the original twelve: who opened the
door of the Church to the Gentiles in
the person of Cornelius. 2. James. Of
apostolic rank, though not included in
the twelve ; the president of the Jew-
ish Christian Church at Jerusalem.

II. Two missionaries. — 1. Paul.
The apostle to the Gentiles par excel-
lence, the pioneer evangelist who car-
ried the gospel beyond the bounds of
Palestine—first into Asia, and subse-
quently into Europe. 2. Barnabas.
The son of consolation, the good
Levite; the modest and self-effacing
companion of his great colleague.

Ill. Two deputies.—1. Judas Burs-
abbas. A Jerusalem Christian of good
repute among his brethren ; otherwise
unknown. 2. Silas. Also a recognised
disciple of good standing ; afterwards
Paul’s companion on the second mis-
sionary tour.





Ver. 23. The Jerusalem Concordat.—
1. The salutation—“ Greeting.” “The
actual form of the salutation is re-
markable—yaipew: Hail! The secular
traditional Greek salutation is used
here, and not yet, as in the subsequent


epistles, the apostolic greeting : ‘Grace
and peace from God and Christ’; but
the Israelitish salutation of Jesus and
his disciples is no longer adopted, which
ran, ‘ Peace be with you!’ We find
this yaifpe used in the New Testa-
ment by Judas with the kiss of be-
trayal (Matt. xxvi. 49), by the mock-
ing soldiers (Matt. xxvii. 49; Mark
xv. 18; John xix. 3); in the letter
from the chief captain Lysias to the
governor Felix (Acts xxiii. 26); it is
also quoted as a salutation of every-
day life in 2 John 10, 11, and it is
made use of in the Epistle to James
(i. 1). This Greek expression, ya/peu, is
certainly spiritualised by Christian
use, and raised to its true and highest
signification, Just as is the Israelitish
42 DY in the mouth of the Lord;
here, however, it is a friendly mode of
address to the Greek brethren, and a
greeting highly suited to the case”
(Stier). 2. The contents. ‘“ As an in-
dependent commandment of loving wis-
dom for the edification of the Jewish and
Gentile Church, this letter formed the
remarkable beginning of inspired
writing of the New-Testament system,
as the Decalogue did in the Old Testa-
ment. . . In this letter we find the
first transition from oral teaching to
the principal form of the New Testa-


325


CHAP. XV.





ment Scripture” (Stier). 3. The
authority. ‘It seemed good unto the
Holy Ghost and to us.” “We must
neither look upon this expression as a
mere formula, as in the later councils,
nor must we refine upon it, as if the
apostles and elders said, The Holy
Ghost instructed us in this in the
house of Cornelius, and we now decide
therefrom ; as if they had been taught
by that outpouring of the Holy Spirit
that these four items were to be
specially imposed on the Gentile bre-
thren. In this decretal formula now
made use of there is, of course, some
allusive reference to the matters of
fact which had been set forth by
Peter, and to the Scripture that had
been quoted by James, both being alike
testimony of the Holy Spirit, by which
testimony the assembly had been in-
duced to come to a conclusion.” ...
“ But the éofe of the Holy Ghost
refers as much to the four requisitions
of abstinence as to the principal reso-
lution, which declared the liberation of
the Gentiles ; consequently, it is always
maintained that these four requisitions
were made by the full authority of the
Holy Ghost ” (Stier).


Ver. 24. Subverting Souls.

I. An easy performance.—May be
done by (1) promulgating erroneous
doctrine ; (2) setting a bad example ; or
(3) unduly exercising liberty (Rom.
xiv. 15).

II. A frequent practice——By no
means seldom occurring. Sometimes
ignorantly, but often also deliberately
done (2 Tim. ii. 14, iii. 6; Titus i.
LOS EL:

III. A dangerous achievement.—
1. Imperilling the salvation of the
subverted soul. 2. Involving in awful
guilt—that of soul-murder—him who
subverts (2 Peter i. 1-3).


Ver. 26. Hazarding One's Life for
the Name of Christ.

I. To decline to do so when neces-
sary is sin.—To save one’s life at the
expense of one’s fidelity to Christ, or

326


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


to deny Christ in order to save one’s
life, is to be guilty of apostasy.

Il. To do so when called on by
conscience is duty.—When one who is
called to serve Christ finds that he
cannot do so without imperilling his
life, it becomes his duty to embrace the
risk.

II. To do so voluntarily, in order to
serve Christ, is heroism.—One who
would not hesitate to sacrifice his life
when serving might still shrink from
deliberately encountering such risk, in
order to find opportunities of serving
Christ. This latter did Barnabas and
Paul.


Ver. 30. The Jerusalem Epistle: the
Church's Charter of Liberty.

J. Its urgent occasion.—It con-
cerned the question, Moses or Christ.

II. Its unassailable origin.—Dic-
tated by the Holy Ghost.

III. Its honourable bearers.—The
heralds of evangelical grace, accredited
by God Himself.

IV. Its incontestable contents.—
Freedom from the ceremonial, but not
from the moral, law. Deliverance from
the yoke of slavish obedience, but not
from the service of self-denying love.

V. Its joyous publication.—First to
the Church at Antioch, and afterwards
to the Churches in the cities visited by
Paul and Silas (xvi. 4).


Delivering the Epistle—That this
encylical was never composed and far
less delivered—at least in the way
recorded in the Acts—has been argued
(Baur, Zeller, Weizsicker, Holtzmann,
and others) on various grounds.

I. The apparent discrepancy between
the narrative in Acts and the account
given by Paul, who was an eye-
witness of what took place in Jeru-
salem, it is said, shows the letter to be
unhistorical__It is urged—l. That
the conference with the Jerusalem
authorities, according to Galatians, was
sought for by Paul alone; whereas,
according to Acts, it originated in a
Church resolution. 2. That the Gala-
tian story bears no trace of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XV.





antecedent disturbance at Antioch;
whereas the picture drawn by Luke
is that of storm and dissension, both
at Jerusalem and Antioch. 3. That
Acts is absolutely silent about the
Titus episode, which forms so striking
a feature in the Galatian letter. But,
as to the first, why may not both
statements be true, and Paul have
resolved, on his own account, while
executing the Church’s commission, to
lay before the Jerusalem authorities a
full and clear exposition of the gospel
which he preached among the heathen,
in the hope and belief that this would
put an end to all further controversy ?
As to the second, may not Paul have
deemed it quite unnecessary to inform
the Galatians of every detail concerning
the struggle for liberty at Antioch and
Jerusalem, and considered it enough to
emphasise the main point, that his
apostleship to the Gentiles had been
expressly recognised by the three pillar
apostles, James, Cephas, and John?
The third, the Titus episode, though
not particularised in Luke’s narrative,
is not contradicted, or even excluded,
and may well have formed an item in
the much questioning (xv. 7) which
preceded Peter’s speech; or it may
have been deliberately omitted from
Luke’s narrative because it formed no
part of the public discussion. In any
case the two accounts, when im-
partially viewed, are rather supple-
mentary than contradictory of each
other.

II. Had the letter been written as
reported, it is held Paul could not
have stated in Galatians, as he does,
that those who were of repute im-
parted nothing to him.—‘‘ There is no
getting beyond this,” says Weizsicker.
“Tt is a round assertion, and perfectly
clear... . All possibility of an ex-
ception, of anything having been added
by the apostles, is excluded. . . . Paul
has not said that nothing burdensome,
but that nothing at all, was imposed
upon him.” But surely this is to
misunderstand the meaning of the
apostle, who is not writing about
ecclesiastical decrees for the observance


of Gentile converts, but about apostolic
authorisation for himself, and who
distinctly asserts that the three pillar
apostles imparted nothing to him -—i.e.,
did not for a moment ever imagine
that he required to be authorised by
them, and certainly did not arrogate
to themselves the right to authorise
him as an apostle to the Gentiles, but,
on the contrary, recognised that he had
already been authorised as such by God.

III. Had the letter been written,
it is difficult, we are told, to see how
either Peter could have acted at
Antioch or James at Jerusalem, as
they are represented afterwards to
have done (Gal. ii. 11, 12). But
(1) with reference to both apostles it
should be borne in mind that it is by
no means uncommon for even the best
of men to act at times inconsistently
and in flat contradiction to their
previously expressed opinions and
principles—even Barnabas, as well as
Peter, was carried away with the
prevailing spirit of dissimulation.
(2) As regards Peter, had the letter
not been written it is doubtful if Paul
would have been justified in so sharply
censuring Peter’s conduct. Nor (3) is
it likely that Paul would have so
distinctly charged Peter with having
acted contrary to his avowed principles
had he not been aware how Peter had
expressed himself at the Jerusalem
conference. While (4) as to James,
it is not certain that his emissaries did
not travel beyond their instructions ;
or, if they did not, it is by no means
unintelligible that, while James may,
at the conference, have recognised the
Church membership of uncircumcised
Gentiles, he may also have desired
that Jewish Christians should not be
too free in social. intercourse with the
Gentiles.

IV. Had the letter been written, it
is further contended, it would hardly
have dropped so completely as it
appears to have done out of the
Pauline epistles.—Though referred to
again in Acts (xvi. 4, xxi. 15) it is not
alluded to again by Paul, it is said, in
either Romans, Corinthians, Galati ins,


327


CHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





or Ephesians. But—l. Paul may
have deemed it unnecessary to cite the
apostolic decrees either (1) because
they were sufficiently well known, or
(2) because they were more or less
Palestinian in their colouring, and
therefore less suitable for impressing
Churches in Europe and Western Asia ;
(3) because the purpose of his letters
did not call for their citation; or
(4) because he chose to rely rather


on fundamental gospel principles
than on _ ecclesiastical enactments.
2. Even in Galatians Paul may


have judged it better to make no
appeal. to the decrees, in case of
weakening his claim to apostolic au-
tonomy and total independence of
human authority in the exercise of his
ministry. 3. It is scarcely accurate
to assert that all trace of the encyclical,
if it ever existed, quickly disappeared,
since each of the above-named epistles
contains manifest allusions to its
contents, as, ¢.g., (1) to abstinence from
flesh and wine (offered to idols) for the
sake of a weak brother (Rom. xiv. 21) ;
(2) to the practice of fornication
(1 Cor. v. 1, vi. 13, x. 8); (3) to things
offered to idols (1 Cor. viii. 1, 13, x. 7,
19, 20, 21, 28); (4) to the freedom of
the Gentiles from circumcision (Gal.
ii, 3, 11, 14, v. 2); and (5) to marriage
(Eph, vi. 25).

V. The recognition by Paul of the
mother Church in Jerusalem as the
supreme court, whose decisions were
universally binding (it is added), does
not harmonise with his claim for
independence of all human authority
in the gospel which he preached
(Gal. i. 1)—But while Paul’s conviction
that he had received his gospel by


express revelation from heaven may
have been, and was, for himself a
sufficient authorisation of the same, he
may also have felt (or been taught by
the special revelation that sent him to
Jerusalem) that a decision from the
mother Church would not be without
importance as a means of securing the
acquiescence of Jewish Christians, who
could hardly be expected to remain
satisfied with his statement about the
heavenly source of his views.

VI. Other objections to the histo-
ricity of this decree, such as that it
opens and closes like Claudius Lysias’
letter to Felix (xxiii. 26-30), and that
the sentence formations of vers, 24, 25,
are analogous to Luke i. 1-3, do not
strike one as weighty. Both only
show that there were customary modes
of composition, which were known to
Theophilus’s friend and to Claudius
Lysias, as well as to the apostles and
brethren in Jerusalem—surely by no
means an impossible or even violent
supposition !

VII. The suggestion that, neverthe-
less, the letter has a historical basis,
and that a concordat of similar purport
must have been arranged subsequent
to the Antioch dispute (Weizsicker),
shows how hard put to it objectors feel
themselves in their attempts to get rid
of the document as it stands, and how
difficult they find it to explain the
growth of Gentile Churches without
some such deliverance as Acts records.


Ver. 33. Let Go in Peace.
A testimony to—
I. The success of their mission.
II. The unity of the Church.
III. The influence of the letter.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 36—40.


The Second Missionary Jowrney Commenced ; or, the Separation of Barnabas and


Paul.


I. Paul’s proposal to Barnabas.—1. Zo what it referred. The initiation of a
second missionary journey, for the purpose of visiting the brethren—i.e., the
young converts in every city in which, on their previous tour, they had preached
the gospel—and inquiring into their spiritual condition. Not only must the work
of spreading the gospel never stop, but the equally important business of edifying
and building up those who have been converted must never be neglected. A true


328


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XV.





pastor will not only labour to bring souls into Christ’s fold, but will watch
with assiduity and care over such as are already in. 2. When it was made.
Some days after the return to Jerusalem of Judas and Silas (ver. 33), or of
Judas alone (see “ Critical Remarks”), and after their own evangelistic activity
at Antioch had continued for some time, though how long remains uncertain.
Perhaps the commencement of this second journey should be dated a.p, 51.
3. How it was received. Obviously Barnabas assented to the proposal, though
it had been mooted by Paul rather than by himself. Of jealousy on Barnabas’s
part not a trace appears. Though probably older than Paul he appears to
have recognised, with equanimity and satisfaction, Paul’s superior genius and
greater fitness to be a leader. That they quarrelled before the proposal could
be carried out was, doubtless, to be regretted. But meanwhile it may be noted
that the cause of that quarrel was nothing connected with the subordinate
position of Barnabas.

II. Paul’s contention with Barnabas.—1. Quite simply it arose. As great con-
tentions often do. (1) Barnabas very naturally wished, as before, to take along
with them John Mark, his kinsman (Col. iv. 10)—probably for his own sake,
as having a liking for his relative as well as a desire for his society, and
probably because Mark, having got over his home-sickness, or, having laid
aside his early feeling of offence (see on xiii. 13), was once more desirous of
resuming active service in the cause of the gospel. (2) Paul, on the other
hand, demurred to the proposal of Barnabas, probably because he had not
been able to sympathise with Mark’s motives for going back on the previous
occasion, and because he was not yet assured of Mark’s stability and courage.
It is, however, pleasing to observe that Paul susequently took a kindlier view of
the young man (2 Tim. iv. 11), and even accepted him as a companion in travel
(Col. iv. 10). 2. Very hotly it blazed. The contention became so sharp that the two
missionaries felt obliged to separate. Barnabas’s kinship with, and affection for,
the young man would not allow him to yield. Paul’s judgment as to the unlike-
lihood of a fickle character like Mark being of much use in the mission field
determined him to hold out. Which was right is not clear. If Barnabas had
Christian feeling on his side, Paul had Christian reason. Most likely both erred
in exhibiting temper and in not trying to understand each other’s view of the
case. Had they done this, and omitted to do that, they would surely have come
to some amicable arrangement. 3. Haceeding peacefully it ended. As they
could not agree, they let the matter drop, and took each his own independent
course. What a pity they had not done this before the quarrel! It would
have saved an unpleasant episode in the history of both.

III. Paul’s separation from Barnabas.—‘‘ They parted asunder the one from
the other.” 1. Not in perfect friendship. There is some reason to suspect that
they were a trifle displeased with one another. All the more likely if this
occurred shortly after the rebuke which Paul administered to Peter for conduct
of which Barnabas also had been guilty. Yet that the present rupture did
not permanently estrange the good men appears from the way in which Paul
afterwards alludes to Barnabas as a Christian teacher worthy of the fullest. con-
fidence of the Churches (1 Oor. ix. 6). 2. But in Christian service. Neither of
them retired from his work as a Gentile missionary, as modern Christian workers
often withdraw from service altogether when they quarrel with one another.
Both continued to labour in the cause of the gospel, but each pursued his own
path. Barnabas, taking with him Mark, sailed to his native Cyprus on a
missionary tour, thus following the track of his first journey with Paul; Faul,
choosing as a companion Silas, who must by this time have returned to Antioch
(ver. 33), started on a similar journey over the old route, only approaching it
from the opposite end, travelling to Derbe and Lystra through the Cilician gates.


329


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





3. And with the prayers of their brethren. Although it is only of Paul that it is
written that he was “commended by the brethren to the grace of the Lord,” it
is hardly to be supposed that Barnabas would be allowed to depart without the
prayers of his fellow-Christians. To infer that he was, because the Church had
taken sides in the quarrel and decided for Paul as against Barnabas, is to ascribe
to the Church quite an unworthy part. Better far let it be said that Luke has
omitted to record anything of the Church’s attitude towards Barnabas, and con-
fined himself to what was done in the case of Paul—not because Barnabas was
left to go his way alone and unsympathised with, but simply because Paul was
the hero whose future fortunes it was Luke’s object to trace.

Learn.—1. That good men are, unhappily, not above quarrelling, though they
should be. 2. That when good men do quarrel, they should study to go asunder


rather than come to blows.
men, for good.
commending them to God’s grace.


3. That God can overrule even the quarrels of good
4, That Churches should never send forth missionaries without
5. That ministers and missionaries should not


neglect the work of confirming young converts.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 36-40. Four Valuable Lessons.

I. For Christian preachers.— Never
to desist from their holy work of
converting sinners and edifying saints.

II. For Christian friends.—Never
to contend with one another, except in
love and Christian activity.

III. For Christian workers.— Never
to grow weary in well-doing, but to be
steadfast and immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord.

IV. For Christian Churches.— Never
to omit praying for both ministers and
missionaries.


Barnabas, Paul, and the Lord.

I. The forbearing love of Barnabas
was good.

II. The holy severity of Paul was
better.

III. The wisdom of the Lord, con-
verting all things into good, was best.
—Cerok.


Ver. 36. Pastoral Visitation.

I. A necessary part of ministerial
work.—Christ’s sheep and lambs have
not merely to be gathered into the fold,
but also to be carefully fed and tended
(John xxi, 15-17).

II. A kindly display of Christian


sympathy.—lIf it betokens an amiable
and brotherly disposition to ask after
each other’s welfare (Exod. xviii. 7),
much more does it do so to inquire
after cach other’s spiritual progress,

III. A profitable form of religious
service.—Like mercy, “it blesses him
that gives and him that takes.” It
benefits those who are visited and them
who visit ; it contributes to the spiritual
upbuilding of both.


Ver. 39. The Quarrel between Bar-
nabas and Paul illustrates—
I. The imperfection of good men. :
II. The danger of success. even for
eminent Christians.
III. The grace of God in making the
wrath of men to praise Him.


The Quarrels of Good Men—

I. Are of more frequent occurrence
than they ought to be.

II. Are less deeply lamented than
they should be.

III. Are seldom healed as quickly
as they might be.

IV. Are more tenderly dealt with
than they deserve to be.

V. Are sometimes productive of
more good than they promise to be.








330


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. | cmap. xv1.
nr


CHAPTER XVI.
Tae Szconp Misstonary Journey (PAUL AND SILAs)—-CONTINUED,


- Paul and Silas in Lycaonia ; or, Meeting with Timothy (vers. 1-5).

. Regions Beyond ; or, the Vision of the Man of Macedonia (vers. 6-10).

- Paul and Silas in Philippi; or, the Gospel carried to Europe (vers. 11-13, 40).

. A Sabbath in Philippi ; or, the Conversion of Lydia (vers. 14, 15).

. The Cure of a Pythoness ; or, the Slave-girl and the Apostle (vers. 16-18).

. The First Pagan Persecution; or, the Imprisonment of Paul and Silas
(vers. 19-39).


POR UR 0? C2
SD OU 09 bo eS


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Derbe and Lystra (see xiv. 6) are now visited by Paul and Silas in reverse order
to that followed in the first journey. There meant Lystra, not Derbe, as has been wrongly
inferred out of xx. 4. The son of a certain woman, etc., should be, the son of a believing
Jewish woman, whose name was Eunice, the daughter of Lois (2 Tim. i. 5), both pious females
who instructed him in the Scriptures (2 Tim. iii. 15), but of a Greek father, who may have
been a proselyte, and was certainly uncircumcised.

Ver. 2. Well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.—This may well
have been if Timothy had been converted on the occasion of Paul’s first visit to the former
city, and if since that he had been engaged in evangelistic labours both there and in
Iconium.

Ver. 3. Circumcised him.—Whether by Paul’s own hand (Meyer, De Wette), or by that
of another (Neander) is immaterial. Any Israelite might perform the rite, though no
heathen could (see Riehm’s Handworterbuch des Biblischen Altertums, art. Beschneidung).
On the seeming inconsistency of this act with Paul’s refusal to circumcise Titus (Gal. 11. 3),
see “ Homiletical Analysis.”

Ver. 4. The mention of the decrees confirms the historic credibility of chap. xv.

Ver. 6. Phrygia and the region of Galatia should probably be, the Phrygian and Galatian
region ; but whether one or two distinct districts is intended is presently under debate. The
commonly accepted interpretation (Hackett, Alford, Plumptre, Holtzmann, Zockler, and
others) holds that Paul and Silas, having visited the Churclies in Derbe, Lystra, Iconium,
and Antioch, directed their steps first in a north-easterly direction towards Phrygia, and
then turned north-west towards Northern Galatia, which was bounded “on the north by
Paphlagonia and Bithynia, on the east by Pontus and Cappadocia, on the south by
Cappadocia and Phrygia, and on the west by Phrygia and Bithynia” (Hackett), and
inhabited by a Celtic population; but a different view (Zeller, Renan, Hausrath, Weizsicker,
Wendt, Ramsay, and others) considers the Phrygian and Galatian region to be the district
alluded to in vers, 1-4, in which the above-named Churches were situated—viz., Southern, as
distinguished from Northern Galatia. (See further in “ Homiletical Analysis.”) That Paul
again visited the Churches in this district, or these districts, at the beginning of his third
journey is afterwards mentioned (xviii. 23). Forbidden of the Holy Ghost.—Not through the
exercise of ordinary prudence on the part of the apostles (De Wette), but by some special
Divine intimation, as in xiii. 2 (Alford), but whether conveyed by the Bath-Kol (Renan), or
through some prophetic voice, as in xx. 23, xxi. 11 (Holtzmann), cannot be determined.
That this prohibition extended to preaching in Phrygia and Galatia is against the pre-
supposition contained in xviii. 23. Asia.—l.e., Proconsular Asia, or the western coastland.

Ver. 7. Mysia was situated in the north-east corner of Asia Minor, Bithynia in the north
and west of Mysia. Why they were prevented from preaching in Asia and Bithynia cannot
be known, though Rom. xv. 20 and 2 Cor. x. 15, 16 may shed some light on the problem.
Perhaps it should suffice to say that in this way the Spirit designed to turn their steps and
faces westward in the direction of Europe. But see further in “ Hints.” The Spirit—The
oldest authorities read, The Spirit of Jesus. As in the Filiogue controversy at the Synod of
Toledo, A.D. 589 neither party quoted this phrase, the inference is that by that time the
text had been Jong corrupted.

Ver. 8. Passing or having passed by Mysia.—Not “having passed along” the border of
Mysia, but “ having passed it by” so far as their work was concerned—i.e., having not stopped
to preach in, but hastened through it. Troas.—Called Alexandria Troas, in honour of
Alexander, founded by Alexander’s successors, and situated on the Hellespont. Now Zski-


331


CHAP, XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


ee


Stamboul. Visited twice again by Paul (xx. 5; 2 Cor. ii. 12). The home of Carpus, who
perhaps acted as his host (2 Tim. iv. 13). ; ie

Ver. 9. Whether Paul’s vision in the night (compare xviii. 9, xxiii. 11, xxvii. 23; 2 Cor.
xii. 1) occurred in a dream or in an ecstasy vannot be decided, A man of Macedonia.— Paul
would know this, if not from the man’s appearance, from his words ‘“ Come over.” Ramsay
(St. Paul the Traveller, etc.. pp. 202, 203) maintains that the man of Macedonia was Luke,

Ver. 10. We.— he commencement of the “We” passages of this book (xvi, 10-17, xx.
5-15, xxi. 1-18, xxvii. 1-xxviii. 16), which shows that the writer of the Acts (Luke) joined
Paul’s company at Troas. Tradition makes Luke to have been an Antiochian.

Ver. 12. The chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony.— Better, a city of Macedonia,
the first of the district, a colony—i.e., of Rome. Macedonia was divided into four parts ;
but whether “the first” meant “tie first arrived at” (Winer, Zockler, Lightfoot. Alford),
not a very valuable observation; or the first in political importance (Farrar, Ramsay),
which Philippi was, though Thessalonica was the capital of Macedonia, and Amphipolis of
the province; or “the first to be made a colony” (Grotius, Meyer, Wendt, Overbeck),
the distinction pointed out in the text; or “the first city on the frontier ” (Wordsworth),
is debated, and is not clear. Wordsworth’s idea derives support from the occurrence of a
similar phrase in Xenophon (An ab,, I. iv. 1): els "Icoovs, 79s Kudexlas éoxdryv widw. Dr. Hort
thinks some early corruption has crept into the text, and that instead of meptdos should be
read IIcepiéos (M for IL), for Philippi belonged to the Pieria of Mount Paragon, and might
well be called “(a chief city of Pierian Macedonia” (Westcott and Hort’s The New Testament
in Greek, ii. 97, Appendix.) Ramsay says: “The term ‘first’ was commonly assumed
by towns which were or claimed to be chief of a district or province.”

Ver. 13. By a river side.—Neither the Strymon nor the Nestos, whic’) are both di-tant
from Philippi, but the smaller stream Gangas close by the town. Where prayer was wont to
be made; or, where we supposed there was a place of praycr (R.V.). Tue received reading
corrected thus, where a place of prayer was wont to be, has the support of good authorities,
Josephus (Ant., XIV. x. 23) mentions the custom of making ‘prayer houses” at the
seaside,

Ver. 14, Lydia.—“ Certainly a proper name, not a patronymic” (Zockler). ‘She had
probably become addicted to Jewish religious practices in her native city” (Ramsay).
Thyatira.—A town in Lydia, famous for its dyeing.

Ver. 15. Come into my house, and abide there.— Up to this time the four teachers may have
supported themselves by their own labours, Paul as a tent-maker, Luke as a physician,
Silas and Timothy in ways unknown. That Paul was reluctant to accept Lydia’s invitation
has been argued from the words, And she constrained us (compare Luke xxiv. 29); and tLis
he may well have been, not because of unwillingness to partake of the hospitality of others
(see Rom. xvi. 23), or to receive assistance from them when his circumstances required
(xxiv. 23, xxviii. 10; Phil, iv. 15), but because he wished to avoid the imputation of being
actuated by mercenary motives (xx. 34; 2 Cor, xii. 17, 19).

Ver. 16. A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination.—Better, a female slave
(Gal. iv. 22) having the spirit of a pythoness, or, according to superior authorities, a spirit, a
python. “The python was the serpent worshipped at Dephi, as the symbol of wisdom, from
which the Pythian priestesses and Apollo as succeeding to the oracular power of the
serpent took their distinguishing appellative ” (Plumptre).

Ver. 19. The rulers, dpxovres, were the town magistrates (Luke xii. 58),

Ver. 20. The magistrates, orparnyoi, were the two chief civic authorities (duumviri) in a
Roman colony town, and were usually styled preetors.

Vers. 20, 21. Being Jews—i.e,, belonging to tiie despised race, whom Claudius had
shortly before banished from Rome (xviii. 2); and being Romans—i.c., in proud contrast to
the hated sons of Abraham. “The distinction between trdpywr and dv seems to be that
the former is used of something which the speaker or narrator wishes to put forward into
notice, either as unknown to his hearer or reader, or in some way to be marked by him for
praise or blame; whereas the latter refers to facts known and recognised and taken for
granted by both” (Alford).

Ver, 22. Rent off—by ordering the lictors to remove—their clothes. The customary
mandate was: Summove, lictor, despolia, verbera. Commanded—lit., were commanding—to
beat them, the imperfect showing that the whole process of scourging went on under the
narrator’s eye.

Ver, 23. The inner prison.—“In a Roman prison there were usually three distinct, parts—(1)
the communiora, where the prisoners had light and fresh air, (2) the interiora, shut off by
strong iron gates, with bars and locks, and (3) the tudlianwm, or dungeon. The third was a
place rather of execution or for one condemned to die” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 280, note 4),

Ver. 27. Would have killed himself.—Because he would certainly have been put to death
had his prisoners escaped (see xii. 19, xxvii. 42).

Ver, 28. Do thyself no harm.—As the prison was dark Paul may have learnt from some


332


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xvi.





exclamation of the jailor that he meditated suicide, or, if ordinary means sufficed not to


pag him with the keeper’s purpose, supernatural revelation may have discovered it to
vim.


Ver. 29. A light shouid be lights.

Ver. 30. Brought them out.—Not into his house (see ver. 34), but into the outer or common
prison or other room belonging to the prison, where they were joined by the jailor’s family.

Ver. 34. Believing in God with all his house, should be, he rejoiced with, or over, all his
house, having believed in, or having believed, God.

Ver. 35. The serjeants were the 70d bearers or lictors.

Ver. 37. They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, etc.; or, having beaten
us publicly uncondemned, they cast us into prison.—lt was against the Valerian law passed A.U.C.
254 to inflict stripes or torture on any Roman citizen until an appeal to the people had been
decided. The Porcian law, passed A.U.c. 506, forbade stripes and torture absolutely. From
this passage it appears that Silas as well as Paul was a Roman citizen. That they did not
appeal to their Roman citizenship may have been due to the haste with which proceedings
had been taken against them. Of the three times Paul was beaten with rods (2 Cor. xi. 25)
this was one; the other two are not recorded.

Ver. 38. They, the magistrates, feared when they heard that they, the apostles, were
Romans.— Because, according to Roman law, “ Facinus est vinciri civem Romanum; scelus
verberari; prope parricidium, necari” (Cicero, Jn Verrem, v. 66).

Ver. 40. The use of the third person shows that Luke remained behind in Philippi, where
he was afterwards rejoined by the apostle and his company (xx. 5).

NoTE.-—The whole critical school admits the credibility of everything in this chapter
except the transactions represented as having taken place in the prison. The earthquake,
shaking the prison doors and snapping the prisoners’ fetters, the jailor’s foolishness in
proposing to murder himself before he knew what had actually happened, the unlikelihood
of all the prisoners remaining in their cells when the doors stood open for their escape, and
the hasty dismissal of the apostles, are all set down as “ holy fable,” which received a colour-
ing at least from the story preserved by Lucian of an innocent prisoner in Alexandria
(A.D. 100), who disdained the opportunity of flight from prison which was offered him,
and instead demanded the formal recognition of his innocence from the magistrates. But
the story is not incredible, if the supernatural is not impossible; while in Lucian’s tale, com-
pared with Luke’s narrative, is nothing more wonderful than this, that an innocent man
tell upon the same course of action, as another did half a century before—which is surely
not impossible or even uncommon.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.


Vers. 1-5. Paul and Silas in Lycaonia ; or, Meeting with Timothy.

J. The missionaries and the Churches.—1. The Churches visited by the mis-
sionaries. Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium, which are mentioned in reverse order
from that in which they were first introduced (xiv.), because on this occasion
Paul and his companion approached them from Tarsus by travelling, most likely,
through the Cilician gates. ‘‘ And if indeed Paul and Silas took this route, and
passed through the narrow gorge, under its frowning cliffs of limestone, clothed
here and there with pine and cedar, which to the Crusaders presented an appcar-
ance so terrible that they christened it the Gates of Judas, how far must they
have been from imagining, in their wildest dreams, that their footsteps—the foot-
steps of two obscure and persecuted Jews—would lead to the traversing of that
pass centuries afterwards by kings and their armies” (Farrar, The Life and Work
of St. Paul, i. 456). 2. The special work done by the missionaries. ‘Twotold.
(1) Confirming the Churches (xv. 41), doubtless by preaching (see xv. 32, 41).
(2) Delivering them the apostolic decrees (ver. 4), presumably with exposition
and enforcement on the part of both Paul and Silas. 3. The result of their labours
in the Churches. (1) Intensive: establishment or strengthening in the faith, in
the belief, love, and practice of the truth. (2) Extensive: increase in number
daily, first of believers and next of Churches.

If. Paul and Timothy.—1. Details of Timothy’s history. (1) His birthplace.
Not Derbe (Neander), but Lystra (see xx. 4). (2) His parentage. His father a
Greek ; whether living, or dead, and, if living, whether a proselyte, or a heathen,
cannot be told. If alive and a proselyte, he was most likely uncircumcised. His


333


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
rrr kwh SE


mother a believing Jewess, by name Eunice, the daughter of Lois (2 Tim. i. 5),
also a Christian disciple. Mixed marriages, condemned by Paul (1 Cor. vii.),
“were far less strictly forbidden to women than to men” (Farrar). (3) His
character “well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium.”
Supposing him to have been converted during Paul’s first visit to Lystra (xiv. 8),
he would at the time of Paul’s second visit be a disciple of three or four years’
standing, and during the interval may have given ample proof both at Lystra
and Iconium of his interest in the cause of the gospel. 2. Paul's desire to have him
as a, colleague in the ministry (compare 2 Tim. iv. 5). This may have arisen from
a variety of motives. Paul may have (1) considered him from his talents and
graces eminently qualified for the work ; or (2) felt drawn towards him from the
fact that he (Paul) had been the means of his conversion (1 Cor. iv. 17; 1 Tim.
i. 2, 8; 2 Tim. ii. 2); or (3) recognised in his mixed Jewish and Greek descent,
a circumstance calculated to be helpful in propagating the gospel in such mixed
communities as were about to be visited; or (4) wished to havea third companion
in place of John Mark, as already he had Silas in room of Barnabas. (See
further “ Hints” on ver. 3.) 3. Paul's conduct in causing him to be circumcised.
(1) The reason. ‘ Because of the Jews that were in those parts; for they all
knew that his father was a Greek.” In Paul’sestimation it would have hindered
Timothy’s and perhaps his own usefulness among the Jews had he accepted as a
colleague one of Jewish descent who was not circumcised. In other words, it
would have looked strange that Paul should ask of Timothy (a half Jew) less of
conformity to the law than was demanded of a heathen who became a proselyte
of righteousness. (2) The consistency. Paul’s conduct in circumcising Timothy
—whether with his own hand or by that of another is uncertain—has been
pronounced irreconcilable with his refusal to circumcise Titus (Gal. ii. 3). Of
course, if Titus was circumcised (Farrar, Zhe Life and Work of St. Paul, i. 412-
420), the subjection of Timothy to the same ritual requires no explanation ; but
if, as most hold, Titus was not circumcised, then no apology is needed further
than to say, the circumstances were entirely different. To have yielded in the
case of Titus would have been to concede the obligatory character of circumcision
for Gentiles as well as Jews; to have left Timothy uncircumcised would simply
have prevented him from finding access to the Jews. Paul acted on the prin-
ciple laid down in 1 Cor, ix. 20. 4. Timothy’s ordination to the work of the
ministry. Not mentioned in the Acts, this may be gathered from the pastoral
epistles (1 Tim. iv. 14; 2 Tim. 1, 14).

Learn.—1. The value of a pious mother.
sion. 3. The influence of a good name.
to all men in order to gain some.
disposal of controversies.


2. The advantage of early conver-
4, The duty of becoming all things
5. The benefit that flows from a peaceful


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. A Certain Disciple named
Timothy.

I. The son of a pious mother.—
The advantage of being descended from
godly parents. The influence of good
mothers. The power of heredity in
religion.

IT. A student of the word of God.—
Instructed in the Scriptures from his
youth. Value of Bible education.
The profit of beginning early,


334


III. A disciple of Jesus Christ.—
Circumstances that favoured his con-
version—his birth and education in a
pious home. What presumably led to
his decision for Christ—listening to
Paul’s preaching, possibly witnessing
Paul's stoning (xiv. 19), Advantages
of early conversion—greater happiness,
longer usefulness, higher advancement
in grace.


IV. A preacher of the gospel. A


ai HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVI.





fitting termination to Timothy’s career.
The noblest occupation a young man
can follow.


The Pious Mothers of the Bible.
J. Jochebed, the mother of Moses.
Ii. Hannah, the mother of Samuel.
Ill. Mary, the mother of Jesus.
IV. Salome, the mother of Zebedee’s
children.
V. Eunice, the mother of Timothy.


Mixed Marriages.

I. Not permissible to Christians
(2 Cor. vi. 14).

II. Seldom beneficial to either party.
The Christian more likely to become
unchristian than vice versd.

I1I. Not to be dissolved, if formed
before the conversion of either (1 Cor.
vii. 10).


Ver. 3. Paul’s Companions on the
Second Missionary Journey.—1. Silas,
or “Silvanus, as Paul constantly
names him, was an older man (than
Paul), who had already made his
appearance in foreign Churches as a
prophet and teacher, and Paul con-
stantly speaks of him as an associate
of equal rank with himself. A prophet
of the mother Church, who in the
moment of general falling away steps
manfully forward upon Paul’s side,
must also have been an energetic and
whole-souled man, of stronger tenacity
than Barnabas and the others, and
that Paul always speaks of him as a
co-founder with himself of the Churches
established in this period shows that
he was to the apostle even more
than an assistant. Then, if Silas was
a sufficient compensation for Barnabas,
who had departed to Cyprus, on the
other hand Paul contemplated supply-
ing the lack of John Mark through
the taking with him of a younger man.
For whilst the disciples of Jesus were
accustomed to set forth two and two,
Paul preferred, for various reasons
suggested by the aim of his mission,
that his travel company should consist
of three. As he formerly journeyed
with Barnabas and Mark, and on the
present occasion travelled with Silas


and Timothy, so worked he afterwards
with Titus and Timothy in Macedonia
and Achaia, and again with two, Luke
and Aristarchus, sailed to Rome.”
2. Timothy. “The fresh young com-
rade whom the two older men now
took with them was even then famed
among the Christian Churches in
Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium. Of no
apostolic scholar is so concrete a pic-
ture handed down as of Timothy.
. . . Through the pastoral epistles to
Timothy we possess a complete tradition
concerning Timothy which neverthe-
less may periectly well include in itself
elements of true history.... But in
any case, out of Paul’s own letters (z.e.,
his acknowledged epistles), it is clear
that Paul could entrust even difficult
commissions to ‘the son of his heart,
his beloved son in the Lord.’ Fixing
our eyes exclusively on Paul’s own ex-
pressions concerning Timothy, we can
see that modesty and even shyness were
fundamental features in his character,
so that Paul occasionally bespeaks for
him a friendly reception that he might
be able to appear amongst those to
whom he is sent without fear (1 Cor.
xvi. 10). Forceful natures, like Paul,
are often conscious of an inward attrac-
tion towards such quiet and gentle
helpers; and just for this reason Paul
rated the modest Timothy far above all
his other fellow-labourers (Phil. ii. 20).
Nor was he deceived in him, since in
persecution and bonds the younger
disciple remained true to him when
stronger natures fell away, and even
after the apostle’s death he belonged to
the best-known travelling preachers of
the second generation (Heb. xiii. 23).
Tradition has endowed Timothy
like another Achilles with eterna]
youth, so that in the epistles to
Timothy, which, according to tradition,
were composed towards the end of
Paul’s activity, he appears the same
youngling as he had been when first
called by the apostle to the holy work
(1 Tim. iv. 12; 2 Tim. ii. 22). Indeed,
so high stood his reputation in the
Church at this time, that his future
career was said to have been pointed


335


CHAP, XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





out by prophet voices (1 Tim. i. 18) ; I. The number of its members.
whilst with great earnestness tradition II. The enlightenment of their
asserted he had been a genuine scholar faith.


of Paul (1 Tim. i. 2).”"—Hausrath,  [11, The cheerfulness of their obedi-


“ Der Apostel Paulus,” pp. 258-260. ence.
Ver. 5. The Strength of a Church. IV. The completeness of their or-
Consists in— ganisation.


HOMILETIOAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 6—10.


Regions Beyond ; or, the Vision of the Man of Macedonia.

I. The hindering Spirit—1. Who this was. (1) The Holy Ghost. The third
person of the Trinity, who proceedeth from the Father and the Son (John
xv. 26), and whom Christ promised to send after His departure from the earth
(John xvi. 7), who came according to promise, on the day of Pentecost (ii. 4),
and had ever since been guidi: g the development of the Church and the footsteps
of its apostles and evangelists (see viii. 29, x. 19, xi. 12, xii. 2, 4). (2) The
Spirit of Jesus—i.e., the Spirit whom Jesus had sent. A valuable statement,
the genuineness of which must be conced:d (see “ Critical Remarks”), confirming
the well-known dogma of the Creed that the Spirit bears the same relation to
the Son as to the Father. 2. When He interposed. (1) After the two mission-
aries Paul and Silas had gone through the Phrygian and Galatian region, lying
on the west and north of Lycaonia. The route pursued by them can only be
conjectured. Probably from Lystra they proceeded to Iconium, and from that
to Antioch in Pisidia, where Paul had on his previous journey founded a Church,
after leaving which they would most likely cross the hills, and, merely touching
Phrygian territory, enter the district of Galatia towards the north. (See, how-
ever, ‘‘ Critical Remarks” and ‘“ Hints” on ver. 6.) Whether they evangelised
any towns in Phrygia cannot be determined. Colossz, situated in the south of
Phrygia, it is not certain the apostle ever visited; but that he published the
gospel to the Phrygians and made disciples seems the obvious deduction from
xviii, 23. That he preached in Galatia and founded Churches there himself
declares (Gal. i. 2, iv. 19). No Galatian cities are specially mentioned in con-
nection with the spread of Christianity in this province; hence the inference
that the Christian communities were scattered about the rural parts. Paul’s
preaching in Galatia was, in a manner, brought about against his will, through
an attack of bodily sickness which detained him in that province, when possibly
he intended to push eastwards to Pontus. What this sickness was is not
recorded, though most likely it was ophthalmia, and presumably had to do with
his “thorn” or “stake in the flesh” (compare 2 Cor. xii. 7-10 with Gal. iv.
13-15) ; and see also xiii. 14 ; “* Homiletical Analysis” and ‘ Hints”). (2) Again
when they assayed to go into Bithynia. This they did when they had come
over against Mysia, which lay north of Asia, and, like it, looked out on the
Aggean. Arrived thither, they contemplated turning north-east to Bithynia,
a province located between Mount Olympus and the Euxine, when once more
they were mysteriously arrested. 3. How He signified His will. This also can
only be surmised. It may have been by an outward voice (Renan), such as pro-
bably directed Philip (viii. 20), or by an inward impression, such as Paul had
already experienced (Gal. ii. 2), by a dream or by a vision, by the voices of

rophets, as in xx. 23, xxi. 11 (Holtzmann, Nosgen), or simply, though
less likely, by some natural occurrence, unrecorded, which rendered it impossi-
ble to carry out their intentions first of going into Asia and next of moving
north into Bithynia. Paul’s rule (2 Cor. x. 15, 16) was not the hindrance.
(See “ Hints” on ver. 7.) 4. What course He appointed. (1) That they should not


336


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuap. XVt.





speak the word in Asia. Politically considered, Asia meant the western portion
of Asia Minor, which included Mysia, Lydia and Caria, Galatia, Phrygia,
Bithynia, Cilicia, Pamphylia and Lycia, but, popularly viewed, it signified the
territory situated west of Phrygia and south of Mysia. Why the missionaries
were prevented from entering it can only have been that the hour was not yet
arrived for its inhabitants to hear the gospel. (2) That they should not pass into
Bithynia. This seemed the natural direction for them to take, if their mission was
not to cross the Aigean. But the Spirit, unconsciously to them, was conducting
their steps towards Europe. Accordingly, once more stopped (at Mysia)and turned
westward, they passed through but did not preach in (the meaning of “ passing
by”) the country, till they came down to Troas on the Hellespont, about four
miles from the site of ancient Troy.

II. The midnight vision—1. The form it asswmed. “A man of Macedonia”
appeared before the eye of the apostle, “standing, beseeching him, and saying,
Come over into Macedonia and help us.” The apparition and the voice were
both supernatural (compare ix. 12, x. 30). Whether Paul recognised the man
as a Macedonian by his appearance, dress, or speech is not related; but as Paul’s
thoughts the day before had probably been much occupied with the Macedonian
land which lay beyond the AMgean, and as the vision, though not created by, had
been fitted to, his thoughts, it is not difficult to understand how his soul, lying
in the hand of God, quickly leapt to the interpretation of thescene. The strange
figure wore the aspect of a Macedonian man—perhaps, from his upright posture,
a soldier (Farrar); the outstretched hands evoked a mute appeal for aid; the
voice sounded like a summons to hurry over with that help which the men
across the water greatly needed, not alone because of the corrupt and decaying
civilisations in the midst of which they were perishing, but because of the
magnificent potentialities for good which lay within them, notwithstanding their
environment as members of the most advanced and active races on the face of
the globe. 2. The inference it suggested. The apostles at once perceived the
reason of that mysterious hindrance they had twice suffered, and, concluding
that God had called them to preach the gospel in Europe, at once took steps to
obey. ‘“‘Straightway, we sought to go forth into Macedonia.” Like the good
soldier of Jesus Christ that he was (2 Tim. ii. 3), Paul always obeyed his marching
orders with military promptitude and precision.

Lessons.—1. The real, though unseen, presence of the Holy Spirit in the
Church and with the true servants of Jesus Christ. 2. The development of the
Christian Church the proper care of the Holy Ghost. 3. The duty of Christian
people, but especially of Christian ministers, to wait upon and follow the
leading of the Spirit. 4. The certainty that guidance will never fail those
prepared to accept it. 5. The loud call of the heathen world to the servants
of Jesus Christ.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. The Region of Galatia.—The
view that this was not Northern but
Southern Galatia, the district in which
lay the Churches of Derbe, Lystra,
Tconium, and Antioch, hasbeen recently
championed by Professor Ramsay, who
offers in its support the following con-
sideration :—

I. The phrase, riyv Gpvyiay kal
Tadarixiy xepav, describes a single


district, the land or territory which
is both Phrygian and Galatian—a
description which the professor main-
tains to be “ strictly true,” and perfectly
inapplicableto Northern Galatia, which
could have been thought of had the
discarded reading of the Textus Re-
ceptus, tyv Ppvyiay Kal tyv Tadarexyy
xwpay, been retained.

II. Roman documents of the first


337


CHAP. XVI.





century show that the district in
which the above-named Churches were
situated might be accurately described
as Phrygian-ttalatic. “In some in-
scriptions,” writes the professor, ‘“ the
Governor of Galatia (in the larger
sense) is called simply the Governor
of Galatia, while in others he is styled
Governor of Galatia, Pisidia, Phrygia,
Lycaonia, Isauria, Pontus Galaticus,
etc.”

ILI. No traveller from North Gala-
tia to Bithynia could come to a point
“over against Mysia,” still less “ to
the frontier of Mysia.” “A glance at
a map (preferably a large map) will
make this clear to all”; while every-
thing is natural, if, after leaving
Phrygian Galatia, the apostle was
making for Asia when his course was
arrested, and again was heading north-
wards to Bithynia, when he was a
second time checked and turned west-
wards to Mysia and Troas,

IV. South Galatia is favoured by the
chronology of Acts.—‘‘ The process of
preaching in the great cities of Galatia
needed in any case a considerable time ;
an invalid, as St. Paul is supposed on
the North Galatian theory to have
been, would require a long time in
that vast and bare country. But the
period allotted on any of the proposed
systems of chronology to this journey
leaves no room for the evangelisation
of Galatia. We may safely assume
that Paul left Antioch on his second
journey in the spring. No one who
knows the Taurus will suppose that
he crossed it before the middle of May ;
June isa more probable time. Say, he
passed the Cilician Gates on the Ist of
June. If we calculate his journey by
the shortest route, allowing no deten-
tion for unforeseen contingencies, but
making him rest always on the Sundays,
and supposing a stay of two Sundays
each at Derbe, Iconium, and Antioch,
and of at least five weeks at Lystra
(which is required to select Timothy
as comrade, to perform the operation
on him, and to wait his recovery), we
find that even if he did not touch
North Galatia, October would be begun


338


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


before he reached Philippi. Eleven
months may be fairly allotted to the
events recorded at Philippi, Thessa-
lonica, Berea, and Athens; and then
Paul went to Corinth where he resided
a year and a half. He would then
sail for Jerusalem in spring. ‘Thus
three entire years are required as the
smallest allowance for this journey,
even if it was done in the way our
theory supposes.

V. Paul’s sickness makes for the
South Galatian theory.—“It is re-
quired by the North Galatian theory
that St. Paul, stricken at Ancyra by
the severe illness,” referred to in
Gal. iv. 13, “took that opportunity to
make the iong, fatiguing journeys
needed in order to preach in Tavium
and Pessinus. Those who know the
bare, black uplands of Galatia, hot and
dusty in summer, covered with snow
in winter, will appreciate the im-
probability and want of truth to nature
which are involved in the words ‘ be-
cause of an infirmity of the flesh IL
preached unto you.’” Professor Ram-
say thinks Paul’s infirmity was the
fever which he caught at Perga, and
which determined him to visit the high-
lands of Pisidia and Lycaonia.— The
Church in the Roman Empire, chaps.


iii., iv.


Vers. 6, 7. Forbidden to preach in
Asia and Bithynia.—The reason sug-
gested for this by Hausrath is that
Paul’s visit to Galatia, and indeed his
entire progress hitherto, had been one
of controversy and struggle. ‘“Con-
troversy in Jerusalem, controversy at
Antioch, controversy in Galatia: that
had been the way which lay behind
him. Perhaps it was just for this
reason that in the year 53-54 the
Spirit suffered him not to turn either
west to Proconsular Asia, where
Ephesus was alieady in the struggle
with Jewish Christians, or to Bithynia
in the north, where in the days of Pliny
at least a strongly coloured Jewish
Christianity prevailed, but called him
by a vision to Europe, where a freer
development of his own peculiar foun.


a HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVI.





dation principle was possible among
the Jews of the Diaspora who were
less closely bound up with Jerusalem”
(Der Apostel Paulus, p. 266).


Ver. 7. The Spirit of Jesus.

I. The personality of this Spirit.—
1. Implied in the actions here ascribed
to Him—“ suffering not,” “‘ hindering.”
Impossible to be explained as a merely
human, moral spirit, or even as ‘the
power of the true religion or of the
fellowship in life which the human
spirit has with God, which has pro-
ceded from Jesus Christ and continues
to work in the Christian Church”
(Pfleiderer, Grundriss der Christlichen
Glaubens- und Sittenlehre, p. 163).
Throughout Acts the Spirit is a Divine
person. 2. Confirmed by other Scripture
representations. John xiv. 26, xv. 26,
xvi. 7, 13-15; Rom. viii. 9; 1 Cor. i.
1G iL 2) Cor. cai. 14, eten, “With
Paul the Holy Spirit is that Spirit
which, according to its origin, is Divine,
but in Christians is Divine-human,
as becoming the peculiar and per-
manent principle of the new man
(Gal. v. 22, 25; Rom. v. 5, viii. 1-15;
1 Cor. ii. 10-15). With John also
the Holy Spirit, corresponding to and
in consequence of the Divine Logos
personality in Christ is definitely con-
ceived of as a separate Divine being ”
(Jbid., pp. 159, 160).

IJ. The relation of this Spirit to
Jesus.—1. Hqual in essence with Christ.
This implied in His association with
Christ in the baptismal formula (Matt.
xxviii. 19) and the Christian benedic-
tion (2 Cor. xiii, 14). ‘As the prin-
ciple of man’s life fellowship with Ged,”
says Pfleiderer (Grundriss, p. 159),
the Holy Spirit with Paul ‘is thought
of at one time as of the same essence
with God and Christ, at another time
as distinguished from both as the gift
of God intermediated through Christ.”
2. Distinguished in personality from
Christ. This also involved in the
biblical doctrine of the Holy Spirit.
Yet the distinction in personality must
not be so held as to contradict the
unity of essence, The existence of


such relations in the Godhead may
transcend human reason, but is not on
that account to be denied. 3. Pro-
ceeding forth from Christ. Not merely
from the Father (John xv. 26), but
also from the Son. Though not so
stated in the New Testament, this
has been accepted by the Christian
Church as the necessary consequence
of the doctrine of the divinity of the
Son, and therefore of the Son’s essential
equality with the Father. 4. Dis-
pensed by Christ. In the days of His
flesh Christ claimed that after His
glorification He would send forth the
Spirit from the Father (John xv. 26,
xvi. 7), and this promise He fulfilled
at Pentecost (ii. 33). 5. Representative
of Christ. That the Holy Ghost should
be the personal vicegerent and pleni-
potentiary of Jesus after His departure
from the world was likewise distinctly
taught (en xvi. 16).

III. The functions of this Spirit
in the Church.—1. The creator and:
sustainer of its life. The new moral
and spiritual nature which belongs to
every individual member of the Church
is a direct production of the indwelling
of the Holy Ghost in the soul of the
believer (John iii. 5; Eph. ii. 1, 10;
2 Cor. v. 17). 2. The revealer and
interpreter of its truth. Whatever
spiritual understanding the believing
soul attains to, he owes to the inward
illumination of the Holy Spirit (John
xvi, 13, 14; 1 Cor, ii. 9-14; Eph. i.
17; 1 John ii, 20). 3. The inspirer
and guide of its movements. As the
footsteps of Paul and Silas were
directed by the Holy Ghost, so are
those of believers superintended by the
same Divine leader (Rom. viii. 14;
Gal. v. 16).


Ver. 9. The Cry of the Heathen—
Come over and help us.

I. The significance of the cry.—1.
The cry of a perishing humanity. 2.
Which bas begun to realise its danger.
3. For that succour which alone can
relieve distress—viz., the salvation of
the gospel.

TI. The parties to whom it is


839


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





directed.—To the Christian Church—
i.e, to those (1) who have that salva-
tion in their possession ; (2) whothem-
selves received it as a free gift; and
(3) who also have been commanded to
make it known to others.

III. Reasons why the cry should be
listened to.—Because (1) it is urgent,
and has been long sounding in the
Church's ear ; (2) those crying are the
Church’s brethren, who, like them-
selves, belong to Jesus Christ; (3)
ordinary gratitude for mercy received,
if not love to Jesus Christ, should
impel the Christian Church to respond
to it; and (4) without the Church’s
aid the heathen world cannot be re-
covered for Jesus Christ,


The Cry of the Nations.

I. All nations ignorant of the gospel
need help.—Arising from: 1. Their
ignorance (1) of God, and the way in
which He is to be worshipped ; (2) of
“the Saviour, and the manner in which
He is to be approached. 2. Their
condition, represented in Scripture as
a state of (1) darkness (Matt. iv. 16;
Eph. v. 8); (2) disease (Isa. i. 6) ; (3)
bondage (Rom. vi. 17; Eph. ii. 2); and
(4) death (Eph. ii. 1).

II. All nations needing help utter
the same cry as the men of iWfacedonia.
—LEvident from (1) the knowledge we
have of their condition; (2) our con-
nection with them in the way of
commerce; and (3) the political re-
lations in which we stand towards
them.

III. It is the duty of the Church of
Christ to respond to this cry.—1. God
has done everything to facilitate our
exertions. 2. He has committed the
care of the inhabitants of the world
to the Christian Church. 3. Christ
commands us to “ love our neighbours
as ourselves ” and to “ preach the gospel
to every creature” imply the obliga-
tion here referred to. 4. Reason and
equity say we should send to others
that which we ourselves received from
others.— Bogue.


340


Ver. 10. The Call to Macedonia.—
The cause which led to the apostle
Paul’s crossing from Asia into Europe,
and the object which he had in view in
coming here.

I. As to the causes which led to his
coming.— While one is referred to in
the text, you will find others mentioned
in the verses which go before (ver. 6).
Thus, even so far, Paul might have
felt himself guided to this continent.
But he was not left to judge of it
merely in that way. It was so im-
portant a step, and such great conse-
quences were to follow on it, that a
vision was given him.

II. And for what object did they
come ?—They drew the conclusion, we
are told, that the Lord had called them
to preach the gospel in that place. This
was the object for which all the
journeys of the apostle Paul were
undertaken.

What are the lessons which we
may learn for ourselves from this
history? 1. From the way in which
the apostle Paul was more than
once kept from going where he in-
tended, kept from going into the
province of Asia, and kept from
entering into Bithynia, and was led on
where he seems never to have intended
to go, to accomplish a mighty purpose,
we learn how God may disappoint His
people now in regard to some plan of
usefulness which they have in view.
2. Another truth which we are re
minded of is, that as this vision was
given to Paul, the man of Macedonia
calling on him to help them, so there
are calls of the same kind continually
made upon all Christian people, which
we need no vision to remind us of,
because they are a reality with which
we are acquainted. 3. And there
is one other lesson closely connected
with this, which we may learn from
what we have been considering to-day
—the exceeding value of the gospel.
This was shown by Paul’s object in
coming over to Macedonia. fF.
Day.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xvy





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 11—13.


Paul and Silas in Philippi ; or, the Gospel carried to Europe.

I, The journey to Philippi.—1. From Troas to Samothracia. No sooner had
Paul and his companions, Silas, Timothy, and Luke, the beloved physician, who
had now joined the apostle (see “ Critical Remarks,” ver. 10, and “ Hints” on
ver, 11), understood the significance of the midnight vision than they proceeded
to comply with the call of the Macedonian man. With the early dawn, having
turned their steps towards the harbour, and found a ship about to sail for
Europe, they engaged berths. As the vessel weighed anchor and shot into the
deep ‘‘the sun rose and spread the day over the sea and the islands as far as Athos
and Samothrace” (Conybeare and Howson). Running in a straight course, or,
in modern nautical phrase, sailing before the (south) wind (see xxi, 1, and compare
xxvil. 16), the vessel would reach the island of Samothrace that day, anchoring
for the night to the leeward of it. Samothrace, the present-day Samothraki,
about half-way between Troas and Neapolis, contains the highest land in this
part of the Aigean except Mount Athos. 2. From Samothrace to Neapolis. “A
run of seven or eight hours would bring the vessel under the lee of the island of
Thasos, and within a few miles of the coast of Macedonia” (Conybeare and
Howson), which accordingly was reached next day. The harbour in which the
four passengers disembarked belonged to the town of Neapolis, the modern
Kavala, in Thrace, on the Gulf of Strymon, and about ten miles distant from
Philippi, to which it served as a port. Hence the missionaries did not linger in
Neapolis, but pushed on towards the capital of the district. 3. From Neapolis to
Philippi. A short journey of not more than three hours would conduct them to
“the chief city of that part of Macedonia,” or to “a city of Macedonia, the first
of the district [see “ Critical Remarks”], a Roman colony.” This city was
Philippi, once an obscure place, called Krenides from its streams and springs, but
erected into a frontier city against the Thracian mountaineers, and named after
himself by the father of Alexander, and constituted a colonia by Augustus, It
was ‘a fact of deep significance that the first. city at which Paul arrived on his
entrance into Europe was that colony which was more fit than any other in the
empire to be considered the representative of Imperial Rome” (Conybeare and
Howson, i. 267).

II. The stay in Philippi—1. How long it continued. Impossible to tell.
Clearly two Sabbaths (vers. 13, 16), and most likely some weeks were spent in the
city (ver. 20). 2. What incidents occwrred. (1) The conversion of Lydia on the
first Sabbath in a -prayer-house by the river-side, through Paul’s preaching
(vers. 13-15). See below. (2) The cure of a Pythoness, or damsel possessing a
spirit of divination, by the word of Paul who, in the name of Jesus, commanded
the spirit to come out of her (vers. 16-18). (8) The imprisonment of Paul and
Silas by the town magistrates, who first commanded them to be beaten and then
handed them over to the care of the town jailor (vers. 19-24). (4) The conver-
sion of the jailor, who was spiritually awakened by an earthquake which shook
the foundations of the prison at midnight, and by Paul was directed how to find
salvation (vers. 25-34).

III. The departure from Philippi—l. After liberation from jail. This took
place : (1) on the morning after the earthquake—‘‘ when it was day” ; (2) at
the request of the magistrates, who had become alarmed at the situation, either
in consequence of the earthquake which seemed like an interposition of the gods
on behalf of the prisoners, or because on reflection they had grown convinced of
the injustice of what they had done (vers. 35, 36); (3) after the remonstrance
of Paul, who declined to be surreptitiously thrust out of bonds after having been


341


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





publicly scourged, and that, too, while they were Romans, and who demanded
that they should be honourably and openly liberated by the magistrates them-
selves (ver. 37); and (4) by the hands of the magistrates, who, on learning that
their prisoners were Roman citizens, feared what might happen to themselves
for having so thoughtlessly violated the sanctity of Roman law, and, like evil-
doers generally who tremble when confronted with the consequences of their
crimes, were exceeding glad to get them peacefully despatched beyond the city
precincts (ver. 39). 2. After visiting the house of Lydia. Having resided there
before arrest and imprisonment (ver. 15), they naturally returned thither on
release from confinement. Not, however, to stay, but to exchange Christian
greetings with, and address words of comfort to, the brethren there assembled, who,
having been converted by their ministry, formed the nucleus of the Church to
which afterwards the epistle to the Philippians was directed. This done, they


departed, but not for ever (see xx. 6).


Learn.—1. That the track of the gospel over land and sea has always been
guided by God. 2. That Europeans have reasons to bless God for having so


early sent the gospel to their shores.
4, That events which seem to hinder may
That the gospel spreads by means of


without His express permission.
eventually further the gospel. 5.
preaching.


3. That nothing befalls God’s people


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. The Writer of the “‘ We” Pas-
sages ; or, Luke the Beloved Physician
(see Introduction).—‘ Of Luke himself,
beyond what we learn of his movements
and of his character from his own
writings, we know but little. There is
no reason to reject the unanimous
tradition that he was by birth an
Antiochene, and it is clear (?) from St.
Paul’s allusions that he was a Gentile
convert, and that he had not been cir-
cumcised (Col. iv. 10, 11, 14). That
he was a close observer, a careful
narrator, a man of cultivated intellect,
and possessed of a good Greek style we
see from his two books; and they also
reveal to us a character gentle and
manly, sympathetic and self-denying.
The incidental allusion of St. Paul
shows us that he was a physician, and
this allusion is singularly confirmed by
his own turns of phrase. The rank of
a physician in those days was not in
any respect so high as now it is, and
does not at all exclude the possibility
that St. Luke may have been a freed-
man; but on this, and all else which
concerns him, Scripture and tradition
leave us entirely uninformed. That
he was familiar with naval matters is
strikingly shown in his account of the


342


shipwreck, and it has even been con-
jectured that he exercised his art in
the huge and crowded merchant vessels
which were incessantly coasting from
point to point of the Mediterranean.—
Farrar, “The Life and Work of St.
Paul,” chap. xxiv.


St. Luke and St. Paul.—“It may
be well to note the phenomena in the
writings ascribed to the physician
which, though they do not directly
indicate his calling, at least fall in
with it and are best explained by it.
... Thus we find him noting speci-
fically the special combination of fevers
(zvperot, as in Hippoc., Aph., vii. 63, 64
—the plural is obviously technical for
feverish symptoms) and a bloody flux
(Svcevrepia) from which the father
of Publius suffered at Melita (Acts
xxvill. 8), and using in relation to the
generous gifts which it called forth the
special word “honour” (ry), which,
like our ‘“ honorarium,” was applied to
the payments made to those who prac-
tised a profession and not a trade (2).
So, again, in the healing of the cripple in
the temple (Acts iii. 7), he records with
a technical precision which our English
Version but partially represents that


©


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:





“his feet” (not the common zodes,
but Bdoces—a word used by Hippo-
crates, p. 637) “and ankle-bones”
(ogpupa) “ were strengthened,” the pre-
vious crippled state being due to the
congenital imperfect development of
the bones and tendons of the feet. . . .
So he stated that the paralysis of
Afineas lasted eight years, and that for
the whole of that period he had been
bedridden (Acts ix. 33); that from
Saul’s eyes “ there fell as it had been the
scales” (doei XAerides) of the incrus-
tation incidental to ophthalmia (Acts
ix. 18) ; and that the damsel at Philippi
had “a spirit of Python,” or Apollo,
‘presenting phenomena identical with
the convulsive movements and wild
cries of the Pythian priestess at
Delphi” (Acts xvi. 16); while as one
whose previous studies had made him
acquainted with the recorded cases of
phthiriasis, such as those of Antiochus
Epiphanes (2 Macc. ix. 9), Pheretima
(Herod., iv. 205), and Sylla, and perhaps
Herod the Great (Josephus, Ant,
xvii. 15), he would note with a special
interest the addition of another in-
stance in the death of Herod Agrippa
as ‘eaten by worms,” oxwAnkdSpwros
(Acts xii. 23).—Dean Plumptre, in ‘‘ The
Expositor” (1876), iv., pp. 137-139.


Ver. 13. An Ancient Prayer Meeting.

I. The place of worship.—1. Outside
the city. Rendered necessary because
of the character of the city which,
being large and heathen, was not much
suited for devotion. Those who wish
to pray should withdraw from both the
world’s bustle and the world’s super-
stition and sin (Matt. vi. 6). 2. By a
river-side. Jewish prayer-houses were
usually erected on river-banks, or at
places where water could be easily
obtained for ceremonial lustrations.
Suggestive of that inward cleansing
which is required by all who would
approach God in prayer (Isa. i. 15, 16;
James iv. 8). 3. In a@ prayer-house.
Not an ordinary synagogue (Schiirer),
there being few Jews in the town;
most likely an open space consecrated
to Divine worship. Prayer may be


THE ACTS.  cHAP. XVI.





offered anywhere. If Christians, for
any reason, cannot obtain comfortable
edifices in which to worship, rather
than not worship at all they should
betake themselves to river-banks, hill-
sides, district moors, dens, and caves of
the earth.

II. The time of worship.—The
Sabbath. Whether on other days is
not clear (see ver. 16); but in any
case the seventh-day worship was not
neglected. Neither should the Lord’s-
day worship be omitted by Christians
(xx. 7; Heb. x. 25).

III. The congregation of wor-
shippers.—A few women; amongst
them some converts to Judaism, like
Lydia (see below). If no men were
present before Paul and his com-
panions arrived upon the scene, the in-
trusion of four male worshippers must
have caused a sensation. Women have
always been more devout than men
(i. 14, xiii. 50).

IV. The acts of worship.—l. Prayer.
This the primary object of such gather-
ings. 2. Reading of the Scriptures.
Though not stated, this may be as-
sumed. 3. Haposition of the word.
As in the synagogue by any capable
person who might happen to be present
(xiii. 15).


Ver. 13. The Opening of the Mission.

I. When was it that they had an
opportunity of preaching? It was on
the Sabbath day. The Sabbath was
the great day on which he knew that
his work was to be done.

II. Observe, then, the place at
which he preached. It was by the
river-side, ‘‘ where prayer was wont to
be made.” There appears to have been
no synagogue at Philippi.

IIT. One other thing to be observed
is, the persons to whom they preached.
They “sat down and spake unto the
women which resorted thither.”

Now, what are the lessons which we
are to learn for ourselves from this
account of the first preaching of the
gospel at Philippi? 1. It is fitted to
remind us of the great practical value
of the Sabbath. 2. Another lesson


343


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a


which we learn from the history,
closely connected with this, is the
importance of meeting together for
united prayer whenever we have the
opportunity. 3. One other thing we
are taught by this passage of history


which we have been considering to-day,
and that is, not to despise any means
of doing good, however small it may
be, which is put within our reach,
We do not know what great results
may follow it.— WU. F. Day.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 14, 15.


A Sabbath in Philippi ; or, the Conversion of Lydia.

I. The antecedents.—1. Lydia’s settlement in Philippi. A native of Thyatira,
on the confines of Lydia and Mysia, afterwards the seat of a Christian Church
(Rev. ii 18); a seller of purple, for which the Lydians were celebrated, the
guild of dyers at Thyatira, oi Badets, having left behind them an inscription
which attests the accuracy of the sacred historian; Lydia, so called not from
her native district, since the name was common among both Greeks and Romans,
in prosecution of her calling had crossed the Aigean and settled in Philippi.
Had she not done so, she might never have met Paul. But a good man’s (and also
a good woman’s) footsteps are ordered by the Lord (Psalm xxxvii. 23). 2. Lydia’s
conversion to Judaism. That like the Eunuch (vili. 27) and Cornelius (x. 2) she
had become an adherent of the Jewish faith, a proselyte, is the clear sense
of the clause, ‘‘ one that worshipped God.” Had she been been still a heathen
she would not have been found in the proseuche, or place of prayer. An
illustration of how God leads those who fear Him and seek the truth (Psalm
xxv. 9). 3. Lydia’s presence in the house of prayer. Had she on that memorable
day when Paul visited the proseuche been absent from any cause—ill-health,
business, pleasure, or indifference—she had missed the blessing that was that
day being prepared for her. A lesson for irregular attenders of the sanctuary.
Compare the case of Thomas (John xx. 24). 4. Lydia's attention to Paul’s words
in the meeting. Lydia listened—all worshippers do not this. Listening for Lydia
proved the way to faith (Rom. x. 17). A hint for careless hearers of the word.

II. The accompaniments.—1l. The opening of Lydia's heart. By an inward
work of grace performed thereupon by the Lord, i.e., Jesus Christ, through His
Spirit. Man’s heart, naturally shut against the truth (1 Cor. ii. 14; Eph.
iv. 18; Rev. iii. 20), can be opened only by heavenly influence (Matt. xi. 25;
Luke xxiv. 45; 1 Cor. iii. 6, 7). 2. The attention of Lydia’s spirit. This more
than such hearing as the understanding gives. The language points to such
inward marking of the truth, whether heard or read, as an awakened or opened
spirit supplies, discerning the suitability of the truth to its needs and laying hold
of the truth so discerned for the satisfaction of those needs. 3. The decision of
Lydia's will, Faith a voluntary act of the soul appropriating to itself the Lord
Jesus Christ as presented in the gospel and a deliberate resting on Him for
salvation (Gal. ii. 20; 2 Tim. i. 12).

III. The consequents.—Confession. 1. By baptism. Necessary after faith in
the case of adults (ii, 38), As to its bearing on the baptism of infants, see
below. Whether Lydia was baptised at once or afterwards and whether
immersed or sprinkled are points not determined. 2. By good works. She
desired to attest the sincerity of her conversion and her gratitude to those
through whose instrumentality it had been brought about by pressing on Paul
and his companions the hospitalities of her roof.

Learn.—1. That God’s hand is in every conversion. 2. That God’s grace
alone can effect any conversion. 3. That without God’s word there can be no
conversion. 4, That obedience to God’s commandments, ceremonial and moral,
best attests conversion.


344


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVI.


—_—_—_—_—_—_—_———oOoOoOoO


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 14. The Church of Christ in
Europe.

I. Commenced in the important town
of Philippi—The keystone of Rome’s
greatness became the foundation-stone
of Christ’s kingdom.

II. Planted by Divine direction.—
God guided the steps of Paul and Silas
to Macedonia.

III. Founded by the apostle of the
Gentiles.—Paul’s preaching the instru-
ment used to convert Lydia.

IV. Originated in a prayer meeting.
The kingdom of God comoth not with
observation.

V. Rooted among the humbler
classes of society ——Not many wise,
not many mighty are called.

VI. Begun with the conversion of a
woman.-—If first in the transgression,
woman is oftenest first in repentance,
faith, and salvation. “In Tinnevelly,
in South India, where are now 120,000
converts, the first convert was a woman.
Clarinda heard Schwartz preach, re-
ceived light into her heart, was
baptised, and by her efforts in obtaining
a native evangelist and in building a
church was instrumental in giving
light to large numbers of her country-
men and countrywomen” (Zenana
Mission Quarterly of the United
Presbyterian Church, No. I., p. 4).

VII. Started with a representative
of commerce.—Upon the bells of the
horses should be holiness unto the Lord.


The First Convert. ;

I. Who was this person that was the
first in Philippi to experience the
saving power of the gospel?—We are
told that it was ‘‘a certain woman
named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the
city of Thyatira, which worshipped
God.” In the account which is here
given of her, I think there are several
things which made it unlikely, before-
hand, that she should be the first
person converted to the faith of Christ.
In the first place, she was a stranger
in the country. She was not a native


she “worshipped God.”


of Philippi, nor even of Macedonia.
She was from Thyatira, a city of Asia
Minor. When the gospel crossed over
from Asia into Europe, we would
expect that the first person to whom
its preaching should be blessed should
be some person of the country. Again,
there was another circumstance con-
nected with this woman which made it
unlikely that she should be the first
convert to the gospel. She was not a
Jewess by descent; she was only a
Gentile proselyte. This is what is to
be understood by the expression that
Tt is almost
the same as that made use of about
Cornelius (x. 2). There is one other
circumstance mentioned concerning
Lydia, which might also have made it
unlikely that she should have been the
first brought under the saving influence
of the gospel. It was the busy trade
in which she was engaged. Others
there may have been in the group
which Paul addressed, the mothers of
families quietly occupied in their home
duties, with such influences surrounding
them as would draw out their minds
in devotional and solemn feeling. It
is not those whom we think the most
likely or the most promising that are
always brought to the saving know-
ledge of the gospel ; but it is sometimes
those whom we would judge the most
unlikely.

II. And now we are to look at the
manner in which she was converted.—
It is very briefly, but at the same time
very plainly told—‘ Whose heart the
Lord opened, that she attended unto
the things which were spoken of Paul.”
I think it means first that she felt
interested in them as a matter of per-
sonal concern. What we each want,
what makes the saving difference in
any individual case, is that God the
Holy Ghost should open the heart to
receive that truth which is heard with
the outward hearing.

III. I can only just refer to what
we are told of Lydia, in the next


345


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





verse, after her conversion.—‘‘ She was
baptised and her household.”—M/. Ff.
Day.


Lydia’s Heart Opened.—Look at this
incident in the light which it casts on
personal conversion.

I. We have the central faculty on
which this change is wrought: the
heart. The heart is the generic term
in which primarily we include the
entire phenomena of the animal and
the spiritual man. Metaphorically it
concentrates whatever distributively
belongs to the physical, the emotional,
and the intellectual nature. In popular
speech it is the organ of vitality ; the
great arterial centre, the common
ground and basis on which all the
functions of life are dependent. In
its Scriptural import the heart is the
normal status that conditions man’s
relations to God. . . . The heart, there-
fore, is the power in man that most of
all needs to be changed. Individual
tendencies, constitutional idiosyncra-
sies, even moral aberrations and
vicious practices, can be arrested and
are frequently mastered by culture.
The heart never outgrows its inherent
depravity. . . . To change the heart
in man, then, whatever else it may
mean, is not merely to amend the life ;
for the life may be superficially cor-
rect, while the heart is utterly false.
For the same reason, it cannot be any
mere intellectual change, such as a
new way of thinking of God, of His
claims, or of His worship; nor yet does
does it consist in any quickened sensi-
bility of the conscience in its outward
reverence for the truth; all of which
are perfectly congruous with the felt,
ascendent alienation of the heart from
God and goodness. . . . The new birth,
as our Lord’s language implies, is the
coming into life of that which did not
previously exist. : Redemption
through Christ is potentially the re-
creation of the lost Divine order in the
soul. Its aim is not to awaken or to
direct merely the religious instincts,
but to renew the soul after the image
in which it was created


346


II. From the subject we pass to the
method of this change.—Let us mark
—l. The supernatural source in which
the change originates. Regeneration
is a supernatural work wrought by the
exercise of a Divine power upon the
soul. It is always this where it is
real. It may not be miraculous, it
probably is not ; it would not be more
real or superhuman for being miracu-
lous; but it certainly is not the product
of human nature. It may be simu-
lated, but it cannot be fabricated by
any art or device of man. 2. A
second characteristic of this Divine
power in conversion is in the variety of
methods in which it operates. In the
instance before us the work was done
silently as the young spring bud is
opened by the morning sun. It was
the sublime serenity of a translation
out of darkness into light. In the
history of the jailor, the same work
is done, not in silence, but in tumult;
not in a translation, but in a resurrec-
tion. Instead of the gentleness of the
budding leaf or the silence of the fall-
ing dew, there were the throes of the
earthquake, shaking the prison walls,
and turning into a storm of agony the
soul of the man. . . . And this variety
in the methods of the Divine working
according to the constitutional differ-
ences in men unfolds to usin perp-tuity,
the mental difficulties with which the
gospel has to contend and the different
methods in which it proceeds in dealing
with them. Uniform in its effects, it is
yet multiform in its modes of action.

III. The reality of Lydia’s conver-
sion was seen in its immediate fruits.
l. She attended unto the things which
were spoken by Paul. If listless before,
if curious only, if speculative, she is
awake now. 2. She was baptised, and
her household. She took upon herself
and upon her home the profession of
the Christian faith.—John Burton.


Vers. 14,15, The Conversion of Lydia.
(Another treatment.) — Remarkable
as—

I. The conversion of a woman.-—The
first instance of such in the Acts.


& HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


Others occurred afterwards (xvii. 4, 12,
34). Relation of woman to Christianity.
What tke gospel has done for woman,
and what woman can do for the
gospel.

II. The conversion of a merchantess.
— Again first example recorded in the
Acts. Trade and religion not in-
compatible. Commerce might be the
handmaid of the gospel. The gospel
fitted to purify and ennoble commerce.

III. The conversion of a European.
Or, at least, of one on European shores.
Once more the first case mentioned in
Luke’s narrative. Whether the gospel
had before this found its way to Rome
is uncertain. But in any case Lydia
may be regarded as the beginning of
the Church of Christ in Europe.


The Conversion of Lydia. (A third
treatment.)

I. How occasioned.—1. By attending
a prayer meeting. 2. By listening to
a sermon.

II. Through what effected—1. By
Divine grace. 2. Through human
faith.

III. By what followed.—1. Baptism.
2. Good works.


Ver. 15. Household Baptism.

I. The apostolic practice. — To
baptise the entire household when its
head became a believer, as in the cases
of the jailor (ver. 33), Crispus (xviii. 8),
Stephanus (1 Cor. i. 16), and no
doubt others, in addition to that ‘of
Lydia.

II. The probable basis.—Not the
faith of each individual baptised. If
it cannot be argued that any of the
households baptised contained children
—though children in a household are
the rule rather than the exception—it
can as little be reasoned that all who
were baptised, assuming them to be
relatives, servants, grown-up sons or
daughters, believed. In the case of
the jailor and his household, it is not
said that they, but only that he
believed on God (ver. 34). Yet they
as well as he received baptism, and


THE ACTS. CHAP, XVI.


probably on the following grounds.
1. The fact was recognised that children
had been included in the Abrahamic
covenant, and through circumcision
were admitted into the Hebrew Church.
From this the step was doubtless easy
to argue that. children of believing
parents should be received into the
Christian Church through baptism,
which like circumcision partook of the
character of an initiatory rite, and all
the more that Christ had not enjoined
their exclusion. 2. The language of
Christ concerning children had declared
that of such was the kingdom of heaven
(Matt. xix. 14); and from this the in-
ference was not difficult to draw that, if
children might without personal faith
receive the substance of salvation, they
might also on the same terms receive
its external sign. 3. The instructions
given to the apostles by Christ to baptise
all nations, “ teaching them to observe
all things,” ete. (Matt. xxviii. 20),
might appear to them to warrant the
deduction that “ discipleship” might
in certain cases, as for instance cf
children of believing parents, go before
instruction and therefore before faith.

III. The warrantable inference.—
That infant kaptism accords with Scrip-
ture. This seems borne out by the view
the apostle takes of the children of
believing parents or of parents of
whom one only is believing (1 Cor. vii.
14). ‘What would Lydia have said”
asks Besser, “if the preachers of the
Lord Jesus had refused to baptise the
little children of her house? She must
have become doubtful of her own faith
—the free gift of God.”


The Characteristics of True Faith.

I. Humble.—Submitting itself to
the judgment of advanced Christians.

II. Learning.— Longing after further
progress in knowledge.

III. Thankful. Both to God, the
prime author, and to man, the instru-
ment (when he is so) of its existence.

IV. Active—Working by love—
“come to my house.”

V. Obedient.—She and all her house
were baptised.


347


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 16—18.


The Cure of a Pythoness ; or, the Slave-girl and the Apostle.

I. The slave-girl—1. Her alject condition. A bond-servant, the property of
several masters, who may have received her by inheritance (Alford), and who
had an interest in her valuable gift, a supposed power of divination. 2. Her
reputed power. That of divining or prophesying, which caused her to be regarded
by the people of Philippi as a python—z.e., as a person inspired by Apollo, like
the priestess at Delphi. 3. Her real character. Not a ventriloquist (Augustine,
Holtzmann), though Plutarch asserts the term python was frequently employed
to describe such, but a demoniac whose insane ravings were palmed off by her
crafty owners as inspired utterances. 4. Her truthful ejaculation. ‘ These men
are servants,” etc. Not to be supposed she merely uttered words of the apostles
either heard by herself or reported to her by others. Her cry an involuntary
because a supernaturally inspired testimony to the character and work of the
apostles, similar to that borne to the Saviour by the demons whom He
encountered (Matt. viii. 29; Mark iii. 11; Luke iv. 41, Vili. 28). ;

II. The apostle.—1. His sore trouble. (1) If Paul’s grief took the form of in-
dignation, as in iv. 2, then its object was not the woman, who was an in-
voluntary victim of the demon, or her saying which was true, but either her
inhuman masters who made gain of her misery, or the evil spirit which had
enthralled her and maliciously designed by her utterance to hinder the work of
the apostles. (2) If of sympathy, then it was directed exclusively towards the
suffering girl whose sad case he pitied. 2. His delivering command. (1) To
whom spoken? To the evil spirit in the girl. Paul unmistakably recognised
the personal existence of evil powers. (2) In whose name? That of Jesus
Christ (compare iii. 6), who had come to destroy the devil and his works. (3) In
what terms ? Come out of her: in imitation of his Master’s language (Marki. 25,
v. 8; Luke iv. 35, viii. 29). (4) With what effect? Immediate healing, “It
(the evil spirit) came out that very hour.”


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. The Dignity and Duty of
Christian Ministers.

I. Their dignity.—Servants of the
most high God. 1. By creation.
Formed by His grace. 2. By pur-
chase. Through His Son’s blood (Isa.
xliii, 21; 1 Cor. vi. 20). 3. By dedica-
tion. As the result of their own con-


went to prayer—probably in the same
place by the river-side where they
originally met—a young woman, a
female slave, possessed by an evil spirit,
who brought her master much gain by
fortune-telling, met them, and cried
after them continually. It appears by
this that the power which evil spirits


secration (Psalm exvi. 16).

II. Their duty.—To proclaim unto
men the way of salvation as: 1.
Divinely provided. 2. Clearly revealed
in Scripture. 3. Humanly easy. By
faith instead of works (Rom. iii. 28).
4. Positively certain. “He that be-
lieveth shall be saved” (John vi. 47) ;
5. Absolutely exclusive—in fact, as the
only way (iv. 12).


Ver. 18. Satan’s Devices.
I. We are told here that as they


548


were permitted at that time to exert
over men was not confined to the land
of Judea, but was known in other
countries also. It shows us the power
of the devil directly in connection with
the idolatry of the ancient world, that
he was working in this way, and in
others, to keep mankind in bondage,
at a distance from the living God.

II. We are told in the next place
after what way this woman, under the
influence of the evil spirit, acted to-
wards the preachers of the gospel—


s HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


“The same followed Paul ‘and us, and
cried, saying, These men are the
servants of the most high God, which
show unto us the way of salvation.”
It was not, we may be sure, with any
friendly object that such a declaration
was made. The very appearing in
this way to praise its preachers might
be in itself a means of drawing them
into disrepute.

III. We have related to us finally
in the text the way in which St. Paul
dealt with this interference to which
he was exposed. He bore with it for
a considerable time—‘“ This did
many days.”

And now, what lessons may we learn
for ourselves from this history? 1. It
teaches us, in the first place, to re-
cognise the power of Satan as working
in the various false religions and forms
of error which are prevalent in the
world. But Satan’s power in sup-
porting false religion has been exerted
not only in heathenism, but in the
corruptions of Christianity. When
the apostle Paul (2 Thess. ii.) is fore-
telling the coming of the man of sin,
he describes him (ver. 9) as one ‘‘ whose
coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying
wonders.” 2. We learn also, from
what has come before us to-day, a


she


CHAP. XVI.





device which Satan, through his agents,
sometimes employs for the hindrance
of the gospel, and that is, leading them
outwardly to join with it. Men would
have said, “‘There is one of Paul’s
converts,” and they would have classed
all together as one band of fanatics
and hypocrites. But that was not one
of Paul’s converts at all. That was a
distinct work of Satan, stirred up to
do him injury. The one is never to be
confounded with the other. 3. There
is one other lesson which we are to
learn, and it is a most happy one, from
the way in which St. Paul is described
as oxpelling this evil spirit in the text,
saying, “I command thee in the name
of Jesus Christ to come out of her.
And he came out the same hour.”
We lo.rn this from it, that the name
and power of our Lord Jesus Christ is
the one force by which the power of
the devil is to be overcome. It is said
(Rev. xii.) concerning the contest
which Christians carry on against him
—‘“ They overcame him by the blood
of the Lamb.” There is no plea but
that even to the very last ; but that is
all-sufficient. Again, to meet the
temptations of the devil, when he
would lead us into sin, the name of
Jesus Christ is the effectual defence.—
M. F. Day.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 19—34.


The First Pagan Persecution ; or, the Imprisonment of Paul and Silas.

I. Before the magistrates.—1. The prosecutors. (1) Their persons. The
masters of the girl. Their hostility formed the first instance of persecution
raised against the apostles by pagans. Hitherto the adversaries of the apostles
had been their own countrymen. (2) Their motive. Because they saw that
through the exorcism of the evil spirit from the afflicted maid their gains were
gone. Their conduct as well as that of Demetrius of Ephesus (xix. 23-31) show
that it is always dangerous to touch a man’s pocket, and that even religion has
little chance when it comes into competition with love of gain. ‘The first way,”
says Professor Ramsay, “in which Christianity excited the popular enmity
outside the Jewish community was by disturbing the existing state of society
and trade, and not by making innovations in religion” (The Church in the
Roman Empire, p. 130). (3) Their violence. Having arrested Paul and Silas
as the principal persons in the company, or perhaps because Luke and Timothy
were at the moment out of the way, they dragged those into the market-place
where the magistrates—in this case the Roman police-executive, the duumviri or
preetors, as distinguished from the city rulers (see “Critical Remarks”)—were


349


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


EN


sitting. 2. The accusation. ‘These men, being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our
city, and teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, being Romans a
(vers, 20, 21). That is to say, they were indicted, not for the crime of observing
their own form of worship, which by Roman statute was a religio licita, but of
doing what Roman statute did not permit, endeavouring to persuade Romans te
forsake their own religious customs and embrace those of (as it seemed) the
Jews, If the charge was in appearance true, since the apostles’ preaching was
undoubtedly being attended by conversions, and the Philippians could not then
distinguish between Judaism and Christianity, it was still in reality false, since
the real head and front of the apostles’ offence was not the publication of a new
religion about which, like other easy-going tolerant pagans, the girl’s masters
“ did not care two straws” (Ramsay), but the interference of his preaching with
their unholy profits, about which they were extremely sensitive, and more
especially the destruction by his miracle of their stock-in-trade, for which they
could perceive no chance of compensation. 3. The multitude. The market-
place mob, composed doubtless for the most part of idlers, out-of-work and loungers
(Matt. xx. 3; Acts xvii. 17), having heard the accusation, and having been
incapable of understanding a defence, even had it been offered, like other eager
and tumultuous rabbles, raised a yell of indignation against the apostles and
demanded their punishment (compare xix. 28, 34, xxi. 30, xxii. 22; Luke xxii.
18). 4. The magistrates. Yielding to the popular cry, without hearing from
the prisoners a word of explanation, far less putting them on trial, the twe
ptetors, representatives of Roman law and justice, who should have studied
equity and afforded their prisoners at least an opportunity of speaking in self
defence (xxv. 16), proceeded to act in flagrant violation of Roman law.
(1) Without troubling themselves to conduct even the smallest or most forma)
investigation, they commanded the apostles to be scourged, in accordance with
the customary formula ordering the lictor to remove the prisoners’ clothes, if not,
in blind fury doing this with their own hands, that on the backs of the apostles
thus bared might be laid ignominious stripes by means of rods—though some-
times more severe instruments such as whips, loaded with lead, were employed
for the infliction of this degrading punishment. That this was one of the three
occasions on which Paul tells us he endured this indignity (2 Cor. xi. 25) there
can be no doubt; and should it be inquired why, as afterwards in the castle of
Antonia, he did not, in this instance, protect himself by making known his
Roman citizenship (xxii. 25), it may be answered either that both Paul and
Silas may have done so, though their voices, if raised, were drowned in the
general din, and the fast-falling blows of the rods” (Lewin), or that in the
agitation of the moment caused by the suddenness of the inhuman proposal
it did not occur to them in this way to rescue themselves, or that if it did they
may have preferred to suffer, thinking that by so doing they would more
effectively promote the cause they had at heart. (2) Not content with having
publicly beaten the apostles, the magistrates cast them intu prison, as if they
had been convicted of a heinous crime, handing them over wounded and bleeding
to the tender mercies of the town jailor with instructions to keep them “safely,”
either in case further proceedings should require to be instituted against them,
or perhaps lest some attempt at rescue should be made by their friends.

II. In the inner prison.—1l. Their degradation. The town jailor, having
perfectly understood what his master wanted, thrust his supposed criminals
into the inner prison, the interior ward of a Roman cell, probably a damp, cold
ehamber, shut off with bolts and bars, iron gates and locks, and totally excluded
from fresh air and light (compare xii. 6; and see “Critical Remarks”), In
addition, improving most likely on his instructions, he made their feet fast in
the stocks, which were pieces of wood drilled through with holes, into which


350


os HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuwap. xvi.





the feet were thrust, and sometimes so far apart as to cause the stocks to become
an instrument of acute torture. Compare the treatment of Joseph in the
Round House at Heliopolis (Psalm ev. 18). 2. Their occupation. So far as can
be gathered from Scripture, this was Paul’s and Silas’s first experience of a jail,
Yet neither of them yielded to despondent thoughts. Their solitary hours were
enlivened, and their pains alleviated by the hallowed exercises of religion, in
which they prayed and sang praises to God, doubtless finding appropriate
expression for their mingled emotions in well-known words from the Hebrew
Psalter (compare Luke i. 46-55, 68-79, ii. 29-32 ; Col. iv. 2). That they could
thus pass the hours of their incarceration, forgetting the pains of their lacerated
bodies and tortured limbs in the inward joyfulness of their spirits, was a signal
testimony both to the sustaining grace of Him who had given them “songs in
the night” (Job xxxv. 10), and to the power of that religion they professed
and proclaimed to elevate the soul above all life’s ills, as Tertullian finely says,
“The limbs do not feel the stocks when the heart is in heaven.” Nor were
their prison devotions without eager listeners on earth, as none can doubt they
found delighted hearers in heaven (Psalm cii. 19, 20). The inmates of the outer
or common cell of the prison had never before heard such melodies proceeding
from the inner or from any ward of a Roman jail, and kept listening, it can well
be imagined, with wonder and amazement. 3. Their deliverance. (1) Effected
by an earthquake, which cannot be successfully explained as a natural occurrence
(Baur, Zeller), which might indeed have shaken the prison’s foundations, but
could hardly have unlocked the barred doors or unloosed the prisoners’ fetters.
That the writer distinctly intended to describe a supernatural interposition on
behalf of Paul and Silas can hardly be questioned, even by those who decline
to accept the narrative as true history ; and that the other prisoners partook of
the same gracious visitation was as obviously designed to arrest, impress, and if
possible save them, if not from earthly, at all events from spiritual bondage and
condemnation. ‘“ When we reflect,” say Conybeare and Howson (i. 282), “on
their knowledge of the apostles’ sufferings” (for they were doubtless aware of
the manner in which they had been brought in and thrust into the dungeon) ;
“and on the wonder they must have experienced on hearing sounds of joy from
those who were in pain, and on the awe which must have overpowered them when
they felt the prison shaken and the chains fall from their limbs; and when to
all this we add the effect produced on their minds by all that happened on the
following day, and especially the fact that the jailor himself became a Christian,
we can hardly avoid the conclusion that the hearts of many of those unhappy
bondmen were prepared that night to receive the gospel, that the tidings of
spiritual liberty came to those whom, but for the captivity of the apostles, it
would never have reached, and that the jailor himself was their evangelist and
teacher.” (2) Accompanied by a trophy of Divine grace in the person of the
jailor who, through the earthquake, was awakened to more than a sense of his
temporal danger, even to a realisation of his spiritually lost condition. For
this he may have been in some measure prepared by his acquaintance with
the character of the apostles’ preaching, of which he had doubtless heard ;
though he could hardly have been affected by their praying and singing, since
during the time they were engaged in these holy exercises he was sleeping.
In answer to his cry of distress—‘Sirs! what must I do to be saved?”—an
utterance which cannot be explained as signifying less than genuine soul concern
—he was first directed to the one and all-sufficient method of salvation by faith
in Jesus Christ: “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved” ;
and afterwards along with the inmates of his household, who by this time had
appeared upon the scene, the jailor’s house being not necessarily above (Meyer),
but on a higher level than the prison (ver. 34), more fully instructed in the way


351


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





—


of the Lord, with the happy result that he believed and was baptised, along with
all his house, rejoicing in God.
III, In the jailor’s house.—1. Before they entered it, while yet in the prison
court underneath, the jailor took them, his lacerated prisoners, and washed
their stripes. A beautiful indication that sympathy, repentance, and gratitude—
three emotions to which, probably, he had been long a stranger—had begun to
dawn within his soul. ‘The jailor,” says Chrysostom, ‘‘ washed them, and he
was washed himself. He washed them from their stripes, and he in his turn was
washed from his sins.” 2. When they were within it, he set meat before them.
‘“‘ His former cruelty was changed into hospitality and love” (Conybeare and
Howson). ‘The two sufferers may well have needed food. . . . They were not
likely to have made a meal, when they were thrust into the dungeon” (Plumptre).
Doubtless by such hospitality the jailor hoped to compensate in some degree for
his previous unkindness, and to evince the grateful affection he now entertained
towards his benefactors. 3. How they left it. With a triumphant acknowledg-
ment of their innocence on the part of the magistrates (see preceding homily),
who, having learnt that their prisoners were Romans, became alarmed for their
own safety, because of having violated the sanctity of Roman law in scourging
two uncondemned citizens, and with all haste caused them to be fetched from
the prison, entreating them at the same time to leave the city. This they
agreed to do, but not before they had visited the house of Lydia, and comforted
the brethren, amongst whom, doubtless, henceforth the jailor took an honoured
lace.
Learn.—l, That natural men as a rule, and occasionally spiritual men, as an
exception, prefer their businesses to religion. 2. That Christ’s ambassadors
need hardly expect to escape persecution of some sort. 3. That when Christ’s
servants suffer God their maker can give them “ songs in the night.” 4, That
no prison doors or bars can keep out God when He wants to be in, or keep in
God's servants when He wants them out. 5. That conversions can occur in the
most unlikely places, and pass on the most unlikely persons.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 20. Preachers of the Gospel, City-
troublers. Because they—
I. Interfere with men’s sinful gains


IV. A means of helping on the
cause of the gospel.


Ver. 25. Singing in Jail.


—being teachers of morality.

II. Expose men’s intellectual delu-
sions—the gospel bringing the light of
truth to the understanding.

III. Change men’s __irreligious
customs—substituting for the worship
of idols that of the true God.

IV. Turn men’s thoughts towards
salvation—-men not caring to be re-
minded of their lost condition.


Ver, 24. Fast in the Stocks.
I. A verification of Christ’s promise.
II. A testimony to the efficiency of
the apostles’ work.
III. A trial of the sincerity of their
faith.


389


I. Not easy.—Requires great grace.

II. Perfectly possible.—Grace can
make a Christian do all things.

III. Eminently comforting.—To
those who are imprisoned innocently
for conscience’ sake.

IV. Occasionally useful.—May lead
to the conversion of the prison inmates.


A Strange Religious Service.

I. The unusual hour of prayer—
midnight.

II. The singular temple—a prison.

III. The remarkable conductors—
Paul and Silas in the stocks.

IV. The strange congregation—tho
prisoners in their cells.—Gerok.


, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


CHAP, XVI.





Songs in the Night.

I. The singers.—Paul and Silas.
1. Their character. (1) Servants of
the most high God. (2) Missionaries
of the cross. (3) Benefactors of their
race. 2. Their condition. In the
night. (1) In the darkness of a
Roman cell. (2) In the painfulness
of bodily suffering. (3) In the sadness
of disappointed hopes.

II. Their songs.—1. The giver of
them : God, whose servants they were
(Psalm xix. 8); Christ, for whose name
they had been cast into prison (John
xvi. 33, xvii. 13); and the Holy Spirit,
in obedience to whose leading they had
come to Philippi (Eph. v. 18, 19).
2. The burden of them. (1) Thank-
fulness that they had been counted
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ
(ver. 41). (2) Prayerfulness for grace
to sustain them while suffering, and
for a happy issue to their trial in the
furtherance of their mission. 3. The
hearers of them. Doubtless the angels
in heaven, but also the prisoners on
earth, Christians when at their devo-
tions are more frequently than they
suspect observed by others. 4. The
effect of them. If they comforted the
singers, they most likely helped to con-
vert the listeners.


Ver. 25. Singing in Jail_— His
presence turns a prison into a palace,
into a paradise.” ‘ From the delectable
orchard of the Leonine prison” —so the
Italian martyr Algerius dated his
letter to a friend. “I was carried to
the coal-house,” saith Mr. Philpot,
“where I with my fellows do rouse
together in the straw as cheerfully, we
thank God, as others do in their beds
of down.” “ Philip, Landgrave of
Hesse, being a long time prisoner under
Charles V., was demanded what upheld
him at that time. He answered that
he felt the Divine consolations of
the martyrs” (Zrapp). (See on
xxiii. 11, ‘‘ Hints.”)


Ver. 26. Opened Doors and Loosened
Bands. f
T. A miracle of power.—Even if


AA
—_—


explainable as the result of the earth-
quake, the earthquake itself was the
work of God.

II, A symbol of grace.—1. Of the
message of the gospel, which proclaims
liberty to the captives and the opening
of the prison to them that are bound.
2. Of the influence of the Spirit, which
breaks the fetters of sin from the soul
and opens the heart to receive the
truth. 3. Of the work of providence,
which opens doors of usefulness for
Christ’s servants and gives them
ability to enter in,

III. A prophecy of glory.—Of the
opening of the prison-house of the
grave and the unloosening of the bands


‘of death.


Vers. 30, 31. The Way of Salvation.

I. The jailor’s question.—1. Jm-
portant. Concerning the salvation of
the soul, the most momentous of human
concerns. 2. Personal, Concerning
individual salvation. Salvation a per-
sonal affair. 3. Urgent. No time for
delay in this concern of the soul’s
salvation.

II. The apostle’s answer.—1. The
simplicity of it. ‘‘ Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ.” Nothing needful but
faith. 2. The certainty of it. “ Thou
shalt be saved.” No peradventure.
3. The sufficiency of it. “ And thy
house.”


Vers. 23-34. The Story of the Jailor ;
or, the Moral and Spiritual History of
a Soul.

J. A spiritual sleeper.—1. Uncon-
scious of his moral degradation (ver. 24).
2. Insensible to his danger (ver. 27).

TI. An awakened sinner.—Roused
from his bodily slumber by means of
the earthquake, he instantly realised
the peril in which he stood—(1) bodily
and temporarily (ver. 27), and (2) spirit-
ually and eternally (ver. 30).

III. An anxious inquirer.— Mani-
fested by his exclamation, “ Sirs ! what
must I do to be saved?” (ver. 30),
which referred exclusively to his deliver-
ance from the spiritual alarm which
had seized upon his soul.


353


CHAP. XVI.


IV. An eager listener.—Thisfollowed
of necessity from his soul agitation
and the sincerity of his exclamation.
Anxious souls always hear the gospel
with avidity (ver. 32).

Vv. A humble penitent.—Evidenced
by his gentle and affectionate treat-
ment of the apostles (ver. 33).

VI. A rejoicing believer (ver. 34),—


As faith cometh by hearing, so does


joy spring from believing. Not joy is
the source of faith, but faith is the
source of joy.

VII. A baptised Christian.— He
and all his were baptised” (ver. 33),
and so incorporated in the Church of
Christ.


Vers. 19-34. The Jailor at Philippi.

I. “Do you, jail keeper of Philippi,
believe in being scared into religion ?
An earthquake—pardon the  sug-
gestion—is a shaky foundation for a
religious resolve. Now do you believe
in religion which begins in fear?”
“The question is stated offensively,
although in a popular form,” such is
the jailor’s reply; “‘but I do believe
that fear is a proper motive to réligion
and in religion. In my case it worked
well. I came into the kingdom moved
by fear, as the history plainly tells you.
Other motives were present, but fear
was foremost. The absence of fear
would have been stolidity. It is the
part of wisdom to be taught by events.
In them God is the Teacher, and when
events are fearful we ought to fear.”
It is worth while to listen to the
testimony of the jailor upon this point,
because current religious thought of
a superficial and sentimental sort
hesitates to find a place for fear
amongst the motives to religion. Fear
‘‘which takes counsel of the reason
and not of the imagination ” is a proper
motive to religion and in religion.
Noah was not playing the part of a
craven in a truly courageous world
when he, ‘‘ moved with fear, prepared
an ark to the saving of his house.”
An apostle made no ill-judged appeal
to fear when he said to impenitent
men, “It is a fearful thing to fall into


354


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





the hands of the living God” And now
let us give to fear its true place amongst
religious motives. Do the great hopes
of the gospel fill and sway our hearts?
Then away with fear! Does the love
of God, like a summer’s atmosphere
full of sweet odours, enfold our spirits
in its warm embrace?) Then away
with fear! Does gratitude, the sense
of infinite indebtedness to Him who
loved us and gave Himself for us, stir
our hearts, so that to lay our powers
and possessions at his feet is only a
grateful and easy task? Then away
with fear. Is the sense of duty so
dominant in our hearts that we are
always ready to make payment of our
dues to God? Then away with fear.
But if none of these higher motives
have control, then, as we love our
souls, we,ought not to allay our fears
in any other way than by seeking the
grace of God to save us from the
danger which occasions fear. It is
conceivable that the jailor might have
reasoned with his fears until all appre-
hension vanished, but in so doing he
would have lost his soul.

IJ. If we were permitted to make
further inquiries of the jailor, a second
query would arise. We should be dis-
posed to say: ‘ You were upon that
night of the earthquake plunged into
the greatest excitement. You were well-
nigh beside yourself. Of a sudden, the
record tells us, you whipped out your


sword to take your own life. This
therefore is our question, Do you
believe in emotional religion?” ‘“ My


own religious life began in a sudden
and tidal sweep of the emotions,” is the
reply. ‘‘They were emotions which I
did not stop to analyse or question,
and which I could not control. Con-
fused, tumultuous feelings rushed and
crowded in upon me. ‘The sudden
manifestation of the power of God,
His marvellous interference in behalf
of the prisoners, His no less wonderful
interposition to prevent the escape of
the prisoners; in some way there came
to me suddenly and with overwhelming
power the feeling that I was a lost
soul; that I could not repress this’


e HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVI.





feeling was my salvation. And besides
this, it is to be remembered that no
life is unemotional.” If a fervent
religious experience seems to any one
the commitment of life to the control
of the emotions, be it remembered that
irreligious experience has its controlling
emotions also. The publican who smote
upon his breast was an emotional man
no doubt, but he was not more under
the power of emotion in his penitence
and humility than the Pharisee was
emotional in the _ self-complacency
which prompted his useless prayer ;
only a Pharisee’s emotion was narrower
and meaner, an emotion occasioned by
thought of self, while the publican’s
higher emotion grew out of his thought
of God. “I thank Thee that I don’t
believe in emotional religion.” It is
wise to turn over the pages of the
Bible, and to review the lives of God’s
chosen ones, the master-workmen of all
time, to see whether. or not their re-
ligion was emotional. The record will
tell us of Elijah’s tempestuous emotion
in the wilderness and before the pro-
phets of Baal. The religion which
God honours and loves and uses is one
which not only convinces the intellect,
but which powerfully sways the heart.
In thoughtful communities the Church
of these last times is in as little danger
of undue emotion as the North Sea is
in danger from the blasts of the sirocco,
a wind which never blows north of
Italy. A philosophic calmness in re-
ligion may proceed from a dim appre-
hension of what it is to be under
condemnation for sin and a feeble
gratitude to our Redeemer. God is
in holy emotions; cultivate them by
increasing your knowledge of Him.
Follow them loyally. Do not think
the Christian heart that never sings or
weeps is the better therefor.

III. Were we permitted further to
interrogate the jailor, we should be
interested to seek answer to a third
question. It is this: “Do you believe
in sudden conversion? You will
pardon us of these last times whose
habits of thought are evolutionary, if
we look upon character as a slow


and steady growth. It results from
education and training and habit and
circumstances. What character is
to-day is the result of what it was
yesterday. To-morrow grows up out
of to-day. Now, can any man be
chanzed at once in the spirit and
purpose of his life?” “That such a
change is possible,” such is the jailor’s
reply, “my own experience is the
sufficient proof. I was converted sud-
denly and thoroughly ; within an hour’s
time I was convicted of sin, found
peace with God, and did the first works
of love. In that hour of visitation
from the Spirit of the living God I
was transformed. That midnight hour


was the pivot upon which my hfe


turned, the hour of destiny when by
faith in Christ I laid fast hold upon
the grace of God.”

IV. There is a final inquiry which
we should place before the converted
jailor, if he were present and willing
to entertain our interrogations. ‘ Be-
lieve on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shalt be saved.” It is of this
answer that we wish to ask: ‘Is
not this a narrow gospel? Are there
not broader conceptions of the way of
life? Is nothing to be said, when this
great question is answered, of civilisa-
tion, of orderly, law-abiding life, of
good citizenship, of morality, of
neighbourly kindness, of a human
endeavour and resolve to keep the
commandments? Surely salvation must
mean good character. Is not the
command too narrow for the diversified
conditions of the good and the bad, the
wise and the ignorant, the cultured
and the uncouth?” “The command is
narrow,’ is the courteous answer, “ but
not narrower than the way of life. Its
adaptation to the diverse conditions
of human experience each man must
determine for himself. JI can only
bear testimony that it was marvellously
fitted to my needs. I needed a power
within to calm the tumult of my spirit,
to quiet a guilty conscience, and that
power came to me by faith in Jesus.
I needed to learn the lesson of human
pity and kindness, and having received


35D


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





faith in Jesus I arose and tenderly
washed the stripes of Paul and Silas,
and set before them the choicest food
my house could furnish. Narrow? In
my case it turned out to be the one
duty out of which came a dutiful life.”
If the command seems to be narrow,
we have only to obey it to find it
exceeding broad. It touches all char-
acter and truth.—W. G@. Sperry.


Ver. 35. Let those Men go!

I. An order of fear.—The Philippian
magistrates to the prison serjeants.
Those who wrong their fellows are
commonly delighted to be relieved of
the presence of their victims; like
Ammon, who, having humbled Tamar,
hated her exceedingly, and said, “ Arise,
be gone!” (2 Sam. xiii. 15).

II. A command of love.—Jesus to
His captors in the garden: “If ye
seek Me, let these go their way ” (John
xviii. 8). A signal mark of Christ’s
affection for His own, in whose behalf
He was going forward to condemnation
and death.

III. A sentence of justice.—God to
believers, in whose room and stead
Christ has suffered the penaly of sin:
“There is no condemnation to them
who are in Christ” (Rom. v.1). ‘“ He
that believeth is passed from death
unto life” (John v. 24).

IV. A proclamation of power.—The
glorified Christ when He speaks over
the graves of His people, as He did at
Lazarus’s tomb (John xi. 44): ‘“ Loose
them, and let them go!” ‘The hour
is coming,” etc. (John v. 28, 29).


Ver. 40. The Brethren in Lydia's
House ; or, the Church at Philippi.

I. Its original members.—1. Lydia.
That this lady is not mentioned in the
epistle to the Philippians may have
been due to her having died or returned
to her native city before the epistle was
written, unless the unlikely supposi-
tion be adopted that she was either
EKuodia or Syntyche. Had the epistle


been a forgery she would most probably
have beennamed. 2. The jailor. The
same difficulty presents itself with
regard to this early disciple, who also
is passed over in silence, which shows
how dangerous it is to draw conclu-
sions from the omissions of a composer.
3. Huodia and Syntyche. Two Chris-
tian females (Phil. iv. 2), who appear
to have been somewhat estranged from
one another at the time when Paul
wrote to the Church in Philippi, unless
the suggestion be adopted (Farrar)
that Paul was only alluding to their
“joint wrestlings for the gospel.”
4. Zyzygus and Clement. The former
term, meaning “ yoke-fellow,” has been
taken as designating an individual of
that name whom the apostle playfully
addresses (Meyer, Farrar, and others)—
an interpretation in support of which
much can be advanced; but doubt
remains whether, after all, it is not
Epaphroditus (Phil. iv. 18), to whom
the apostle refers under this appellation
(Hutchison). Of Clement, whom tra-
dition reports to have been the third
bishop of Rome, Paul’s letter affords
no clue to the identification, resting
satisfied with describing him as a fellow-
worker, whose name, along with those
of others, was written in the Book of
Life.

II. Its original character.—What-
ever it may have become in later years,
when Paul wrote to it, its members
were distinguished by several delightful
features. 1. Steadfast faith. Firm
adherence to the gospel (Phil. i. 5),
even in the face of persecution (Phil.
i, 28-30). 2. Joyful confidence. Exult-
ing in Christ (Phil. ii, 17, 18), and
in their personal experience of his
salvation. 3. Zender sympathy with
the apostle in his labours and afflic-
tions (Phil. iv. 14). 4. Generous liber-
ality in contributing to the apostle’s
needs (Phil. iv. 15). 5. Laborious


activity, working together for the ad-
vancement of the gospel (Phil. i. 27;
iv. 3).





356


rs HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xvii.





CHAPTER XVII.
THE Seconp Miss1ioNARY JouRNEY (PauL AND SILAs)—CONTINUED.


§ 1. Paul and Silas in Thessalonica; or, Mingled Experiences of Success and
Persecution (vers. 1-9).

§ 2. Paul and Silas at Berea ; or, another Good Work interrupted (vers. 10-14).

§ 3. Paul at Athens; or, Alone in a Heathen City (vers. 15-21).

§ 4. Paul on Areopagus; or, Preaching to Philosophers (vers. 22-34).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver, 1. They.—Paul, Silas, and Timothy, Luke having remained behind at-Philippi. (See
on xvi. 40.) Passed through.—The road traversed was the Via Hgnatia, a great military
road, the Macedonian continuation of the Appian Way. Amphipolis.—Thirty miles south-
west of Philippi, on the eastern bank of t!1e Strymon, “ which flowed almost round it and
gave to it its name” (Hackett), Apollonia.—To be distinguished from a town of the same
name in Galatia (Ramsay). Thirty miles south-west of Amphipolis, At each of these towns
the travellers most likely passed a night, but not more, “as it appears the Jews were not at
either town in sufficient numbers to maintain a synagogue, or perhaps even an oratory ”
(Lewin). Thessalonica.—Now Saloniki. The capital of the second division of Macedonia;
a rich commercial city near the mouth of the Ecedorus, on the Thermaic Gulf, about twenty-
eight miles west of Apollonia, Weizsacker, badly off for an objection to the historic
credibility of the Thessalonian visit, finds it strange tiat Paul ‘‘ went, of all places, to the
capital of the province which had just given him such a bad reception”; from which it may
presumably be inferred that the German critic would not have proved so courageous as tle
Ubristian apostle. A (according to the best MHS. the definite article is wanting, though
Hackett and Alford favour its retention) synagogue of the Jews.—Doubtless the only one in
town.

Ver. 2. As his manner was.—Compare xiii. 5-14, xiv. 1. Out of, or from the Scriptures.—
The source whence Paul drew his teaching (compare xxviii. 23).

Ver. 3. Opening.—J.e., giving the sense of Scripture, and alleging—z.e., propounding, main-
taining, or setting forth as the sum of their teaching. Christ should be the Christ. That
this Jesus, etc, should be, that this is the Christ—viz., the Jesus whom I preach or proclaim
unto you.

Wei 4. Believed.—Rather, were persuadcd. Consorted with.—Attached themselves to
(Olshausen, Hackett), though the more correct interpretation is were added by lot to (Winer,
De Wette, Meyer, Alford, Holtzmann, Zockler)—viz., by God (compare xiii. 48; John vi. 44,
xvii. 6). Of the devout Greeks reads in the Alexandrine Codex of the devout and of Greeks,
which, however, is not to be preferred (sce xiii. 43). Of the chief, or jivst women.—See on
xiii. 50. :

Ver. 5. The Jews who believed not.—The best MSS, omit the relative clause, as an inser-
tion from xiv.2. Lewd fellows of the baser sort.—Lit., certain disreputable men of the market
idlers—such as Cicero calls subrvstrani, Plautus sub-basilicani, Xenophon the market-place
mob, 7dv dyopaiov 8xdov, and Demosthenes the knaves of the market, weplrpiupa dyopas.
Jason was Paul’s host (ver. 7), as Lydia had been bis hostess at Philippi. Whetuer this Jason
was Paul’s kinsman (Rom. xvi. 21) cannot be determined,

Ver. 6. When they found them not.—Probably because Paul and Silas were then absent
from their lodging. The rulers of the city, politarchs = the dpyovres of xvi. 19.—Not in this
case, as in that of Philippi, prtors, because Thessalonica was not a colony, but a free city,
possessing the right of self-government in all its internal affairs, within the territory ti at
might be assigned to it, and having magistrates with whose jurisdiction the provincial
governor had no right to intermeddle. An inscription found on an arch at Thessalonica
mentions that the city magistrates were called politarchs, and gives as three of these
individuals bearing the names of three of Paul’s friends—Sosipater (xx. 4), Gaius (xix 29),
and Secundus (xx. 4). ;

Ver. 7. Another King, one Jesus.—Virtually a charge of high treason, a more alarming
charge than that preferred against them at Philippi (xvi. 21), and recalling the accusation of
the Jerusalem Jews against Christ (John xix. 15).

Ver. 9. When they had taken security.—Lit., having taken the sufficient (sum or pledge) =
satisdatione accepta, either by sureties or money. They let them go dwé\vaay (compare xiii. 3).


397


cHap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a ee pee ne etme Ee


—Paul’s language in 1 Thess. ii. 14-16 appears to contain a reminiscence of his experience in
Thessalonica.

Ver, 10. Barea.—Presently Pheria, south-west of Thessalonica, and fifty-one miles distant.

Ver. 12. Many of them believed.— Codex Beze adds, “And some disbelieved.” The
adjective Greek qualifies men as well as women.

Ver. 13. They came thither also and stirred up the people should be they came, stirring up
and troubling (“ and troubling” being inserted in accordance with the best authorities) the
people there also.

Ver. 14. As it were to the sea.—ds with érf may signify intention, actual or pretended
(Winer’s Grammar of the New Testament Diction, p. 640), and some (Grotius, Bengel,
Olshausen) suppose, in accordance with this reading, that Paul’s companions only made a
feint of sending him off by sea,while in reality they conducted him off by the overland route
to Athens—a distance of 251 Roman miles; but the oldest codices (§ A B E) read &ws as far
as to the sea, and this avoids even the suggestion of pretending to go one way and taking
another.

Ver. 15. A commandment unto Silas and Timothy that they should come to him with all
speed.— According to Acts xviii. 5 they came from Macedonia to Lim in Corinth ; according
to 1 Thess. iii. 1 Timothy was sent back from Athens to Macedonia. The statements are
not inconsistent. Silas and Timothy may have followed Paul at once to Athens, (so Ramsay)
from which Timothy may have been recommissioned to the Thessalonians, and Silas to some
other church in Macedonia, both again returning to him in Corinth.

Ver. 16. Athens.—Described by Milton (Paradise Regained, iv. 20) as “the eye of Greece,”
and “the mother of arts and eloquence.” The capital of Attica was situated about five miles
from the harbour of Pirzus, partly on a group of rocky hills, and partly upon the low land
surrounding these, and separating them one from the other. Of these rocky eminences the
loftiest was the Acropolis, which stood almost in the middle of the town, and to which a
magnificent marble staircase led up through the Propyleeum, built by Pericles. Here were,
besides other works of art, the colossal statue of Athene Promachus, the glorious Parthenon,
or Virgins’ house, replete with the masterpieces of Phidias, and ‘‘the colossal statue (of
Athens) of ivory and gold, the work of Phidias, unrivalled in the world, save only by the
Jupiter Olympius of the same artist” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 330).

Ver. 17. In the market.—The Agora, richly decorated with statues, lying between the two
hills, Pnyx on the west and Museum on the south-west of the Acropolis, was “the centre of
a glorious public life, when the orators and statesmen, the poets and artists, of Greece found
there all the incentives of their noblest enthusiasm ” (Zdid., i. 326).

Ver. 18. This babbler.—6 omepuonrsyos. Lit., s-ed-picker, properly a bird, in which sense it
is used by Aristophanes (Birds, 232); hence one who prowls about the market-place picking
up and retailing gossip, or one who lives by his wits; hence, again, ‘a contemptible and
worthless person.” Or the allusion may be to the chattering of such birds, whence the word
may denote “a babbler.” Zeno called by this name one of his disciples, who had more
words than wisdom (Diog. Laert., Zeno, c. 19); and Demosthenes used this expression of
ready-tongued opponents. ‘Many an Athenian is likely to have babbled all the week
through about this babbler at the Areopagus” (Stier). “ Probably the nearest and most
instructive parallel in modern English life to Spermolgos is ‘ Bounder’ allowing for the
difference between England and Athens. In both there lies the idea of one who is ‘ out of
the swim,’ out of the inner circle, one who lacks that thorough knowledge and practice in
the rules of the game, that mould the whole character and make it one’s nature to act in the
proper way and play the game fair” (Ramsay, St. Paul, p. 243).

Ver. 19. Areopagus.—This ancient college of justice in Athens, whose province it was to
pronounce judgment on the worst criminal cases, had its name from the elevation, Mars’ Hill
(ver. 22), upon the east end of which it had its sittings. It was approached from the market-
place by a flight of steps cut in the rock, and on its summit had, also cut in the rock, a row
of seats, in which the judges sat, and room for a considerable number of spectators and
listeners. Ramsay (St. Paul, etc., pp. 241 7f.), thinks Paul was brought before the Council of
Areopagus, neither to be tried by the city judges, nor to address the Athenian people, nor to
discuss with the philosophers, but to explain to the university court the nature of his
doctrines. (See Hints on ver. 19.)

Ver. 21. Either to tell or to hear some new thing.—Compare Demosthenes: “Ts it yovr
sole ambition to wander through the public places, each inquiring of the other, what new
advices ?” (Philippic, i. 11); and Thucydides (iii. 38): “ And so you are the best men to be
imposed upon with novelty of argument,” etc. “It is just the same to-day with the upper
and lower classes in our great cities. It is ever xawédrepdv 71; or, as they are wont to say,
One new thing supplants another ” (Stier). ;

Ver. 22. Too superstitious —Somewhat superstitious (R.V.); better, more god-fearing, more
religious (sc., than others)—#.e., unusually religious; though the word has both senses
Your devotions should be objects of devotion, as temples, images, altars, and the like,


358


¥ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuav. xvit.








Ver. 23, To the (or, an) unknown God.—Not a singular fora plural as Jerome (ad. Tit.
i, 12) asserts: “Inscriptio ar non ita erat ut Paulus asseruit: ignoto Deo; sed ita: Diis
Asiz et Europe et Africas, Diis ignotis et peregrinis. Verum quia Paulus non pluribus
Diis ignotis indigebat sed uno tantum ignoto Deo, singulari verbo usus est.” The accuracy
of Paul's statement is confirmed by the testimony of. Pausanias, I. i. 4, and Philostratus,
Apoll., vi. 2, who both report the existence at Athens of altars to unknown divinities. Whom
.. . Him.—Rather, what ... this.

Ver. 26. Blood.—Omitted by the best authorities. Times before appointed, rporeraypdvovs,
should be times appointed, mpocreraypmévous.

Ver. 28, The quotation, For we are also His offspring, is verbally taken from Aratus, a
native of Tarsus, B.C, 270, who composed astronomical poems, and in one of the only two
extant, the Phenomena, wrote rod yap Kal yévos éoue; though substantially, also, it is con-
tained in the words é« cov (Avis) yap yé&vos éoug& of Cleanthes of Assos in Troas, B.C. 300.
Other traces of Paul’s acquaintance with Greek poetry may be found in 1 Cor. xv. 33; Titus


i, 12;
Ver. 31. Because, did7r. Better, tnasmuch as, xabér. Giving the reason why the heathen
are required to repent. The world means “the inhabited earth.” That man should be “ the”


or “a man”—viz., Jesus, of whose appointment to the office of judge God had given assur-

ance, or confirmation—lit., offered faith, or a sufficient ground for faith (“ Quia res erat vix

ears argumentum adfert eximium ”—Grotius), unto all men by raising Him from the
ead.

Ver. 32. Some mocked.—Perhaps Epicureans. Others, perhaps Stoics (Grotius) or Platonists
(Zockler), said—whether seriously (Calvin, Grotius, Alford) or only courteously, as a polite
refusal (De Wette, Meyer), remains uncertain—we will hear thee again of this matter, or
less happily person.

Ver. 34. Dionysius, the Areopagite.— Obviously a man of note, though nothing further in
known concerning him—at least with certainty. According to tradition he became the first
bishop of Athens (Euseb, A. Z., iii. 4, iv. 23) and suffered martyrdom under Domitian
(Nicephorus, H. #, iii. 11). Damaris.—Conjecturally regarded by Chrysostom to have been
the wife of Dionysius, and by Stier unnecessarily supposed to have been a courtesan.

Note.—On the historic credibility of Paul’s visit to Athens and oration before the
Areopagus.

I. The usual objections to the narrative on the ground of miracle narrations are in this case
awanting, as the apostle is not credited with having performed so much as one wonder in the
capital of Achaia.

II. The special difficulties set forth by the Tiibingen critics (Baur, Zeller, Overbeck,
Hausrath, and others) are so unreasonable that they can hardly claim a refntation. Weiz-
sicker, indeed, without offering any reasons, dismisses the story of Paul at Athens, as of
“no historical value,” and looks upon the speech before the Areopagus as simply “the
author’s conception of Paul’s manner of preaching to the heathen.” By those who give reasons
it is alleged: 1. That the narrative is so obviously full of purpose and reflection that it must
have been manufactured in order to bring out as strongly as possible the contrast between
Christianity and Heathenism. 2. That the apostle could not have introduced his mention of
the resurrection in so sudden and objectionable a manner as is represented, and in fact ina
way so admirably fitted to make the worst possible impression upon his hearers. 38. That
the apostle should have alluded to the Athenians’ characteristic irony as well as to their
peculiar curiosity. 4. That there was no altar to an unknown God in Athens, but only “to
the gods unknown.” 5. That if Paul had been brought before the Areopagus, he must have
undergone a judicial trial—which he did not. 6. That the glory of Paul’s “ hearing ” before
the Areopagus, or highest Greek tribunal, was simply invented as a parallel to the account
given of Stephen’s appearance before the highest Jewish court. 7. That the last section of
the oration breaks off so suddenly as to show that the composer has been without accurate
information about what actually occurred. So far as th. e and other similar difficulties
require explanation, that is furnished either in the “Cvitical Remarks” or under the
“ Homiletical Analysis”; but their purely arbitrary and subjective character shows the straits
to which the opponents of the credibility are reduced.

III. The sufficient answer to all that can be urged against Luke’s narrative is that it bears
on its surface evident marks of its truthfulness. 1. The Pauline conceptions and expressions
it contains, which are too numerous to have been invented. Compare, ¢g., ver. 27 with
Rom. i. 19, 20; ver. 26 with Rom. v. 12; 1 Cor. xv. 45 ; ver. 30, “times of ignorance,” with
Rom. iii. 25; ver. 31, “the judgment of the world through Christ,” with 2 Cor. v.10. 2. The
exact acquaintance which it shows with the thoughts and manners of the Athenians, as these
are borne witness to by classical writers—as, é.g., with (1) the habit of the Athenians to ask
after new things ; (2) the devotion of the Athenians to idolatry; (3) the existence in Athens
of a worship of unknown gods; and (4) the belief which prevailed in Athens of the superior
origin of their progenitors (see on these points the “Critical Remarks” and “ Homiletical


359


cHap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








Analysis”)—an acquaintance much more easily explained by supposing Luke’s narrative to
have proceeded from an eye and ear witness such as Paul, than from a second century
fabulist. 3. The possibility of Luke obtaining accurate information ahout the whole Athenian
visit, either from Paul himself or from Dionysius and Damaris, all of whom may have
preserved written notes ot what tvok place. 4. The difficulty of discovering how a second
century writer could have manufuctured the incident and far less the discourse. The
suggestion that these were freely constructed out of Paul’s first epistle to the Thessalonians
is totally inadequate as a solution of the problem.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—9.


Paul and Silas at Thessalonica ; or, Mixed Experiences,

I. Their arrival in the city.—1. How they reached it. By passing through
Ampbhipolis and Apollonia, towards which they directed their steps on departing
from the house of Lydia (xvi. 40). The first of these towns lay thirty-three
miles from Philippi in a south-westerly direction, the second thirty from
Awmphipolis and thirty-seven from Thessalonica. In all a journey of a hundred
miles was undertaken, which might easily have been performed in three or
four days. The first town, anciently called the “Nine Ways,” from the
number of Thracian and Macedonian roads which converged at it, stood
back three miles from the sea, on the east bank of the Strymon, which,
flowing round it, gave it its name. The exact site of the second town has
not been ascertained, although the road to it must have lain through scenes
of surpassing loveliness. 2. How they found it. In those days Thessalonica
—the modern Saloniki, with a population of 70,000, of whom a third are
Jews—was a rich commercial city, near the mouth of the Echedorus. Originally
called Therma, its name was changed by Cassander, the son of Antipater, and
one of Alexander’s generals, who rebuilt it, into Thessalonica, after his wife, who
was a daughter of Philip. For the historic associations connected with Thessa-
lonica see Conybeare and Howson’s Life and Epistles of St. Paul, i. 298. When
Paul and Silas for the first time entered this town “it was the most populous of
all the cities of Macedonia, and the capital of the whole province,” where “the
Roman Proconsul, attended by six lictors and their fasces, held his court, attended
by his privy council, or Board of Advice, composed of select illustrious Romans,
with whom he conferred on all matters of state” (Lewin). Its dense heathenism,
moreover, was relieved by the presence of only one Jewish synagogue, while its
streets were crowded by “lewd fellows of the baser sort,” “vile fellows of the
rabble,” or market-place tramps. 3. How long they remained in it. At least
three Sabbaths (ver. 2), and possibly three full weeks, during which, it may be
safely assumed, the four missionaries were not idle, and Paul specially kept
working night and day (1 Thess. ii. 9). There is even ground for thinking Paul
must have stayed several months in Thessalonica, as during that period he twice
received pecuniary assistance from Philippi (Phil. iv. 15, 16).

II. Their procedure in the city.—l. Their lodging. This, the procuring of
which naturally formed their first concern, they found in the house of one Jason,
a Grecised form of Jesus, a Jew, to whom “they may have brought letters of
introduction from the disciples at Philippi” (Lewin), or who may have been a
kinsman of Paul’s (Rom. xvi. 21), though too much significance may be attached
to similarity of name, If the individual here mentioned was a relative of Paul’s
he must have been with the apostle at Corinth when he wrote the epistle to the
Romans. 2. Their living. This may have been provided gratuitously by Jason,
though that is unlikely. The epistle to the Thessalonians (1 ii. 9) rather shows
that Paul and his companions laboured night and day, if not at their ordinary
trades, at some form of manual labour, to furnish for themselves such scanty
supplies as their modest wants demanded. The Philippians, indeed, once and


360


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. ocnapP. XVI.
ar ee es


again forwarded money contributions (Phil. iv. 15, 16) to the apostle while in
Thessalonica; but if, as he himself states, he had suffered the loss of his whole
worldly property in Philippi (Phil. iii. 8), and if, as there is reason to believe,
while he was there, wheat stood at famine prices in Thessalonica, a peck of
wheat being sold, according to Eusebius, for six drachme, or four shillings and
sixpence, being six times the usual price (see Lewin, vol. i., p. 258), the amounts
received from his grateful converts would hardly dispense him or his companions
—NSilas, Timothy, and Luke—from the necessity of supporting themselvis hy
their own hands, 3. Vheir preaching. MHere the narrative loses sight of Silas
and speaks exclusively of Paul, concerning whose ministrations it furnishes the
amplest details. (1) The place in which they were held was the synagogue, the
only one then, though now Saloniki can boast of nearly forty Jewish churcl es.
2) The time was the Sabbath, the ordinary season for worship, in selecting
which Paul followed his usual custom of seeking the earliest hearing for his
gospel from his countrymen (compare xiii. 5, 14; xiv. 1). (3) The text-book
from which his expositions and exhortations were drawn was the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, which he regarded as the word of God and the New Testa-
ment Church’s manual of salvation. (4) The thesis in support of which he
reasoned said that Jesus of Nazareth was the Hebrew Messiah who had been
promised to the fathers, obviously a suitable starting-point from which to addrevs
a Jewish audience. A preacher’s success with his hearers depends, to no small
extent, on the way in which he opens his discourse. (5) The method in which
he sought to establish this proposition was not by noisy declamation or dogmatic
assertion, least of all by vulgar sensationalism, but by calm reasoning, app aling
to the Scriptures for the evidence on which he based his proposition, exj ounding
the meaning of the prophecies that spoke of the Messiah, and showing how they
all had received their fulfilment in Jesus of Nazareth. (6) The proof which he
deduced from Scripture consisted in this, that according to these prophecies “ Christ
must needs have suffered and risen again from the dead” (compare ii. 24—31,
iii. 18, xiii. 2737; Luke xxiv. 44), and that, according to actual fact, Jesus of
Nazareth had risen from the grave. (7) The effect produced by his disputations
was such that a considerable number of his hearers were converted. First, some
of the Jewish worshippers came over to his side, among them Secundus (xx. 4),
Aristarchus (xix. 29, xx. 4; Col. iv. 10; Philem. 24), and perhaps Gaius (xix. 29).
Next, a great multitude of the Greek proselytes (according to another reading
“of the devout and of Greeks”) attached themselves to the new faith. Lastly,
not a few of the chief (or first) women—+.e., occupying a leading position in the
town (compare xiii. 50), espoused the new cause. WV.B.—<As all the above, unless
the other reading be adopted, were practically gathered from Judaism, while
Paul speaks of the Thessalonian Christians as having been drawn from those
who worshipped idols (1 Thess. i. 9; ii, 14), it has been surmised that Acts
preserves the result only of Paul’s three Sabbaths’ reasonings in the synagogue,
and that either he preached to the Gentiles during the week (Neander) or spent
a longer time in Thessalonica preaching to the Gentiles after he had been
excluded from the synagogue, and before the incidents next recorded (Paley).
See above, I. 3.

III. Their treatment in the city.—1. Their work hindered. Perceiving the
success which had attended the apostle’s preaching in drawing away frcm the
synagogue so large a body of converts, “‘a greater multitude of adherents than
they had won during many years to the doctrines of Moses” (Farrar), indignant
at seeing the strange missionaries teaching the Gentiles (1 Thess. ii. 16), and
perhaps furious at their losing the resources, reverence, and adhesion of the
leading women of the city (Farrar), the unbelieving Jews followed the example
of their co-religionists at Antioch (xiii. 50), Iconium (xiv. 2), and Lysira (xiv. 19),

361


cHap.xvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





and excited against the evangelists a fresh persecution, calling to their aid
“certain lewd fellows of the baser sort,” the roughs and scoundrels, loafers and
loiterers of the city, the men of the market-place, the street-walkers, and raising
a hue and cry against the objects of their rage (see “Critical Remarks”). 2. Theor
lodging assaulted. Jason’s house, surrounded by the mob, was broken into in
hope of finding his hated guests (compare Gen. xix. 4-11). The ostensible
ground of attack was that Jason had granted these wandering preachers a
lodging; the real purpose was to fetch these out before the people, demos, or
popular assembly, in which their condemnation would at once have been secured.
Had the apostles, at the moment, been within Jason's house, they would certainly
have been arrested. As, however, they were absent, Jason and certain brethren—
i.e., Thessalonian converts with him at the time—were a)prehended and forcibly
dragged before the city-rulers, or politarchs (see “Critical Remarks”). 3. Their
names traduced. The absent missionaries were charged—not with being Chris-
tians, which had not yet become a crime in the Roman empire—but with being
(1) revolutionaries, men who were aiming at turning, and who in some measure
actually had, “turned the world upside down” ; and (2) rebels—persons who acted
contrary to the decrees of Cesar, saying, “ There is another king, one Jesus,” and
who therefore were, to all intents and purposes, guilty of high treason. The
decrees of Csesar were the Julian Laws, which enacted that whosoever violated the
majesty of the State, or insulted the emperor by casting a stone at his image,
would be counted asa traitor. As intended by its promoters, the accusation was,
of course, false (compare Luke xxiii. 2; John xix. 12, 15), though it found a
seeming warrant in the character of Paul’s preaching at Thessalonica, which talked
about Christ’s kingdom and glory (1 Thess. i. 10, i. 19, ili. 13, iv. 13-18, v. 1, 2;
2 Thess. i. 5, 7-10; ii. 1-12); in another sense than theirs it was perfectly
true (see below, ‘‘ Hints,” etc.). 4. Their departure rendered necessary. The
magistrates, alarmed for the peace of the city, demanded security—perhaps by
sureties or by a sum of money—from Jason and his brethren, not that Paul and
Silas would appear for trial, since these were forthwith sent away from the
town, but that no attempt would be made against the supremacy of Rome, and
that the quiet of the town would not be disturbed. As this could hardly be
secured while Paul continued preaching within its precincts, it was necessary
for him to depart. This, accordingly, he did, taking with him Silas and Timothy,
the brethren in Thessalonica sending them off secretly, under cover of the
darkness, and, no doubt, with affectionate farewells, to the out-of-the-way town
of Berea.

Learn—1. The unwearied diligence which Christ’s ambassadors should exhibit.
2. The value of the Old Testament as a storehouse of proofs of Christ’s Messiah-
ship and divinity. 3. The proper subject of Christian preaching—that Jesus is
the Christ. 4. The most effective style of preaching—that which is based on
Scripture and aims at the heart, through the understanding. 5. The success
which commonly results from faithful preaching. 6. The inveterate hostility
of the evil heart towards the gospel. 7. The slanders which are often hurled
against the followers of Christ.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. The Death and Resurrection accomplish God’s counsel—which had
of Christ a Necessity. foreordained that Christ should die
I. His death necessary.—1. Tofulfil (iv. 28; 1 Peter i. 19, 20; Gal. iv. 4).
Scripture—which as God’s word could 3. To atone for the sins of men—by
not be broken (John x. 35). 2. To the shedding of His blood (2 Cor. v. 21;


362


+ FIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVII.





Col. i. 14; Heb. ix. 12). 4. To perfect
His example of holiness—since in thus
taking the sinner’s place He gave to
mankind the highest demonstration of
self-sacrificing love (1 Peter ii. 21;
1 John iii. 16).

II. His resurrection necessary.—
1. To fulfil Scripture, which had fore-
told His rising from the dead. 2. To
demonstrate His Divine sonship, with-
out which He could not have been a
Saviour for man. 3. To attest the
acceptance of His atoning work, evi-
dence of which would have been a-
wanting had He not risen. 4. To
perfect Him as a Saviour, by showing
Him to have life in Himself and all
power in heaven and on earth, and
therefore to be able to save to the
uttermost, etc.


Ver. 6. Turning the World upside
down.

I. A malicious calumny.—As used
by the Thessalonian Jews about Paul
and Silas, and as still directed by the
unbelieving world against ministers,
missionaries, and Christian people
generally, who are not either—1. politc-
cal revolutionaries, in their tenets or
their actions, Christianity enjoining
submission for conscience’ sake and
Christ’s sake to the powers that be
(Rom. xiii. 1); or 2. social agitators,
their religion teaching them to follow
peace with all men (Heb. xii. 14), to
lead a quiet and peaceable life (1 Tim.
ii. 2), and to study the things that
make for peace (Rom. xiv. 19).

II. A glorious truth.—In a sense
not intended this indictment expressed
the truth concerning Paul and Silas, as
it still does about Christian preachers
and professors. It is the aim of these,
as it was of Paul and Silas, to turn the
world upside down. 1. In its beliefs,
leading it from trust in idols to faith
in God and Jesus Christ. 2. In its
actions, turning them from sin to holi-
ness, and from the bondage of Satan to
serve the living God. 3. In its hopes,
directing it to seek its chief good above
and not below, in heaven rather than
on earth.


Ver. 7. Another King, one Jesus.

I. His sovereignty.— Rests on 1. The
appointment of Heaven. Christ is a
king by Divine right (Psalm ii. 6; Acts
v. 31; Phil. ii. 9-11). 2. The affections
of His subjects. His enemies do not
wish Him to reign over them, but His
friends do (Luke xix. 27).

II. His empire. 1. Its extent. The
universe (Matt. xxviii. 18), including
the nations (Dan. vu. 14), and the
Church (John i. 49; xviii. 36; 1 Cor.
xv. 24; Col. i. 18), as well as angels,
principalities, and powers (1 Peter iii.
22). 2. Its character. Spiritual, not
of this world, a kingdom of truth and
righteousness (John xviii. 36). 3. Its
duration. Eternal. It shall never
pass away (Rev. xi. 15) till the end of
this mediatorial dispensation (1 Cor.
xv. 28).

III. His rule. A rule 1. Of right-
eousness (Psalm xlv. 6; Isa. xxxii. 1),
2. Of love (Psalm cx. 3). 3. Of salva--
tion (Zech. ix. 9). ;


Illustration —“‘ After an absence of
twenty months Andrew Melville re-
turned to Scotland and resumed his
office at St. Andrew's, He was re-
peatedly elected Moderator of the
General Assembly and Rector of the
University. A remarkable instance of
his plain speaking took place at Cupar,
in 1596. Melville was heading a
deputation to remonstrate with the
king. James reminded the zealous
remonstrant that he was his vassal.
‘Sirrah !’ retorted Melville, ‘ye are
God’s silly vassal; there are two kings
and two kingdoms in Scotland; there
is King James, the head of this Com-
monwealth, and there is Christ Jesus,
the King of the Church, whose subject
James VI. is, and of whose kingdom he
is not a king, nor a lord, nor a head,
but a member.’” (Chambers’ Encyclo-
pedia, art. Melville, Andrew).


Vers. 1-9. Paul’s Visit to Thessalo-
nica.

I. A time of uninterrupted labour.
1. Providing for his own maintenance


363


cuap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








2. Publishing the gospel. 3. Arrang- III. A season of spiritual joy. Be-
ing for the welfare of his converts. cause of—1. The hearty reception which

Il. A period of growing influence. his message received; 2. The numerous
Extending 1. Among his own country- converts it gained ; and 3. The practical
men. 2. Next among the Gentiles. influence these exerted in the com-
3. Finally among the leading citizens, | munity.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 10—15.


Paul and Silas among the Bereans ; or, Another Good Work interrupted.

I. The Berean Jews commended.—1. Their noble disposition. Though Bercea,
now Karra-Verria, to which secluded town the three missionaries repaired on
quitting the Macedonian capital, lay only forty-five miles towards the south,
yet the character of its Jewish colony compared favourably with that of the
larger city. Indeed, the members of its synagogue were ‘‘less obstinate, less
sophisticated,” than any Paul had elsewhere found. Their minds were les:
contracted by prejudice, and their hearts less inspired by malice. Ready to
receive the word the moment it was proved to be true, they likewise showd
themselves to be profoundly interested in what the apostle preached. “ The
nobler conduct of the Berean Jews consisted in their freedom from that
jealousy, which made the Jews in Thessalonica and many other places, en-
raged when the offer of salvation was made as freely to others as to them-
selves” (Ramsay, St. Paul, ete., p. 232). 2. Their ingenuous conduct. Inst.ad
of angrily rejecting what was submitted to their judgment, they dealt with
it as upright and honest men. (1) They accorded it a candid hearing, which
is more than many nominal Christians do; they shut it not out from their
understandings by preliminary prejudice against or indifference towards it,
as is the habit of many mderns, but frankly and openly allowed it to fill
their minds in such a way that at least they accurately comprehended its im-
port. (2) They searched the Scriptures daily whether the doctrines propounded
by Paul could be found therein, or were by fair and legitimate argument deducible
therefrom. Instead of sitting in judgment on Paul’s preaching, and determining
ij »,evedibility by @ priori considerations suggested by the natural reason, they
humbly and respectfully accepted the Old Testament Scriptures as the ultimate
court of appeal. If Paul’s ideas concerning Jesus Christ could be sustained
before this tribunal then all controversy concerning them was at an end; if
they could not, just as decidedly and promptly must they be rejected. It was a
clear and a fair issue which was thus raised. Probably Paul had the Berceans
in his mind when he afterwards exhorted the Thessalonians to “ prove all things
and hold fast that which is good” (1 Thess. v. 21). (3) They in large numbers
believed, their example being followed by not a few Greek women and men
both of honourable estate—i.e., belonging to the first families in the town.
Sopater of Bercea (xx. 4), it may be presumed, was at this time won for
Seas In all respects the Berceans afforded a worthy ‘pattern for gospel

earers.

II. The Thessalonian Jews discommended.—l. Their persons distinguished.
The parties referred to are expressly stated to have been the unbelieving Jews.
who had stirred up the Thessalonian populace against Paul and Silas (ver. 5), and
to whom, through some secret channel, intelligence had been conveyed of the
extraordinary success of these evangelists at Berea. 2. Their motive specified.
This was, on the one hand, to hinder the progress of the gospel which they had
learnt was being preached with acceptance among the Berceans, and on the
other hand to “ overwhelm the apostate from the law of Moses” (Lewin). Their
proper ancestors were the Pharisees of Christ’s day, who would neither enter into


364


’ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


—


CHAP. XVII.


the kingdom of heaven themselves, nor suffer those who were entering to go in
(Matt. xxiii. 13), and who ultimately crucified the Prince of Life and Lord of
Glory. 3. Their behaviour described. Having come to Berea they stirred up
and troubled the people there as at Thessalonica (ver. 8), by circulating the same
calumnies and organising the same lewd fellows of the baser sort against the
missionaries. Their hatred of both Paul and his gospel unsleepingly pursued
him henceforth from city to city. 4. Their success recorded. Not directly, but
indirectly, by the circumstance narrated that Paul’s friends deemed it prudent to
hasten his departure from the city, as the brethren in Thessalonica had coun-
selled his withdrawal from that city (ver. 10), and as formerly other friends had
hurried him from Jerusalem (ix. 30). He had been anxious to return to his
converts in Thessalonica (1 Thess. ii. 18), but Satan in the person of these
persecuting Jews from Thessalonica had hindered. The path of providence for
him lay southwards to Athens. Immediately therefore the brethren conveyed
him as far as the seaport of Dium, sixteen miles from Bercea, and shipped him
for the Greek metropolis. Some of them even accompanied him all the way to
the Achaian capital, because Silas and Timotheus were left behind in Bercea to
continue the work which he had so auspiciously begun, to preach the gospel and
to organise the Church, while he, the apostle, owing either to his weak eyesight
or to some other bodily infirmity, was not fit to travel alone.

Learn.—1. The duty of hearing the gospel with an open mind, 2. The
propriety of proving all things and holding fast that which is good. 3. The
suitability of the gospel for persons of the highest estate. 4. The inveterate
hostility of the carnal heart against what is good. 5. The fickleness of crowds.
6. The wisdom of attempting to preserve useful lives. 7. The dependence of
most men upon the services of others.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. True Nobility of Mind. Book, but of the infallible Author of
Evinced in three things. the Book.—G. Brooks.
I. Readiness to receive the word.
II. Diligence in searching the Scrip-
tures.


Searching the Scriptures. .
I. A blessed right.—1. Conferred by
God. 2. Due to man.


III. Faith in the person of Jesus of
whom the word speaks.


Ver. 11. The Elements of a Truly
Noble Spirit.—1. Attention to religion.
It is the highest kind of truth and the
grandest object of pursuit, 2. Can-
dour in religious inquiry. Prejudices
are bars to fair dealing. Idols. Cob-
webs. 3. The exercise of the right of
private judgment. It is mean to sur-
render this right to a Pope or a priest.
Tt is not less mean to surrender it to
great thinkers and great dreamers.
4, Deference to the authority of Scrip-
ture. Man never occupies a more noble
position than when, like a little child, he
submits his own feeble faculties to the
guidance of the oracles of Him that
cannot lie. It is not worship of the


3. Not to be
withheld by either State or Church.
II. A holy duty.—l. Commanded


by God. 2. To be faithfully per-
formed. 3. Not to be neglected with-
out sin.


III. An inestimable privilege. —
Considering, 1. Whose word the scrip-
tures is. 2. The benefit resulting
therefrom. 3. The unworthiness of its
recipients.

IV. A rare art.—To be practised—
1. Daily. 2. With intelligence. 3. In
faith. 4. Diligently. 5. With prayer.


Vers. 11, 12. The Noble Bereeans.

I. Heard the gospel.—1. With de-
vout attention. 2. With impartial
candour. 3. With careful investi-
gation.


365


CHAP. XVII.


TI. Experienced its effects.—1. They
believed its statements. 2. They en-
joyed its privileges. 3. They obeyed
its precepts.

Ill. Exhibited their own nobility.
-—1. Adopted a noble conduct. 2. Dis-
played a noble spirit. 3. Presented a
noble example.


Docility of Temper in Relation to the
Truth.

I. The teaching, the recognition of
which the writer commends.—1. The
“ word,” more fully expounded in the
opening verses of the chapter, con-
tained two propositions—viz., (1) that
the Messiah, when He appeared in
accordance with the Scriptures, was to
appear as a suffering Messiah ; and (2)
that the Jesus whose history and cruci-
fixion Paul was then recounting, was,
in fact, that Messiah. This a position
which he only would take, who was
sure of his ground, and who felt that he
could make it good by the most in-
dubitable proofs. 2. The truth of
this word the apostle established
by an appeal to the highest authority—
viz., the Scriptures, “the Old Testa-
ment documents in whose inspiration
he and his Jewish hearers equally be-
lieved.” “By a careful comparison of
your inspired Scriptures with the
veritable facts of which our whole
nation is cognisant,” he practically
said, “‘we have found, beyond all
doubtful disputation, that all that was
foreshown, typified, and promised, con-
cerning the Messiah of our ancient
hope, has met its fulfilment in the
person and history of this Jesus whom
I preach unto you.”

II. The spirit in which this teach-
ing was received.—‘ With all readi-
ness of mind.” Here is—l. The
docility of temper which belongs to the
right reception of truth. ‘ The Berceans
were in that balanced equipoise of mind
which, equally removed from a listless
indifference on the one hand and a self-
complete and haughty presumption on
the other, left them at liberty to listen
with attention to the apostle’s reason-
ing, to think dispassionately on it, and,


366


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





finally, to draw logically their own
conclusions from it. 2. The fearless
honesty and manly independence of
spirit which ought to mark inquirers
after the truth. “The great question
with which the Berceans charged
themselves was, whether those things
were true as the apostle put
them, whether they were founded on
fact, and were therefore accessible to
the ordinary methods of moral con-
viction. It was not whether they
were agreeable or in harmony with
their preconceptions, or with their be-
liefs and customs ; whether they were
ably reasoned by the apostle or ill ; but
whether they were true.”

lil. The result which followed on
this procedure-—‘“ Therefore many of
them believed.” This result was—
1. The logical consequence of the ante-
cedent procedure. ‘ Faith, waiting on
the light of evidence, is met by the
evidence of light, and following that,
is led into the liberty of truth; as it
always will be in the things of God.
“Tf any man will do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine whether it be of
God.” Will to do first; know after-
wards. Obedience is the spirit in
which to seek. Knowledge its after
product. 2. The outcome of a mental
process in which several things were
combined. ‘‘There was, in the case of
these Berceans, first of all a clear
presentation of the truth to the mind;
there was then the actual personal
contact of the mind, of the individual
thought of the hearer, with the truth,
and a process of reflection upon it.
There was a readiness to surrender all
old convictions to the authority of
evidence, at whatever cost of personal
state or attainment, and following
directly in the course of this ingenuous-
ness of intent and act, the light came,
and they believed.”

Learn.—1. The fitness of the gospel
to deal with dissimilar classes of men.
2. The great impediment in the way
of a man’s salvation—which is not in
the gospel or in the ministration of the
gospel, but in the indifference of the
human heart to religion.— John Burten.


Ver. 13. Stirring up the Multitudes.

I. Of a true sort.—l. By the gospel.
2. Of noble minds, 3. To the exercise
of faith. 4. For the warfare of the
Spirit.

II. Of a false sort.—l. By wicked
men. 2. Of lewd fellows. 3. To re-
sist the truth. 4. For the persecution
of the saints.


Ver. 14. Silas and Timothy in Berea.
— The question naturally occurs, Why
did Paul go on from Berea alone,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVII.





with all speed? There seems at first
sight some inconsistency here. But
again comparison between Acts and
Thessalonians solves the ditticulty:
Paul was eager ‘once and again’ to
return to Thessalonica, and was wait-
ing for news that the impediment
placed in his way was removed. Silas
and Timothy remained to receive the
news (perhaps about the attitude of
the new magistrates) and to bring it
on to Paul. But they could not bring
it on to him until they received his


leaving Silas and Timothy behind, and
yet send orders immediately on reach-
ing Athens that they were to join him


message from Athens.”-—Ramsay, St.
Paul, etc., p. 234.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 16—21.


Paul at Athens ; or, Alone in a Heathen City.

I. Waiting for Silas and Timothy.—1. Alone. These two friends having been
left behind in Macedonia, Silas in Bercea, and perhaps Timothy in Thessalonica,
to carry forward the spiritual movement which had there been initiated when those
who had brought the apostle as far as to Athens had departed, he naturally
began to realise the isolation of his position as a stranger in a large heathen
city. Nor is it likely that the brilliant scenes on which he gazed in that fair
metropolis of the ancient world did much to relieve his depression. Besides,
largely on account of bodily weakness, the apostle may have felt himself in need
of friendly sympathy and assistance in order to effective working in Athens.
Hence, on sending back his conductors to Bercea, he deemed it prudent to
entrust them with instructions for both Silas and Timothy to rejoin him with all
speed. Doubtless he expected to await their arrival at Athens; but as the turn
of events once more constrained him to leave the Achaian capital sooner than he
had anticipated, it was not till he had reached Corinth that his esteemed
colleagues overtook him (xviii. 5).—Silas coming from Berea, and Timothy from
Thessalonica, to which city (as above conjectured, though see “ Critical
Remarks,” and ‘“‘ Hints ” on ver. 14) he had been despatched from Bercea, instead
of Paul (1 Thess. ii, 18). Meanwhile the apostle found himself in Athens
alone (1 Thess. iii. 1). Yet, 2. Mot alone. Like his glorified Master, who, in
the days of His flesh, when forsaken by His disciples, affirmed that though alone
He was yet not alone, because the Father was with Him (John xvi. 32), the
apostle in his solitude enjoyed first the companionship of that gracious Lord on
whose business he had come to Athens, who had said, “ Lo! I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world” (Matt. xxviii. 20), and whose
“comforts,” it need not be doubted, in that season of “thoughtfulness” de-
lighted his soul (Psalm xciv. 19). Then, like him who said he was “ never less
alone than when alone,” the apostle had the fellowship of his own thoughts,
which, if they had much to depress, were fitted also in no small measure to
cheer. The recollection of the toils and sufferings he had passed through
since entering on his lifework of preaching the gospel to the heathen could
hardly fail at times to cast “the pale hue of sickly thought” upon his spirit,
though even that could not daunt his heroic soul. But, on the other hand, the
remembrance of how he had been sustained throughout his arduous warfare,
and of how astonishingly the work of the Lord had prospered in his hand,


367


cHAP. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





would more than counterbalance his depressing reminiscences. Lastly, he might.
have found, though it is doubtful if he did, in the fresh scenes upon which he
gazed in that brilliant capital, the means of relieving the tedium of his lonely
hours. “It was at Athens,” writes Farrar, “that the human form, sedulously
trained, attained its most exquisite and winning beauty; there that human
freedom put forth its most splendid power ; there that human eloquence displayed
its utmost subtlety and grace; there that art reached to its most consummate
perfection ; there that poetry uttered alike its sweetest and its sublimest strains ;
there that philosophy attained to the most perfect music of human expression,
its loftiest and deepest thoughts”; but it may be questioned if these considera-
tions affected Paul with the like enthusiasm they inspire in the breast of modern
travellers.

II. Surveying the Athenian city.—1. The spectacle he beheld. That which
arrested Paul's attention, presumably from the moment of his landing at the
harbour of Pirseus, as he walked up slowly between the ruins of the Long Walls
towards the shining city, and while he, later on, sauntered through its streets
and lingered in its market-place, was not its geographical situation, or its
architectural beauty, or its air of culture and refinement, but its religious
condition. Like Babylon of old, which was “a land of graven images,” and
whose people were “‘mad upon idols” (Jer. 1. 38), the Athens of Paul’s day was
‘‘ wholly given over to idolatry,” literally stuffed full of idols. ‘A person could
hardly take his position at any point in ancient Athens where the eye did not
range over temples and statues of the gods almost without number” (Hackett).
Petronius (Satires, 17) was wont to say that it was easier to find a god at Athens
than a man; while, according to Pausanias, Athens had more images than all
the rest of Greece put together. Some of the streets were so crowded with those
who sold idols that it was almost impossible to make one’s way through them.
“Every god in Olympus found a place in the Agora; and as if the imagination
of the Attic mind knew no bounds in this direction, abstractions were deified
and publicly honoured. Altars were erected to fame, to modesty, to energy, to
persuasion, to pity” (Conybeare and Howson, i. 328, 329). Finally, lest any
divinity should be overlooked, the inhabitants had erected an altar with this
inscription, “To the unknown God.” It is of course objected that ancient
writers, such as Pausanias and Philostratus, only knew of altars “to unknown
gods” not “to an, or the, unknown god”; but neither can their ignorance be
allowed to invalidate the testimony of Paul, nor can it be incontrovertibly
demonstrated that the “ altars of unknown gods mentioned by the above writers
referred to a plurality of deities, and not to a plurality of altars; while, even
if the former supposition be accepted as correct, it does not follow that Paul may
not have observed one inscribed as Luke reports. There is even a “great
probability that by ‘the unknown God’ was actually meant Jehovah ” (Lewin).
2. The feeling it aroused. “ His spirit was stirred within him,” provoked or
filled with indignation ; (1) at the profanation of the holy name of God implied,
in the very existence of an idol; (2) at the prostitution of manhood exhibited in
the worship of a graven image ; (3) at the unspeakable source of moral corruption
opened in the degrading rites by which such divinities were honoured; and
(4) at the terrible display of Satanic power given in the subjection of a whole
city to such a caricature of religion as idolatry really was. Nor would the
apostle’s indignation be lessened, but immensely heightened, by the fact that in
Jerusalem he had never witnessed an idol.

Il. Disputing with its inhabitants—1. Where, und when? (1) In the
synagogue on the Sabbath. Although ‘“‘no trace of any building which could
have been a synagogue has been found at Athens” (Farrar), there is no ground
for calling in question the accuracy of Luke’s statement that one existed there in


368


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xvit.


+








Paul’s day, and that Paul, according to his wont (ver. 2), entered it on the
Sabbath. (2) In the market-place on the other days of the week. Located at
the foot of the Acropolis and the Areopagus, the market-place of Athens was a
busy scene. “Around were porticoes fitted up as bazaars for the sale of a
thousand articles of commerce; here and there were circular sheds, one for the
sale of slaves, another of provisions. In one place was the flesh market, in
another the horse market ; here the mart of books, there the stalls of fruit and
flowers” (Lewin). 2. With whom, and about what? (1) On the Sabbath day
or days in the synagogue with the Jews and devout persons or prosclytes there
assembled; and the fact that there were Jews and prosclytes in the Greek
capital shows that even in that idolatrous city the name of Jehovah could not
have been utterly unknown. On the week days in the market-place with those
encountered there, amongst whom mingled representatives of the various schools
of philosophy for which Athens was celebrated (see below). (2) With the former
his theme of disputation would be the Messiahship of Jesus, which, as on other
occasions, he would endeavour to establish from the Scriptures (vers. 2, 3); with
the latter he would reason not about philosophy or science, politics or trade, but
about religion and theology, and, in particular, about the true knowledge of God
and about the folly of idol worship, about the true wisdom which descended from
heaven, and about the resurrection and eternal life.

IV. Confronting the philosophers. —1. Their designations. (1) Epicureans.
The founder of this sect, Epicurus, born 342 B.c.—i.e., six years after the death
of Plato, in his thirty-sixth year—opened at Athens a philosophical school, over
which he presided till his death in B.c. 270. The principal tenets of his
philosophy were, that the swmmuwm bonum of -human life consisted in happiness
or pleasure; that this happiness was to be found in sobriety and temperance,
contentment with little and a life generally in accord with nature; that death
was not an evil to be feared ; that man has no moral destiny ; and that the gods
which in his system were more phantoms than gods, took no manner of interest
in mundane affairs (Schwegler’s History of Philosophy, pp. 131-134). With
his followers happiness became convertible with sensual pleasures (1 Cor. xv. 32),
belief in inert and shadowy divinities degenerated into practical atheism, and
man’s soul, if he had one, was nothing but a body composed of finer atoms than
the fleshly tabernacle in which it was enshrined. They were thus the Greek
Sadducees of their day. (2) The Stoics. Fcllowers of Zeno, who was born in
Citium, a town of Cyprus about 340 B.c., and opened a school in an Athenian
arcade (Stoa, whence the name Stoic), these were virtually pantheists, who
believed that the world was God’s body, and God the world’s soul, that the
highest law of human action was to live in accordance with nature, and that
virtue, apart from all personal ends, was man’s sole good ; but in point of fact
they were commonly nothing better than fatalists, who boastcd of their indifference
to the world, and affected an ideal of morals which in practice became unreal
(Schwegler, pp. 123-131). 2. Their exclamations. (1) What will this babbler
say? Better, what might this secd picker, this idle prater mean? J.e., if he has
any meaning. These depositaries of the world’s wisdom looked upon the apostle
as only another specimen of those market-place loungers and gossips who picked
up scraps of information and retailed them to others, and whom the quick-witted
humorists of the day likened to a sparrow, rook, or other bird which hopped about:
the streets and squares of the city picking up crumbs (see “‘ Crit.cal Remarks ”
on ver. 18). (2) Hescemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods (or daemons)—
the very charge preferred against Socrates (Xen., Mem., i. 1, § 1)—“ because,”
Luke explains, “‘he preached unto them Jesus and the resurrection.” This,
the reason advanced by the philosophers for their exclamation, Luke must have
learnt from Paul himself. The philosophers, it has been thought, mistook


BB 369


car. xvi, .MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Anastasis for the name of a second divinity in addition to Jesus (Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Spence, Plumptre, Holtzmann) ; but it is more likely that the gods
referred to were the God of the Hebrews, the true God and His Son Jesus Christ
(Alford, Hackett, De Wette). 3. Their interrogations. (1) Where these were
put. At the Areopagus or Mars’ Hill, “where the most awful court of
judicature had sat from time immemorial, to pass sentence on the greatest
criminals, and to decide the most solemn questions connected with religion. The
judges sat in the open air upon seats hewn out in the rock, on a platform
ascended by a flight of stones immediately from the ‘ Agora’” (Conybeare and
Howson, i. 346). (2) How these were put! ‘May we know what this new
doctrine or teaching is that is spoken by thee?” ‘ We would know what these
things mean.” The questions do not indicate that Paul was formally arraigned,
but merely that he was called upon to furnish an explanation of the theological
novelties to which they had listened—which, all things considered, was a fair
enough demand. The words in which their demand was couched do not
resemble those in which a prisoner at the bar is addressed by a judge; nor does
the speech, made by Paul in reply, in the least degree resemble a defence.
(3) Why these were put. Partly out of a desire for information—the teaching
sounded strange to their ears—but chiefly out of idle curiosity, which was
a notorious characteristic of the Athenians (see, however, “ Critical Remarks”
and ‘“ Hints” on ver. 19).

Learn.—1. The essential loneliness of God’s people in a sinful world. 2. The


earnest activity which Christ’s servants should everywhere exhibit. 3. The
natural incapacity of the human heart to comprehend the gospel. 4. The two
principal obstacles to the reception of the truth, pleasure and pride. 5. The


comparative frivolity of all earthly engagements in comparison with the business


of salvation.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. Athens : A Microcosmus.—
A city—

I. Of degraded idolaters, who wor-
shipped the creature more than the
Creator.

II. Of ignorant philosophers, who
professed themselves to be wise, but
were all the while fools.

ITI. Of arrant triflers, who had no
just conception of the seriousness of
life.


Ver. 18. Strange Gods.

I. Senseless images.—Dumb idols
such as were and are worshipped by
the heathen.

II. Local divinities—Such deities
as were supposed to be restricted to
particular lands and peoples—e.g., the
gods of the Egyptians, Babylonians,
Pheenicians, ete.

III. Impersonal abstractions.— Such
as are worshipped by philosophers and
others, both ancient and modern; as


370


e.g., the All, the Great Unknown, the
Power behind the Visible, etc.

IV. Material possessions.—Such as
are worshipped under the names of


Mammon, Wealth, Riches, by all
classes of society.
Jesus and the Resurrection. sesus—


I. The efficient cause (John v. 25).
ob The personal principle (John xi.
III. The archetypal pattern (Phil.
ili, 21).

IV. The first fruits of the Resurrec-
tion (1 Cor. xv. 23).


The Athenian Philosophers and their
Relation to Christianity.

I. The Epicureans.—‘‘The Epicurean
system was essentially materialistic.
The senses formed the only source of
knowledge. The world was traced
back to atoms, out of whose accidental
concurrence all things were formed.


+


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVII.


ee ee


Even the soul was said to be only a
body of ethereal and fiery substance
fashioned out of fine atoms. Hence the
immortality of the soul was a delusion,
the freedom of the will a deception,
and the gods superfluous ; only quite
illogically Epicurus allowed them to
exist, but denied them all world-govern-
ment and participation in the fortunes
of men. The highest good of man,
placed as he is in this senseless and
heartless existence, is pleasure; wis-
dom to attain to the highest measure
of this in life; and virtue, the con-
duct leading to this aim.”

IT. The Stoics.—‘ The Stoical sys-
tem, on the other hand, was essentially
pantheistic. It distinguished in the
world—all, matter and force. It named
the latter in relation to the whole, it
is true, Reason, Providence, Godhead,
but thought of it only as not self-
existent, impersonal, and therefore also
not truly spiritual essence, as an all-
forming and all-animating fire which
brings forth the creatures and the
worlds and again destroys them. The
human soul, a spark of this imper-
sonal godhead, and consequently with-
out immortality, has, according to the
Stoics, its highest good in virtue; but
virtue is a life in accordance with
nature, the agreement of the human
will with the Jaw of the world, con-
sequently above all resignation in
presence of world-governing fate.”

III. Their relation to Christianity.
—‘ According to these doctrines of the
Epicureans and Stoics, which present
numerous resemblances to modern un-
Christian modes of thinking, it is
conceivable that both, notwithstand-
ing their different views of the world
and of morals, should have agreed,
with reference to the gospel of the
apostle, to see in it a new Oriental
enthusiasm desirous of being admitted
to Greek philosophical rank and es-
pecially in the resurrection message, a
fable to be laughed at.”—Beyschlag.


Ver. 19. The Teaching of Chris-
tianity at Once, Old and New.
I. Old, asthe fall of man, being


contained in the first promise; New,
as the latest need of man, being able
to adapt itself to the ever-varying
phases of human civilisation.

IT. Old, as the outgrowth of the
Hebrew dispensation ; Vew, as the sub-
stance of a fresh revelation.

III. Old, as being the subject of
prophetic anticipation ; Mew, as being
the burden of a specially sent teacher,
Christ.

IV. Old, as gathering up and crown-
ing all God’s utterances in the past ;
New, as exhibiting all that is required
to meet the exigencies of the future.


The New Doctrines of Christianity.

1, The unity of God.—Though not
new to the Jews it was new to the
Athenians,

II. The brotherhood of man. —
Even to the Jews as well as Greeks
this was an unheard-of idea.

III. The resurrection of Christ.—
To both Jew and Greek this was a
stumbling block and a strange thing.

IV. The reality of a judgment
day.—The conception of such a general
assize had never before entered into
the world’s mind.

V. The duty of repentance——Men
may previously have admitted the
necessity in certain cases of reforma-
tion. Repentance in the sense of
godly sorrow for sin against God was
a novelty.


Unto the Areopagus; or, In the
University at Athens—‘Two ques-
tions have to be answered in regard to
the scene that follows: Why was Paul
taken before the council? and what
were the intentions of the philosophers
in taking him there? 1. It is clear
that Paul appeared to the philosophers
as one of the many ambitious teachers
who came to Athens hoping to find
fame and fortune at the great centre
of education. Now, certain powers
were vested in the council of Areopagus
to appoint or invite lecturers at Athens,
and to exercise some control over the
lecturers in the interests of public


371


CHAP. XVII.





order and morality. There isan almost
complete lack of evidence what were
the advantages and the legal rights of
a lecturer thus appointed, and to what
extent or in what way a strange
teacher could find freedom to lecture
in Athens. There existed something
in the way of privileges vested in the
recognised lecturers ; for the fact that
C*cero induced the Areopagus to pass
a decree inviting Cratippus, the peri-
patetic philosopher, to become a lec-
turer in Athens, implies that some
advantage was thereby secured to him.
There certainly also existed much free-
dom for foreigners to become lecturers
in Athens, for the great majority of
the Athenian professors and lecturers
were foreign. The scene described in
vers. 18-34 seems to prove that the
recognised lecturers could take a
strange lecturer before the Areopagus,
and require him to give an account of
his teaching, and pass a test as to its
character. 2. When they (the philo-
sophrs) took him to the court to
satisfy the supreme university tribunal
of his qualifications, they probably
entertained some hope that he would
be overawed before that august body,
or that his teaching might not pass
muster, as being of an unsettling ten-
dency (for no body is so conservative
as a university court).”—Ramsay,
St. Paul, the Traveller and the Roman
Citizen, pp. 246, 247.


Ver. 21, with Rev. xxi. 5. The Idolatry
of Novelty.—It cannot be denied that
there is in all lives—probably not least
in the busiest and the loftiest—an ele-
ment of dulness. This is only to say
that there must be routine in every life
which is either active or useful. The
Athenians of the first text were not mere
gossips or newsmongers. The first sound
of the words does them some injustice.
Their idolatry of novelty by no means
exhausted itself in inventing or em-
bellishing or retailing scandalous or
mischievous stories against the great
men of their city, or against humbler
neighbours “dwelling securely by
them.” Their treatment of St. Paul


372


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


shows this. He was not a man of
sufficient notoriety or sufficient import-
ance to attract the attention of the
mere tattler or scandalmonger. It
was because he raised grave ques-
tions, going to the very root of the
national and individual life—questions
of “Jesus” and of “resurrection ”—
that these idolaters of novelty were
attracted. The idolatry of novelty
has a wide range. There are those
amongst us whose idolatry of novelty
never rises to the level of the Athenian.
In vain for them the preaching in ten
thousand churches of Jesus and the
resurrection, even could that doctrine
be for once new. Enough for them
the last new fashion in dress, the last
new horror in the police-courts, the last
new tragedy or comedy in the news-
papers, the last new mystery or the
last new misadventure in society.
This sort of idolatry of novelty, this
base, vulgar, grovelling curiosity, is of
no value whatever beyond the evidence
which it affords, more than half by
negatives, to the instinct which is in
all of us that this is not our rest. It
may be enough to say of this worship
of novelty, that, as often as not, per-
haps (if we knew all) in nine cases out
of ten, it is but another name for the
worship of falsehood. No trouble
whatever is taken by the caterers for
this table to make sure whether its
supply has anything more in it
than a germ, if even a germ, of fact
however worthless. But in _ itself,
even where “news” and “lies”
are not synonyms, how paltry, how
unworthy of an immortal being is
this form of the idolatry of novelty!
Let us try it in another and higher
region—the region of art and litera-
ture. - There the idolatry of novelty
becomes the worship of originality.
And need I say what the effort to be
original becomes in the hands of the
commonplace? Need I speak of the
exaggerations, the contortions, the
burlesques of the would-be originalities
of landscape and _portrait-painting ?
Alas! the rage for novelty does not
exhaust itself in the province of art,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


+


It is the condition of success in the
historian, to invert received opinions of
character, and to rewrite history itself
into contraries. But the mischief
stops not even here. The preacher
himself is tried by his originality. A
cruel trial this for the weak, vain man,
who is miserable without an audience,
and must purchase it at any cost.
Yet how preferable any dulness to this
sort of brilliancy! The subject
widens before us, and we must lose no
more time in bringing it to its practical
application in the one higher province
still The Athenian development of
the worship of novelty will be our guide
here. We can scarcely wonder that


the fanciful mythology of the earlier -


days of that wonderful people should
have sunk, before the Christian era,
from a beautiful though insubstantial
faith into a cold and _ half-conscious
hypocrisy——a miserable form for the
many, a political expedient for the few.
Philosophers and statesmen had long
ceased to worship. But the former
dreamed and the latter acted in agree-
_ment thus far—that a thorough icono-
clasm would be dangerous, if not to the
welfare of the people, at least to the
tranquillity of the State. That altar of
which St. Paul availed himself with
such skill in his address on Mars’ Hill,
“ To the Unknown God,” was probably
the only one which had any honest
votary in the then population of
Athens. Those Athenians might well
have an open ear for the preacher of a
new divinity. This was but to confess,
what was no secret by this time, that
their anonymous altar was still stand-
ing, and that they waited to worship
till it had a name. For them the
idolatry of novelty was their hope and
their religion. Alas, brethren, that
we should have come round again to
those days! After all these centuries
we too are left with an anonymous
altar, and the worship of English hearts
is offered once again at the shrine of an
unknown, an avowedly unknowable,
God. There is not an arrival of a
so-called new apostle, there is not an
importation of a so-called new divinity,


CHAP. XVII.


for which this modern Athens has not
at least one of its ears open. There is
no pretence and no burlesque of a new
commerce with the invisible, which
cannot hold its séances in darkened
chambers with a certainty of a sufficient
gathering and a great probability of a
crowd of awe-struck questioners out-
side. Weare told that some one has
dared to say, within the Christian
Church of London, that Buddha him- °
self is second only (if second) to Jesus
Christ in morals, and superior to Christ
Himself in this, that he never claimed
for himself divinity. The idolatry of
novelty can no further go—at least not
while “ he who now letteth will let ”—


but soon he shall be taken out of the
‘way, and then shall “ the- lawless one”


be revealed—to be unmasked and con-
sumed in his season by the One
mightier. We will turn now to the
other and better half of the subject,
and try to show, in a few concluding
sentences, how considerately, how mer-
cifully, our Lord Jesus Christ, and His
Heavenly Father our Lord God, enters
into that natural want of something
new, which lies at the root of the
worship of the ugly idol which we have
sought to characterise in this sermon.
Do you suppose that Jesus Christ, God
in Christ, is unaware, as of the many
woes and crimes of earth, so of this
particular feature of it, and specially
of this earth of England and London
—its flatness, its staleness, its dulness,
its monotony, as it is felt certainly in
all but its ten thousand upper lives—
and what are they among the teeming
multitudes which make up the popula-
tion of either? What is the second
text of this morning? “He that
sitteth upon the throne saith, Behold,
I make all things new.” The very
feeling, the very sense of monotony
which has made impatient man set up
this paltry idol of novelty—is here
provided for by God Himself saying,
“Behold I make (not a few things,
but) all things new.” Yes, you will
say—somewhere and some day, in that
visionary region, in that far-off un-
realisable world, of which St. John’s


373


CHAP. XVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eS


Well—despise not
the world to come. Think not scorn
of that pleasant land. But let me tell
you of a nearer “making all things
new.” Let me tell you of it first in a
word of St. John, and then finally ina
word of St. Paul. There are two ways


Apocalypse tells.


of fulfilling the promise of renovation.
One is by the renewal of the thing
itself—the other is by the renewal of
the eye that views it. If the one is
the promise of the text, the other is the
promise elsewhere alike of St. John and
St. Paul.—Dean Vaughan.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 22—34.


Paul on Areopagus ; or, Preaching to Philosophers.

I. The courteous exordium.—1. A respectful salutation. ‘“ Ye men of Athens,”
che style of address with which their renowned orators had made them familiar.
Had Paul been defending himself before judges he would probably have said :
dvSpes Sixacral. 2. A complimentary ascription. Possible that he characterised
his hearers as “too” or “somewhat superstitious” (R.V.), but more likely that
he called them more religious—i.e., more occupied with and devoted to religion
than others (see “ Critical Remarks ”). As a mere matter of good taste he could
hardly have expected to gain their ears by reproaching them as superstitious ;
the course of-his subsequent remarks shows he regarded their devotion to religion
as something in itself good, which only needed to be instructed and guided to
become better. 3. A pleasing intimation. That he had been wandering through
their streets, closely observing, not their devotions (A.V.), but the objects
of their devotion, such as their temples, images, altars, and the like, and in
particular that he had noted one altar more remarkable than the rest, on
account of its inscription, which ran: ‘‘To the (or to an) unknown God” (see
“ Critical Remarks”). 4. A startling declaration. That he, whom they had just
denounced as a babbler, was prepared to acquaint them with the true personality
and character of that divinity they were ignorantly worshipping. What with
all their wisdom they had not been able to attain to (1 Cor. i. 21), a just know-
ledge of the true God, he was ready and willing to impart. By no means a
modest pretension ; yet splendidly fulfilled.

II. The weighty sermon.—Three main divisions. 1. The relation of God to the
world (vers. 24, 25). The Supreme Being was exhibited in five different aspects.
(1) As Creator of the world. A truth denied by both sects of the philosophers
who listened to the apostle, but frequently affirmed by the apostle (xiv. 15;
Rom. xi. 36; 2 Cor. v. 18; Eph. iii. 9), and other New-Testament writers
(Heb. iii. 4; Rev. iv. 11). (2) As Lord of heaven and earth (Matt. xi. 25;
compare Gen. xiii. 22); the absolute ownership of the universe flowing of
necessity from God’s relationship to it as Creator (Rom. x. 12). (3) As
fillmg immensity with His presence, and therefore as incapable of being
confined like idols in temples made with hands (compare vii. 49). That
the heathen failed to distinguish between the Deity and His image, see
xix. 26. (4) As self-sufficient and therefore as independent of His creatures.
Incapable of being profited by any service that might be rendered by man’s
hands, God was equally removed above the necessity of requiring such service
(Psalm 1, 9-13). In both respects He transcended the divinities they worshipped,
who not only inhabited and were confined to their shrines, but were supposed
to be in need of and to be benefited by the sacrifices laid upon their altars
(compare Jliad, i. 37). (5) As the source of life and blessing to His dependent
creatures. ‘Seeing He Himself giveth to all life and for the continuance of the
same breath, and all things they require (compare xiv. 17; Psalm civ. 14, 15,
27, 28, cxlv. 15, 16; Matt. v.45; 1 Tim. vi. 17). 2. The dignity and destiny
of man (vers. 26-29). (1) As forming a divinely constituted brotherhood, all
nations, or every nation, of men having been made of one blood, or simply of one


374


x HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xvtt.








(stock, or blood must be supplied), for to dwell on all the face of the earth. A
magnificent conception, abundantly asserted in Scripture (Gen. i. 26, 27;
Deut. iv. 32; Psalm lxxxvi. 9; Mal. ii. 10), and confirmed by the best science,
which must have struck at the pride of Paul’s hearers, who regarded themselves
as the flower and cream of humanity, while all others were designed to be their
slaves (Aristotle, Pol., I. ii. 6); which still opposes itself like an immovable rock
or impregnable fortress to all modern theories which deny man’s descent from
a common stock, and on the ground of that (supposed) fact to establish the
original, radical, and essential superiority of civilised to savage, or of white to
black races; and which warrants the hope and expectation that a day is yet
coming when this transcendent truth will receive universal recognition, and
when the Scottish poet’s dream will be realised—


“When man to man the world o’er,
Shall brithers be and a’ that.”— Burns.


(2) As guided in all their movements by an invisible hand. That of Him who
had called them into existence, and who, so far from being indifferent to and
unobservant of their fortunes, had “ determined their appointed seasons and the
bounds of their habitations”—7.e., fixed the periods of their rising, flourishing, and
decaying, “and the limits of their territory ” (Deut. xxxii. 8), beyond which they
could no more pass than could the waves of the sea overstep the sand barriers by
which their fury was restrained (compare Job xii. 23). The truth thus announced
was well adapted to humble his hearers, whose city’s greatness had already passed
its meridian, and whose territory was year by year becoming narrower, and to
remind them of the wisdom of listening to a message from Him who so mani-
festly held them in His hand (Psalm xxii. 28; Dan. iv. 25). (3) As designed to
come to a true knowledge of God and of their obligations to Him. That they
did not possess such a knowledge originally, in themselves and on the platform of
creation (1 Thess. iv. 5), was a clear testimony to their fallen and sinful
character and condition (1 Cor. i. 21). Nevertheless it was God’s will and desire
that they should grope about after Him, like blind men feeling their way in
the dark, in the hope of finding Him who was not beyond their reach by being
at a distance from them, but was near to every individual composing them,


“Closer is He than breathing, and nearer than hands and feet.”— Tennyson.


for “in Him we live and move and have our being,” or live and move (or are
moving), and are—i.e., every moment depend on Him for life, activity, and being.
And that this was no self-invented dogma, but an old and acknowledged truth
which their own gifted seers had discerned, he demonstrated to them by citing in
its support the similar sentiment of one of their own poets (Aratus, a Cilician poet,
B.C. 270), who wrote: “ For we are also His offspring,” clearly showing he re-
garded man as dependent on the Deity for life, activity, and existence. (4) As
convicted of unreason in thinking that the Godhead could be like to gold, or
silver, or stone graven by art and device of man. The argument was irresistible.
Was man the offspring of God? Then God could in no sense be the handiwork of
man. Was man God’s child? Then God must at least be possessed of a nature
resembling man’s, and if like man’s then unlike that of molten or graven idols.
3. The doctrine of Christ and His salvation (vers. 30, 31). This third main
division of discourse, entered upon, was not finished. So far as it had proceeded it
had announced four things. (1) A new dispensation on the part of God. Whereas
God had winked at or overlooked the past ages of ignorance, left them alone
without either gracious revelation or stern rebuke, suffering men to go their
own ways (xiv. 16), He had now interposed with a word of command that men
everywhere should repent—.e., change their minds, about God and His holiness,


375


CHAP. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


oe


about themselves and their sin, about the present world and the next. (2) A
new duty published to men, not in one nation, but in all nations to obey this
command instantly, thoroughly, permanently, honestly, cheerfully. (3) A new
argument for the enforcement of that duty. Binding upon men everywhere
and at all times without further reasoning, this duty was rendered the more
imperative and urgent by the fact of an impending judgment day, on which all
would be arraigned at God’s tribunal and reckoned with for their performance or
neglect of that duty, the judge already appointed being that man whom he had
come to proclaim. (4) A new certificate provided both for the fact of the
judgment day, and for the certainty that Christ would be the judge—viz., His
resurrection from the dead. If that was true, as Paul was prepared to show,
then Christ could be no other than God’s Son, and if God’s Son sent into the
world to redeem men, it was inconceivable that there should not be a day of
judgment, at, and on which, He would adjudicate upon the final destinies of
men, according as they had repented and believed the gospel, or died in unbelief
and sin.

III. The disappointing result. 1. The preacher was abruptly interrupted.
Never before had either Stoic or Epicurean listened to sentiments so sublime, or
to an orator more worthy of attention. Yet at the mention of the resurrection
of the dead—a doctrine which both denied—they felt it impossible to longer
remain silent or allow the speaker to proceed. Did they do so, they might
seem to grant that such a thing as a resurrection was possible, while according
to their philosophy it was not; if, however, on the other hand, it was possible,
then the whole contention of the speaker would require to be admitted. 2. The
teaching of the sermon was variously regarded. (1) Some mocked. At the resur-
rection chiefly, but also at the other tenets of Paul’s gospel concerning God and
concerning man. ‘The Greek was more irrational than the savage, when
religion was philosophised about. He laughed when he heard of the resurrection
of the dead, for the doctrine was not a fashionable one; but when he was
told that our souls would one day pass into cows, oxen, donkeys, etc., he
was less opposed to it, for this idea did not seem so new or strange to him, the
Pythagoreans having taught it” (Michaelis). (2) Some procrastinated—deferred
coming to a conclusion on the momentous themes which had been submitted to
their judgment—saying like Felix (xxiv. 25), ‘‘ We will hear thee concerning
this yet again.” (3) Some believed—credited Paul’s teaching as true, and
embraced with their hearts the gospel it contained. Among those who thus
received the truth, besides others unnamed, were Dionysius the Areopagite, and
a woman named Damaris, of neither of whom is anything certain known, though
Eusebius (Hist., iii. 4, iv. 23), and other writers report that Dionysius afterwards
became bishop of the Church at Athens, and that Damaris was his wife
(Chrysostom), for neither of which statements however exist solid grounds of
belief. 3. The preacher was obliged shortly after to leave the city. How long he
stayed within its precincts after the incident just recorded is unknown; only
this much can be told as certain, that no tidings survive of his having ever again
preached the gospel in or visited the brilliant but idol-loving metropolis of
Greece, That none of his epistles speak of a Christian Church at Athens does
not prove that his work there was absolutely fruitless, or that he did not leave
behind him a believing community.

Learn.—1. That advocates of Christianity should both maintain a respectful
bearing towards and cherish a charitable view of those whose confidence and
conversion they seek. 2. That preachers of the gospel cannot take too compre-
hensive a view or firm a grasp of the truth they recommend to others. 3. That
a ablest and most eloquent discourse will uot succeed in converting all who
isten to it.


376


-HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





CHAP. XVI


oo


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 22. Superstition—Define the
meaning of the original adjective, and
then state the sense in which the word
“superstition” is employed now. It is
the preponderance of terror in the
religious life.

I. Its causes.—1. Erroneous views
of the attributes of God. 2. Ignorance
of the nature of personal religion.
3. Crude conceptions of the works and
laws of nature. 4. A desire to have
systems of religion and worship of
human invention.

II. Its forms.—1. Idolatry. 2. Cor-
rupted Christianity. 3.  Pietistic
errors. 4. Popular illusions. Witch-
craft, astrology, fortune-telling, warn-


ings.

TIT. Its evils.—1. It degrades human
nature. 2. It saps the foundations of
morality. 3. It lessens the sum of
human enjoyment. 4. It hinders the
progress of the Gospel.—G@. Brooks.


Vers. 22-31. The Areopagus Oration ;
or, a Sermon for Philosophers.

I. The doctrines it proclaimed.—
1. The personality, self-existence, omni-
potence, and unity of God. 2. The
reality, universality, and efficiency of
Divine providence. 3. The spirituality
and non-externality of Divine worship.
4, The unity and brotherhood of the
human race. 5. The possibility of a
true natural religion. 6. The dignity
and dependence of man. 7. The ab-
gurdity of idols and idol-worship.
8. The essential graciousness of God’s
dealings with the race of man. 9. The
duty of immediate and universal re-
pentance. 10, The certainty of a day
of judgment. 11. The exaltation of
Jesus Christ to the office of supreme
judge. 12. The reality of a future life.

II. The errors it corrected. —
1. Atheism, or the dogma that there is
no God. 2. Pantheism, or the theory
that the all is God. 3. Materialism,
or the notion that the world is eternal.
4, Fatalism, or the superstition that
no intelligence presides over the uni-


verse, but all things come to pas¢
either by necessity or chance. 5. Poly»
theism, or the fancy that there are, or
can be, many gods. 6. Ritualism, or
the imagination that God can. be
honoured by purely external perform-
ances. 7. Hvolutionism (in its extreme
form), or the hypothesis that man
is a product of force and matter,
8. Indifferentism, or the creed that
man should seek after nothing and no
one higher than himself. 9. Optimism,
or the delusion that this is the best
possible world, and man has no sin of
which to repent. 10. Unitarianism.
or the tenet that Christ was an ordi-
nary member of the race. 11. Anni-
hilationism, or the belicf that after
death is nothing. 12. Universalism,
or the sentiment that all will be saved.
ITI. The lessons it taught.—1. The
duty of renouncing idolatry and wor-
shipping only God. 2. The obligation
to cultivate a spirit of love towards
others. 3. The necessity of repentance
and reformation. 4, The wisdom of
preparing for the great assize.


Vers. 22-34. The Great Sermon on
Mars’ Hill.

I. The wise men (of Athens) charged
with superstition (vers. 22, 23).

II. The nature of God and the
method of His worship established by
natural arguments (vers. 24, 25).

JII. The stupidity of men who,
though created that they might recog-
nise their Maker, nevertheless walk in
darkness (vers. 26-28),

IV. The absurdity of supposing that
God could resemble idols (ver. 29).

V. The doctrine of Christ and tho
resurrection of the dead (vers. 30, 31).
—From Calvin.


Paul at Athens! A more striking
preture than Luther in Rome or Calvin
in Paris. Note—

I. The sensations with which the
apostle tarries in the city of the
Athenians,—1. He does not shut his


377


CHAP. XVII.


eyes to the monuments of the most
ingenious art. 2. He does not permit
himself to be captivated by their sen-
suous beauty. 3. A deep feeling of
compassion for the error of the human
spirit remains as the keynote of his
innermost feelings.

II. The testimony which he there
bears.—Three great truths opposed to
three great falsehoods. 1. Creation
outof nothing as opposed to Naturalism.
2. The personality of God as opposed
to Pantheism. 3. The nature of sin
as opposed to Antinomianism and
Rationalism.

III. The result.—1. Not very con-
solatory. Prejudices too deeply rooted
thwarted the apostolic word. 2. Yet
not without comfort. A single convert
already weighs heavily in the balance
of the kingdom of God.—From Krum-
macher.


Ver. 23. “To the (or an) un
known God.”—The Athenian altar a
significant testimony to three things—

I. The insufficiency of human
wisdom.—If any people under heaven
could have attained to a knowledge of
God by philosophy those people were
the Athenians.

II. The unsearchableness of the
Divine nature.—After all man can
learn from creation, providence, and
revelation about the supreme being, he
must still acknowledge that he knows
only in part, and exclaim with Zophar
(Job xi. 7) and with Elihu (Job xxxvii.
23) that the infinite and eternal One can
never be fully understood by man.

III. The incomparable glory of
Christ.—‘“‘ That which can be known
of God” is by the gospel more clearly
and fully revealed than by either
creation or providence. The central
figure of the gospel records was the
image of the invisible God, the bright-
ness of His Father’s glory, and the
express image of His person.


Ignorant Worshippers of God.—
Such were the Athenians, the philo-
sophers amongst them no less than


378


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. .


a





the vulgar herd. Both alike wer
ignorant—

1. Of God’s exalted nature——As ~
personal intelligence and_ spiritud
essence. Epicureans and Stoics, indeed
spoke of God or of gods. Yet neithet
in one system nor the other was thera
room for God, the Epicureans being
practically Atheists and the Stoics-
Pantheists. Paul’s argument that
God must be a personal intelligenca
rested on two premises : (1) that molten
or carved images could not be God,
seeing they lacked mind; and (2) that
God must resemble man, if man is
God’s offspring.

II. Of God’s real character—As
1. The maker of the universe. Accord-
ing to the Epicureans and Stoics matter
existed from eternity. The Hebrews
held that in the beginning God created
the heavens and the earth. 2. The
governor of the nations. The Greek
philosophers had no true conception of
the moral and spiritual rule of the
Divine being. This idea, which was
known to the Hebrews, received its
proper and complete development under
Christianity. 5. The preserver of His
creatures. “He Himself giveth to
all life and breath and all things.”
Opposed to the Epicureans and Stoics,
who equally believed that the gods, if
any existed, were indifferent to men.
4. The judge of men. Neither of the
philosophic schools had the smallest
idea of a future judgment. Whatever
evil they dreaded was present. Immor-
tality found a place in neither of their
creeds. Paul’s sermon opened up to
them a new thought.

III. Of God’s gracious purpose.—
That men should seek after Him and
find Him. How did God propose to
carry out this? 1. By His providential
goodness. “Giving to all life,” ete.
(ver, 25). ‘‘ Filling their mouths with
food and gladness” (xiv. 17). ‘The
goodness of God leadeth thee to re-
pentance” (Rom. ii. 4). 2. By His
governmental restraints. Leading men
and nations to see that they had to do
with a higher power than themselves,
that they might seek after and find


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eae


CHAP. XVII.





Him (ver. 27). 3. By His longsuffer-
ing treatment of them. ‘The times
of this ignorance God winked at”
(ver. 30). ‘ Account the longsuffering
of our God salvation ” (2 Peter iii. 15).
4. By His announcement of a new
commandment. That men should re-
pent. That men must change their
minds. That men can no longer be
allowed to go on in sin. Whatever
doubt may have existed previously as
to man’s duty, now there can be none,
5. By public certification of a future
assize. Through Christ’s resurrection
from the dead, which showed both who
Christ was and to what dignity and
power He had been exalted.


Vers. 23-31. God’s Three Great Books
about Himself.

I. The book of the world.—In two
parts. 1. Nature (vers, 24, 25).
2. History (ver. 26).

II. The book of the heart.—Also
in two parts. 1. Reason (ver. 27).
2. Conscience (ver. 28).

III. The book of Scripture.—A gain
in two parts, 1, Law (ver. 30).
2. Gospel (ver. 31).—Gerok.


Ver. 26. Made of One ; or, the Unity
of the Race.

I. One in origin.—Created by God.

II. One in nature.—One blood and
one spirit.

III. One in character.—All equally
fallen, sunk in sin, and under con-
demnation.

IV. One in salvability.—All in-
cluded in the offers and provisions of
the gospel; none, at least, while alive,
beyond the reach of grace.

V. One in responsibility. All alike
will be held accountable to God not only
for their actions and words, but for their
treatment of His gospel.


Ver. 27. Seeking after God.

I. It is God’s desire that men should
seek after Him.—He hadso constructed
the world in which men live, and
arranged men’s environment in the
same, that they should feel themselves
impelled to do this.

II. Men’s interest should lead them


to seek after God.—It being incon-
ceivable that men should be capable of
attaining happiness apart from God,
without a knowledge of His character
or without the enjoyment of His
favour.

III. Those who seek after God have
the greatest possible encouragement.—
1. That if they seek in earnest they
are sure to find. And 2. That God is
so near to them that seeking should
be easy.


Ver. 29. God's Offspring; or, the
Dignity of Man.

I. The sublime truth announced.—
That man is God’s offspring. 1. Anti-
cipated by heathen poets. The best pre-
Christian and extra-Jewish thought
had some dim apprehension of man’s
true origin. 2. Revealed by inspired
Scripture. In the Old Testament
(Gen. i. 26; Numb. xvi. 22; Mal. ii.
10). In the New Testament (Matt.
v. 48; Heb. xii. 9). 3. Confirmed by
modern science. Indirectly at least;
first, through its failure to explain
man’s mental and moral nature through
evolution; and second, through the
circumstance that, however eager to
establish a paternity for man among
the lower animals, it has never been
able to more than set forth an unproved
hypothesis.

IT. The consoling inferences implied.
—1l. That God must be a personal intel-
ligence. Neither a senseless image, nor
a blind force, nor impersonal matter,
but a living personality. 2. That God
must be the father of men. Not simply
their creator and Lord, their preserver
and judge, but their all-wise and loving
parent, who regards them with pity .
and affection. 3. Zhat men, as God’s
children, must be brethren. Not members
of different races, but children of the
same parent, and therefore members of
the same family.


Ver. 30. Repentance of Sin.

I, An imperative duty. — Com-
manded by God.

IT. A universal necessity.— Required
by all.


379


CHAP, XVII.


HCMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





III. An immediate obligation.-—Ad-
mitting of no delay,

IV. A saving grace. — Without
which none can stand in the day of
judgment.


Vers, 30,31. Past and Present. The
Cross of Christ, the dividing line
between these,

I. The past.—1l. Times of ignorance.
Before the meridian light of gospel-
day had come. 2. Times of wicked-
mess. Else repentance would have
been unnecessary. 3. Times of for-
bearance. Otherwise the nations must
have been cut off.

II. The present.—1. Times of zlu-
mination. The full light of Divine
revelation now shines, 2. Times of
commandment. Mankind everywhere
enjoined to repent—change their minds
and amend their sinfullives. 3. Times
of responsibility. Whereas the past
dispensation closed with a transcendent
discovery of Divine mercy in the in-
carnation, death, and resurrection of
Jesus Christ (the first advent), the
present age will terminate in a sublime
exercise of judgment, at the glorious
appearing of the Son of man (the
second coming).


Ver. 31. The World’s Assize; or, the
Great Day of Judgment.

I. The fact announced.—God will
judge the world.

II. The day fixed—He hath ap-
pointed a day.

III. The judge designated.—That
man whom He hath ordained, or set
apart for this work.

IV. The standard indicated.—In
righteousness. Every verdict will
accord with equity and truth.

V. The proof given.—The resurrec-
tion of Jesus Christ.


Ver. 31. The Doctrine of a Future
Judgment as a Doctrine of Reason.—
1, The character of God requires it.
2. The analogy of the laws of nature
indicates it. 3. There are facts in our


own experience that foreshadow: it
Incipient strivings toward retribution
in the present state. 4. There is a
general expectation of it among men,
5. Our history would be incomplete
without it. Let it not be imagined
that by rejecting the claims of revela-
tion we shall escape the doctrine of a
future judgment.—G. Brooks.


Vers. 32-34. Man’s Treatment of the
Gospel.

I. Derision.—“ Some mocked.”

II. Delay.—“ We will hear
again of this matter.”

III. Decision.—“‘ Certain men clave
unto him and believed.”


Chap. vii. 2-58 with vers. 22-34 ; or,
Stephen and Paul, the Two Apologies
of Christianity towards Judaism and
towards Heathenism.

I. Both agree in some of their
principal expressions,

II. Stephen’s was delivered before
the Sanhedrim, whose office it was
to protect customs and morals in Jeru-
salem; Paul’s before the Areopagus,
which performed the like service in
Athens.

III. Stephen was accused of destroy-
ing the old religion, Paul of introduc-
ing a new one.

IV. Stephen told his countrymen
that the temple worship must cease,
Paul the Athenians that God dwelt not
in temples made with hands.

V. Stephen extolled the beneficence
of God to Israel in His dealings with
them as a people, Paul the revelation
given by God to men in nature.

VI. Stephen, through the warmth
of his eloquence, called forth a storm
of violence against him; Paul’s oration
took a turn which, in an unexpected
fashion, broke up the assembly.—From
Holtzmann, who looks on these resem-
blances as unfavourable to the his-
toricity ; whereas, rightly viewed, they
confirm it, being fully and satisfactorily
explained by remembering that most
likely Paul heard Stephen’s defence.


thee








380


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuap. xviu.





CHAPTER XVIII.


THe END oF THE SECOND AND BEGINNING OF THE THIRD MissIoNARY JOURNEY
(Paun anp Timoruy).


. Paul at Corinth; or, Meeting with New Friends (vers. 1-4).

. A Year and Six Months at Corinth ; or, Three Significant Events (vers. 5-11).

. Paul before Gallio ; or, a Case of Unsuccessful Persecution (vers. 12-17).

. Paul’s Return to Antioch; or, the Termination of the Second Missionary
Journey (vers. 18-22).

. Paul’s Departure from Antioch; or, the Commencement of the Third
Missionary Journey (vers. 23-28).


Or MUR
or Hm Go bo


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Paul.—Omitted in the best texts. How long the Apostle stayed in Athens—Weiseler .
suggests fourteen days; Ramsay, three or four weeks—and how he came to Corinth, whether
by land or sea, cannot be determined.

Ver. 2. Aquila born in Pontus.—Or, a man of Pontus by race. Though Pontius Aquilg
was a noble Roman name (compare Pontius Pilate), there is no ground for supposing that Luke
has here fallen into a mistake. Ramsay suggests that Aquila may have been a freedman,
since a freedman of Mecenas was called (C. Cilnius) Aquila. That Aquila was born in
Pontus ii. 9 and 1 Peter i. 1 render probable. Possibly his real name was Onkelos, but the
Onkelos who translated the old Testament into Greek lived half a century later. Priscilla.—
Diminutive for Prisca (Rom. xvi. 3). That she was more energetic than her husband has
been inferred (Ewald, Plumptre, Farrar) from her being mentioned first in several places
(xviii. 26; Rom. xvi. 3; 2 Tim. iv. 19). Claudius.—The fourth Cesar of Jewish origin
(41-54 A.D.), a son of the elder Drusus, and therefore the nephew of Tiberius (see xi. 28),
During the last years of his reign the Jews were expelled from Rome—“ Judzos impulsore
Chresto assidue tumultuantes Rom4 expulit” (Suetonius, Claudius, 25). Schitirer thinks the
occasion of this edict was the violent controversies which then prevailed among Roman
Christians about the person of Christ (Riehm’s, Handworterbuch des Biblischen Altertums,
art. Claudius).

Ver. 3. Tentmakers.—J.e., not weavers of, but makers of tents from hair cloth. Most of
the Rabbis had a trade by which they could earn their living. Hillel was a hewer of wood,
Johanan a shoemaker, Nanacha a blacksmith; Jesus was a carpenter. The Jews after the
exile held manual labour in high esteem. The man who neglected to teach his son a trade,
said Rabbi Judas, practically taught him to be a thief.

Ver. 5. Pressed in spirit.—According to the oldest authorities this should be was held
together by the word, cvvelxero TH héyy—i.€., either earnestly occupied with the business of
preaching (Bengel, Holtzmann, and others), or wholly seized upon and constrained by the
word within him (R.V.).

Ver. 6. Your blood be upon your own heads.—Compare 2 Sam. i. 16; 1 Kings ii. 33;
Ezek. iii, 18, 20, xxxiii. 4, 6, 8.

Ver. 7. Justus.—The oldest MSS. waver between Titus Justus (R.V.), Titius Justus, and
simply Justus, who, however named, is not to be identified with Titus (Wieseler).

Ver. 9. By a vision.—Compare xvi. 9, xxiii. 11. The words addressed to Paul remind one
of Isa, Lxii. 1.

Ver. 11. A year and six months.—Paul’s whole sojourn in Corinth was three years (xix. 31).

Ver. 12. Gallio.—Gallio became proconsul towards the end of Claudius’s reign, about
A.D. 53. His character, as depicted by ancient writers, corresponded with that revealed in
Luke’s narrative. ‘“ He was the very flower of pagan courtesy and pagan culture—a Roman
with all a Roman’s dignity and seriousness, and yet with all the grace and versatility of a
polished Greek” (Farrar). Eusebius asserts that he committed suicide towards the end of
Nero’s reign, before the death of his brother Seneca; but as Tacitus (Annals, xv. 73) reports
him alive after that event, Dion Cassius is more likely to be correct in saying that he was
put to death by order of Nero. Deputy, or proconsul of Achaia,—See on xiii. 7. Achaia,
which included all Greece south of Macedonia, was a proconsular province under Augustus ;
ander Tiberius an imperial province with a procurator (Tacitus, Annals, i. 76); under


381


CHAP. Xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
ee oe a ed


Claudius after A.D. 44 a senatorial province with a proconsul as governor. Another instante
of Luke’s accuracy. Made insurrection.—Rather, rose up. : an

Ver. 13. This fellow.—The expression correctly enough states the feelings of disdain
entertained by Paul’s prosecutors, though the word “ fellow” has no place in the original.

Ver. 17, All the Greeks.—The best texts have simply al, though “ the Greeks,” not “the
Jews” (Ewald, Hofmann, Schiirer), is the proper supplement. Spe

Ver. 18. Having shorn his head at Cenchrea, for he had a vow.—The uncertainties
connected with this passage are three: 1. Whether Aquila (Kuinoel, Meyer, Wendt,
Zockler) or Paul (Augustine and most moderns) is here referred to. 2. Whether the hair
shaving signified the assumption of or releasing from a vow. 3. Whether the vow was a
regular Nazarite or simply a private vow, analogous to that. Most interpreters hold that
Paul was the person who shaved his head; that he did so in order to release himself from
a vow he had taken in Corinth; that the vow was, if not in all respects a Nazarite vow, at
least a private vow analogous to that which bound him along with abstinence to let his hair
erow for a certain period—in this case till he left Corinth; that if it was a Nazarite vow
Paul might have taken it without compromising his Christian liberty (compare xxi. 24), and
might have been able to release himself from it without waiting till he reached Jerusalem
(see further in “Homiletical Analysis”). That such vows were practised among the
heathen numerous instances show. Diodorus (i. 18) mentions them among the Egyptians ;
while Homer (Zliad, xxiii. 140-153) records similar acts of Peleus and Achilles. Josephus
(Wars, IJ. xv. 1) notices a like vow which Agrippa’s sister Bernice paid in Jerusalem.

Ver. 19. Ephesus.—On the Cayster, which falls into the bay of Scala Nova on the western
coast of Asia Minor. Dating back probably to B.c. 1044, Ephesus from its foundation
“increased in importance till it became the chief mart of Asia Minor”; while its magnificent
temple of Diana “ never ceased to attract multitudes from all parts,” It ultimately fell into
the hands of the Romans B.c. 41 (Modern Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus, pp.
13-17).

Ver 21. And he left them there.—Not meaning that Paul left Aquila and Priscilla in the
town while he went into the synagogue (Alford), or that he henceforth quitted their society
and devoted himself to the heathen (Wendt, Holtzmann), but signifying that he left them
behind in Ephesus when he set sail for Czesarea. The best MSS. omit the words I must by
all means keep this feast which cometh at Jerusalem, and they are now commonly regarded
as an insertion modelled after xx. 16. But as they occur in some important texts, and
explain the phrase “having gone up” in ver. 22, it will do no harm to retain them—the
feast being in this case either Passover (Ewald, Renan) or Pentecost (Wieseler).

Ver. 22, The Church.—In Jerusalem is meant, not in Antioch (Kuinoel, Blass). An im-
possible interpretation, for two reasons: 1. The phrase ‘“‘ went down” is never used of a
journey from a coast town to an inland city like Antioch. One regularly goes down to a
coast town (compare xiii. 4, xiv. 25, xvi. 8, etc.). 2. The terms “going up” and “ going
down” are used so frequently of the journey to and from Jerusalem as to establish this
usage (Ramsay). The historic credibility of this journey to Jerusalem is challenged
(Weizsicker, Wendt, Pfleiderer, Holtzmann, and others) because it does not appear to be
mentioned in Galatians, and along with that the, truthfulness of the narrative which speaks
of a first brief sojourn in Ephesus (ver. 19) and a second longer visit at a later date (xix. 1).
But neither does Galatians mention the journey in xi. 30, unless this be that referred to in
Gal. ii. 1, in which case Galatians omits all mention of the visit in xv. 2. Yet both of these
are historical.

Ver. 23. The region of Galatia and Phrygia.—See on xvi. 6.

Ver. 24, A certain Jew named Apollos—a diminutive or pet name for Apollonios, which
occurs in Codex D. (Ramsay). Born at Alexandria, or an Alexandrian by birth, he had
probably received “the Jewish Grecian education peculiar to the learned among the Jews
of that city, and acquired great facility in the use of the Greek language” (Neander). The
success of his labours in Corinth is attested by Paul (1 Cor. i. 12, iii, 5,6). Luther’s conjecture

hat Apollos was the author of Hebrews is not without probability (Beyschlag, Plumptre). -
Alexandria,—The chief maritime city, and long the metropolis, of Lower Egypt, was founded
by Alexander the Great, B.o. 332, and built under the superintendence of the architect who
rebuilt the temple of Diana at Ephesus. Under Ptolemy Soter it became the seat not only
of commerce, but also of learning and the liberal sciences. The LXX. translation of the Old
Testament Scriptures was made in Alexandria, B.c. 280. Philo was born there, B.c. 20. In
A.D, 39 the Jews in Alexandria were subjected to horrible persecutions by Ptolemy Philopator
because their co-religionists in Jerusalem had resisted his attempt to enter the temple there.
Mark is said to have introduced Christianity into Alexandria.

Ver. 25. The things of the Lord should be the things concerning Jesus.

Ver. 26. Aquila and Priscilla.—The names should be reversed, as in ver.18. ‘The unusual
order, the wife before the husband must be accepted as original; for there is always a
tendency among scribes to change the unusual into the usual” (Ramsay),


382


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. xvitt.





Ver. 27. The brethren—i.c., of Ephesus—wrote exhorting the disciples in Achaia to receive
him.—Better, the brethren (at Ephesus) encouraged (him) and wrote to the (Corinthian)
disciples to receive him. Holtzmann finds the right explanation in the old reading of
Codex D: “But some Corinthians residing in Ephesus who had heard Apollos requested
him to cross with them to their native city; and the Ephesians consenting to this proposal,
wrote to the disciples in Corinth to receive him.”

Ver. 28. Helped them much which had believed through grace.—According to another
translation, helped much through grace them who had believed (see “ Hints”). And that
publicly might be connected with the participle following, as thus: publicly showing, or in
public showing—.¢., in their synagogues as distinguished from their private homes,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—4.


Paul at Corinth ; or, Meeting with New Friends.

I. His arrival in the city.—1. His departure from Athens. 1. When? “ After
these things”—~.e., after the incidents recorded in the preceding chapter, his survey
of the idolatrous city, and his address to its leading philosophers and counsellors,
though how long after cannot be ascertained. 2. Why? Because the character
of his mission required him to move on, but’ ehiefly because in that renowned
capital of philosophic triflers and superstitious idol-worshippers the good seed of
the kingdom, which it was his business to sow, had found no congenial soil. It
may be that Paul felt “disappointed and disillusioned by his experience in
Athens,” and recognised that he had gone far enough in the way of “ presenting
his doctrine in a form suited to the current philosophy ;” it may even be that
this was the reason why, on reaching Corinth, he “no longer spoke in the
philosophic style” (Ramsay) ; it would, however, be an error to conclude that
Paul left behind him in Athens no converts (see xvii. 34), as undoubtedly
a Christian Church was eventually established there. 3. How? Alone as
to companionship, Luke having remained behind at Philippi, and Silas and
Timothy at Berca, or Silas at Bercea and Timothy at Thessalonica; or, if
these latter had previously come to Athens, they were again on the way
back to Macedonia (1 Thess. iii. 2), or had not yet returned from it (ver. 5).
Sad as to his feelings, since he could not fail to be depressed at the decidedly
cold reception which had been given to his gospel of a crucified and risen
Saviour by “the Gentile Pharisaism of a pompous philosophy” (Farrar).
2. His journey towards Corinth. Whether he sailed from the Pireus to
Cenchrea, a voyage of five hours across the Saronic bay, or travelled on foot the
forty miles which separated the two cities, cannot be determined. Farrar
suggests that ‘“‘the poverty of the apostle’s condition, his desire to waste no time,
and the greatness of his own infirmities, render it nearly certain” that the sea
route was that selected ; but against this stands the circumstance that when he
sailed from Berca to Athens the brethren did not suffer him to go without a
convoy (see xvii. 14, 15), whereas he was now alone. 3. His entrance into the
city. This, which took place in a.p. 50, say Conybeare and Howson, was like
passing “from a quiet provincial town to the busy metropolis of a province, and
from the seclusion of an ancient university to the seat of government and
trade” (The Life and Epistles of Paul, i. 355). Situated on the isthmus be-
tween the Ionian and Avgean seas, Corinth was in Paul’s day the political capital
of Greece, and the seat of the Roman proconsul. “It was not the ancient
Corinth—the Corinth of Periander, or of Thucydides, or of Timoleon—that he
was now entering, but Colonia Julia or Laus Juli Corinthus, which had risen out
of the desolate ruins of the older city” (Farrar, The Life and Work of St. Pau,
i. 554). The older city had been destroyed in B.c. 146 by the Romans under
Mummius; the newer town was in B.c. 44 constructed by Julius Cesar, who
“sent thither a Roman g¢olory, consisting principally oi treedmen” (Strabo,

383


cHap. xvut. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i


viii. 6), “amongst whom were no doubt great numbers of the Jewish race”
(Lewin). Distinguished for its wealth, the Julian city was no less renowned for
its profligacy, the verb, to Corinthianise—z.e., to live like the Corinthians, having
been from the days of Aristophanes used to describe a life of luxury and vice.
Its temple of Aphrodite had a thousand courtesans for its priestesses. Its
Isthmian games periodically attracted towards it, if all the athletes and geniuses,
without doubt also all the scoundrelism of the empire. In short, as Farrar well
expresses it, ‘Corinth was the Vanity Fair of the Roman empire, at once the
London and the Paris of the first century after Christ.”

II. His lodging in the city.—1. The names of his hosts. Aquila and Priscilla,
diminutive for Prisca (Rom. xvi. 3, R.V.). ‘Probably Prisca was of higher
rank than her husband, for her name is that of a good old Roman family ”
(Ramsay). (For conjectures as to who Aquila was, see “Critical Remarks.”) —
The historian introduces him as a Jew, born in Pontus (see on ii. 9), who
had lately come from Rome in consequence of Claudius’s edict (a.p. 50),
which had banished all Jews from that city because, according to Suetonius,
they were continually making a disturbance, being impelled thereto by one
Christ (see ‘Critical Remarks.”) 2. The attractions they had for him.
(1) They were Jews, and Paul never ceased to cherish a warm regard for his
kinsmen according to the flesh. Even when they hated him the most fiercely he
loved them the most tenderly (Rom. ix. 3, x. 1). (2) They were tent-makers—
i.e. of the same craft as himself. Every Jew was required to learn a trade, and
that followed by Aquila and his wife was not the weaving of goats’ hair into
cloth, but the manufacturing of that cloth into tents. Such cloth was woven in
both Cilicia, from which Paul came, and Pontus, to which Aquila belonged.
(3) Whether they were Christians before Paul met them (Kuinoel, Olshausen,
Neander, Hackett, Spence, Farrar), or were converted by him in Corinth (De
Wette, Meyer, Alford, Holtzmann), is debated. The former opinion is certainly
not impossible, since the gospel may have been, and probably was, carried to
Italy by some of the “sojourners from Rome ” who had been converted at
Pentecost (ii. 10). Yet as Luke does not represent them as having been Chris-
tians when Paul met them, the latter idea is quite as probable.

III. His occupation in the city.—1l. He worked for a living to himself (see
1 Cor. ix. 6; 2 Cor. xi. 7). This (1) of necessity, because, to begin with at least,
he had no Christian converts to whom he could look for support, and because he
declined to live by charity while his own hands could minister to his necessities ;
and (2) of choice, because, as a rule, he preferred not to be burdensome to those
he taught. Already he had observed this custom in Thessalonica (1 Thess ii. 9 ;
2 Thess. ili, 8), and afterwards he followed it in Ephesus (xx. 34). Whether he
worked for a wage or as a partner is left unrecorded ; but in either case the
profits were probably not large (2 Cor. xi. 9). “It was a time of general
pressure, and though the apostle toiled night and day, all his exertions were
unable to keep the wolf from the door” (Farrar). 2. He preached the gospel to
others free of charge. (1) In the customary place—the city synagogue, where the
Jews, who had there long established a residence or recently found a refuge, were
wont to assemble. (2) At the usual times—on the Sabbaths, Paul probably
requiring the weekdays to provide for himself things honest in the sight of men.
(3) After his peculiar fashion—with skilful argument and reasoning, proving out
of the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. (4) To his ordinary audience—a
mixed assembly of Jews and Greek proselytes. (5) With the old effect —that he
persuaded—i.e., won over to believe—a number of both classes of his hearers,

Lessons.—1. The providence of God in fetching Aquila and Paul to Corinth at
the same time—Aquila to lodge Paul, and Paul to convert or establish Aquila.
2. The facility with which God’s people can recognise each other even in a foreign

384


aa. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVIIl.





country. 3. The power of the gospel to secure converts even in a debauched and
drunken city like Corinth (1 Cor. vi. 11). 4. The duty of all, not excepting


ministers, to provide things honest in the sight of men.


6. The glory of being a Christian.


5. The dignity of labour.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Aquila and Priscilla.

I. Husband and wife.—A_ beautiful
example of the marriage union.

II. Joint workers in trade.—A
happy illustration of individual inde-
pendence and family co-operation

III. Willing entertainers of Paul.
—A bright specimen of hospitality and
kindness.

IV. Fellow-believers in Christ.—
Whether before or after they met Paul,
they became Christians. A sweet in-
stance of the marriage union being
sanctified by grace.

Vv. Earnest teachers of Apollos
(ver. 26).—A noble pattern of Chris-
tian zeal.


Ver. 3. Paul in Aquila’s Workshop.

I. An example of manly inde-
pendence.—Rather than depend on
others, the apostle would work for his
diving (1 Thess. iv. 11).

IJ. A pattern of Christian humility.
—Though an apostle he did not disdain
to labour with his hands (2 Thess.
iii. 12).

III. An illustration of sincere piety.
—FProviding things honest in the sight
of men (2 Cor. viii. 21).

IV. An instance of religious zeal.—
“ Diligent in business, fervent in spirit,


serving the Lord” (Rom. xii. 11).


Vers. 2, 3. Aquila and Paul ; or,
Christian Companions.

I. Are always desirable, but especi-
ally in strange cities.

II. Are often providentially brought
together.— As in the case of Aquila
and Paul.

III. Are commonly helpful to one
another. As these were.

IV. Are mostly parted with regret.
As doubtless these were when Paul
left Aquila and his wife at Ephesus
(ver. 19).


Vers. 2-4. Christian Journeymen on
their Travels.

I. The dangers in the foreign
country.—The temptations in luxurious
Corinth.

II. The acquaintance by the way.—
Aquila meeting with Paul. ;

III. The work at the trade.— Honest
toil a great safeguard against tempta-
tion.


IV. The care for the soul.—Sancti-


' fication of the Sabbath and worship of


God.—from Gerok.


Vers. 3, 4. Work and Worship ; or,
Week-days and Sabbath-days.

I. Week-days for work and Sabbath-
days for worship.—This their distinc-
tive characters. All attempts to reduve
both to one platform unscriptural, and
therefore foredoomed to failure. As
the work of week days must not be
encroached upon by worship, so the
worship of Sabbath-days must not be
hindered by work.

II. As the work of week-days does
not exclude worship, so the worship of
Sabbath-days must not exclude work.
—If week-day work prevents worship,
then week-day work is excessive. [If
Sabbath worship leaves no room for
works of necessity and mercy, then
Sabbath worship is in danger of becom-
ing burdensome as well as formal.

III. Week-day work should prepare
for Sabbath worship, and Sabbath
worship for week-day work.—The man
who has spent his week-days in un-
lawful idleness is not likely to employ
his Sabbath in worship. He who de-
votes Sabbath to the duties of religion
is most likely to prove a vigorous, in-
dustrious, and faithful worker through-
out the week. ‘‘ Weekly labour creates
hanger and thirst after Sabbath-rest
and Sabbath-fare. Sabbath sanctifica-
tion imparts strength and pleasure to
the daily work of the week.”—Gerok.


cco 385


cuap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,
ar Me MURA WO SOA ee iia eral eles Sa ie ee


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 5—11.


A Year and Six Months in Corinth ; or, Three Significant Haperiences.

I. Renewed activity in preaching.—1l. Brought about by the coming of old
friends. Though Paul was of more heroic mould than to sink beneath the
pressure of external circumstances, however severe (Phil. iv. 13), though he could
testify for Christ without other aid than that Christ extended, whether in the
Areopagus before Athenian philosophers (xvii. 22), or at Caesarea before Festus
and Agrippa (xxvi. 1), or at Rome before Nero (2 Tim. iv. 16), he was neverthe-
less in a high degree dependent on the sympathy of others. During the absence
of Timothy and Silas he felt lonely both in Athens and in Corinth, while there
is good ground for thinking that his strength was at this time somewhat
weakened through his thorn or stake in the flesh (1 Cor. ii. 3), and perhaps also
through the severe privations he chose to endure rather than accept support from
his friends in Corinth, where his enemies were numerous (2 Cor. xi. 8, xii. 13
et seg.; 1 Cor, ix. 12). Consequently, though he never for a moment dreamt of
abandoning his holy work of preaching, he nevertheless toiled along as if a heavy
burden lay upon his spirit. Accordingly when, after the iapse probably of some
weeks, or it might be months, Timothy and Silas arrived from Macedonia, the former
from Thessalonica bringing cheering tidings of the faith and charity of his dear
friends in that city and eras also such material assistance from them as helped
to relieve him from the necessity of manual labour (1 Thess. iii. 6), and the latter
from Berea (xvii. 14), possibly with equally cheering intelligence about the
Church there, and with gifts of lovo from Philippi (Phil. iv. 15; 2 Cor. xi. 9),
the load lifted from his heart so that he bounded forward in his work with
revived alacrity and zeal, as if the word had seized upon him (see “ Critical
Remarks”) and constrained him with a holy violence, impelling him to greater
diligence, fervour, and prayerfulness than before (compare 1 Cor. ix. 16).
2. Manifested in special efforts to gain his countrymen. Though designated
specially as the minister of Christ to the Gentiles, Paul never could forget the
fact that the Jews were his kinsmen according to the flesh, or neglect au
opportunity of seeking their salvation. Hence this fresh outburst of missionary
zeal which seized upon him was directed specially to them. With redoubled
energy and impassioned earnestness he laid before them the proofs from Scripture
that Jesus was the Christ. (For the manner of his preaching see 1 Cor. ii. 4;
and for its matter 1 Cor. xv. 3.) Not that he neglected others; but these were
his first care (Luke xxiv. 47; Rom. i. 16).

II. Renewed opposition by the Jews.—1. Its secret spring. Nothing local, or
accidental, or personal to Paul such as his “ contemptible presence or speech ”
(2 Cor. x. 10) ; but the innate hostility of the human heart to a gospel of salvation
by grace and through faith without works (1 Cor. ii. 14), and the irreconcilable
antagonism of the Jewish heart to everything and every one that challenged the
validity of Moses’ law, as understood and practised by them, or accused them of
ignorance and sin in rejecting Jesus as Messiah. 2%. Its bitter violence. Tike
defeated controversialists generally when they cannot answer their opponents,
and like their co-religionists at Antioch (xiil. 45) and afterwards at Ephesus
(xix. 9), they betook themselves to abusive language, railing against the apostle and
blaspheming God and Christ (compare 1 Cor, xii. 3). 3 Jts necessary consequence.
Paul discontinued his efforts to persuade them. (1) His symbolic action. ‘He
shook,” or shook out, ‘ his raiment ”—.e., shook vut the dust from its folds, as
in Antioch of Pisidia he had shaken the dust from his feet (xiii, 51), for a
testimony against them. (2). His solemn declaration. ‘Your blood be upon
your own heads; I am pure; from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.” By


386


\


, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. onmap. xvtt.








this he gave them to understand that the responsibility for their destruction,
both as a people and as individuals, would rest entirely with themselves, that
he regarded himself as in no way involved in their guilt, and that henceforth he
would preach exclusively to the Gentiles (compare xx. 6; Ezek. xxxiii. 5-9).
(3) His public withdrawal. From that day forward he no more frequented their
synagogue, no more proclaimed to them the words of eternal life, no more
invited them to believe. Having made their election, they were now by him
left to the tender mercies of Heaven. So far from being again pressed to accept
salvation, they would no more be troubled. Practically by Christ’s ambassador
they were judicially abandoned.

III. Renewed consolation from God.—1. The opening of a new door. When
the synagogue was closed against the apostle, the house of a Greek proselyte,
Justus, or Titus Justus (R.V.), opened to give him welcome, as afterwards at
Ephesus the school of Tyrannus was placed at his disposal, when excluded from
the synagogue (xix. 9). There does not appear to be sufficient ground for
identifying this individual who befriended the apostle in Corinth with Titus,
or supposing that Paul left Aquila’s house and went to lodge with Justus.
What Luke designs to say is rather this, that while Paul continued lodging and
working with Aquila, he preached on the Sabbaths in the house of Justus,
who resided hard by the synagogue, so that the Jews and proselytes, if they
chose, might still come to hear him. In the action of Justus Paul would
undoubtedly delight to see the guiding hand of his glorified Master (Rev. iii. 7).
2. The accession of a new friend. Whether Justus was at this time a believer
or not cannot with certainty be inferred from Luke’s words. If, as is most
likely, he was not, the probability is that he ultimately became a convert.
But the withdrawal or exclusion of Paul from the synagogue led to the decision
of Crispus its ruler to cast in his lot with the new cause, in which act he was
followed by his whole house. Already Paul had gathered converts in Corinth,
‘of humble and most probably of slavish origin,” the first of these being—not
Epznetus (Rom. xvi. 5), where the true reading is of Asia—but the household of
Stephanas (1 Cor. xvi. 15), The conversion, however, of one so prominent as
Crispus and of his family, whom, as well as the household of Stephanas, Paul
baptised with his own hand, either because of their importance or because of the
absence of his assistants (1 Cor. i. 15, 16), could not fail to exert a powerful
and happy influence on the side of the gospel and on the heart of Paul. Most
likely this contributed to the success of Paul’s ministry in Justus’s house, many
of the Corinthians who heard him there having believed and been baptised, which
again led to the prolongation of his ministry in Corinth for a year and six
months. 3. The enjoyment of a new vision. In some respects this differed from
each of the other visions granted to Paul. The vision at Damascus (ix. 12),
like that in the temple at Jerusalem (xxii. 18), occurred at midday ; this, like
the vision at Troas (xvi. 9), took place at night. In the vision at Troas a man
of Macedonia appeared; whereas in this, as in the Damascus and Jerusalem
visions, it was the form of the glorified Redeemer that was seen. The purpose
of the Jerusalem vision was to counsel Paul to flee from the city; the object of
this was to make him stay in Corinth. (1) The Lord exhorted him to banish
fear and preach the gospel with all boldness: ‘“ Be not afraid, but speak,” etc.,
a suitable word for one whose ministry had been up till then carried on “in
weakness and in fear and in much trembling” (1 Cor. ii. 3). (2) The Lord
assured him of His constant presence and protection, saying, ‘I am with thee,
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee,” or if they do their purpose shall
be defeated (compare vers. 12-17). The like promise had Christ given to the
_ twelve (Matt. xxviii. 20). (3) The Lord revealed to him that many would be

converted by his ministry : “T have much people in this city,” not already,


387


cHap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee





but about to be converted, a cheering announcement for one who was probably
beginning to think his labours in the gospel might be in vain.
Learn.—1. The impassioned earnestness with which the word of God should


be preached.
others, will at least clear himself.


9. The certainty that a faithful minister, should he not convert
8. The fearful retribution that will eventually


overtake those who oppose themselves and blaspheme. 4. The justification of


preachers in leaving those who persistently refuse to accept the gospel.
extreme unlikelihood of faithful preaching having no saving result.
consolation God can give His discouraged servants.


5. The
6. The
7. The assurance-that such


have of God’s presence with, and assistance of them in their work.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. “Iam Clean” ; or Thoughts
About Ministerial Responsibility.—A
minister may hold himself free from
responsibility for his hearers.

1. When he has faithfully preached
the gospel to them.—1l. Clearly, so
that they can understandit. 2. Fully,
so that they are made acquainted with
the whole counsel of God contained in
it. 3. Fervently, so that they are

impressed with a sense of its importance
~ and urgency.

II. When he has solemnly warned
them of their danger in rejecting it.—
When he has reminded them—l1. Of
their guilt in refusing to believe. 2. Of
their certain condemnation unless they
do believe. 3. Of the possibility of
being abandoned because of declining
to believe.

III. When he has exhausted every
available means for securing their
acceptance of the truth.—Though Paul
turned himself to the Gentiles he did
not entirely desert the Jews. They
were still at liberty to visit the house
of Justus. Doubtless many of them
did this. So ministers should never
cease to labour even for those who
reject and oppose the truth.


Ver. 8. The Conversion of Crispus.

I. Unexpected.— Because of his being
a Jew and its occurring after Paul had
left the synagogue.

TI. Scriptural Brought about by
the preaching of the word.

III. Influential—Leading to the
conversion of all his house and of
many of his neighbours,

IV. Sincere.— Proved by being


388


baptised and opening his house to
Paul.


Ver. 10. God’s Hope for His Workers.
—‘ For I have much people in this
city.” It is very evident that the
apostle came to Corinth in a state of
great depression. His work had
seemed almost a failure in Athens;
and should he fail likewise at Corinth ?
He says afterwards, writing of his
entrance among them, “I was with
you in weakness, and in fear, and in
much trembling” (1 Cor. ii. 3). Nor
was his early experience in that city
calculated to dispel his fears; for the
Jews, to whom first he preached the
gospel, bitterly opposed, and blas-
phemed. It was, therefore, with a
heavy heart that he turned to the
Gentiles—such Gentiles as had mocked
at the gospel in the city which he had
just left.

I. Both human instinct and Divine
guidance had led the apostle Paul to
concentrate his efforts on the popula-
tions of great cities—Damascus,
Antioch, Philippi, Thessalonica, Athens
—these had already been his spheres
of labour; and Ephesus, Jerusalem,
and Rome were to feel his power.
Meanwhile, the great city of Corinth
was to absorb his time and care for some
eighteen months. Great .cities have
played a ‘very important part in the
history of the world, both in ancient
and in modern times. Nineveh and
Babylon, Memphis and Thebes, Athens,
Carthage, Rome—how much do these
names stand for, as representative of
the changing fortunes of the world in


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XVIII.


a ae ee ee er


the ages of the past! And to-day
great cities are of more and more
account, as affording home and industry
and power to the thronging popula-
tions. Great cities have had, and have
still, their various objects of interest
and wonderment, affording almost inex-
haustible material for the entertain-
ment of the curious, and the research
and study of more serious minds. So
Corinth had its Isthmus—called “ the
bridge of the sea,” and “the gate of
the Peloponnesus ”—across which,
about the time of the apostle’s visit,
the Emperor Nero attempted to cut
the canal which, left incomplete
through all the centuries, has just been
opened from sea to sea; the great
rock Acropolis, rising abruptly from
the shore to the height of two thousand
feet; the two harbours, of Cenchres
and Lechzum ; the temple of Neptune,
hard by ; and all that beauty of situa-
tion and structure which led to its
being called “ the Star of Greece.”

IJ. But though the apostle would
not be insensible to these things, the
attraction of Corinth, as of the other
great cities that he visited, was not in
any way external or adventitious
greatness or charm.—Nor is it any such
attraction that makes the great cities
of to-day of so absorbing an interest
to the thoughtful mind. Said Dr.
Johnson, of the London of a hundred
and thirty years ago, “If you wish to
have a just notion of the magnitude of
this city, you must not be satisfied with
seeing its great streets and squares,
but must survey the innumerable little
lanes and courts. It is not in the
showy evolutions of buildings, but in
the multiplicity of human habitations
which are crowded together, that the
wonderful immensity of London con-
sists.” And his biographer, comment-
ing on the remark, says, wisely enough,
“JT have often amused myself with
thinking how different a place London
is to different people. They whose
narrow minds are contracted to the
consideration of some one particular
pursuit view it only through that
medium. A politician thinks of it


merely as the seat of government in its
different departments ; a grazier, as a
vast market for cattle; a mercantile
man, as a place where a prodigious
deal of business is done upon ’Change ;
a dramatic enthusiast, as the grand
scene of theatrical entertainments; a
man of pleasure, as an assemblage of
taverns. But the intellectual man is
struck with it, as comprehending the
whole of human life in all its variety,
the contemplation of which is inex-
haustible.” So it was the quick, busy,
eager, multifarious human life of
Corinth that made the city of such
interest to the apostle; that made it,
if we may say so, of such interest to


_Him who spoke to Paul of the “ much


people ” there.

III. It was not, however, even the
human interest of Corinth, under such
aspects as would present themselves to
other visitors, that made the supreme
demand on the apostle’s regard and
care; nor, vast and various as they
were, did these more secular interests
of the city call forth the emphatic
declaration of the Lord Christ. But
there was one interest which was
indeed supreme, in the regard alike of
Christ and of Paul; an interest which,.
wherever men do congregate, is still so
paramount in the eyes of all who have
learned anything of the true import of
human history and human destiny—
the relation of men to duty, to God, to
eternity. And it is the vision of these
invisible but so real relations, men’s
relations to the infinite, that invests
with so thrilling an interest all the
doings, and aims, and desires of the
multitudes that make up the teeming
life of our great cities.

IV. This brings us to what is indeed
God’s hope, as held forth in gracious
encouragement to all who work in
behalf of the gospel of the kingdom
for their fellow-men.—God’s hope?
And who but the Divine Christ could
have had hope of Corinth? 8o busy, so
wealthy, so gay—andso utterly wicked,
in its unblushing sensuality of sin, that
“to Corinthianise ” meant to give one’s
self up to the worst abominations of


389


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





immorality! But, “I have much
people here,” said Christ ; for, through
all their eager alertness of industry
and commercial enterprise, and beneath
their superficial gaiety, and even deep
down in the reeking corruption of the
people’s sin, did He not see that many
hearts were weary of self-seeking, and
aching despite their gaiety, and sick
of the sin to which, nevertheless, they
were selling themselves body and soul?
Ah, their very despair of any good was
the secret of Christ’s hope for that
people. For over against their utmost
sin and shame the apostle was to set
forth God’s utmost and most holy love,
as manifested in the Cross. Nor could
any inferior power avail to move them.
“ Christ for England, and England for
Christ ”—this must be our watchword,
and we shall not watch, and work and
wait in vain. And in like manner,
when we look out upon the seething
millions of the great cities of the world,
and equally when we regard the needs
of those who live in smaller towns, and
in villages, and in remote, solitary
places, we must listen, as Christ says,
““T have much people here.”—7Z. F.
Lockyer, B.A.


Vers. 5-10. Great Things in Corinth.

I. Fervent preaching.—Constrained
by the word Paul testified.

II. Violent unbelief.—On the part
of the Jews.

III. Solemn judgment —Pronounced
against the opposers. They were self-
destroyed.

IV. Glorious mercy.—The gospel
_ offered to the Gentiles.

V. Unexpected
Justus’s house opened.

VI. Marvellous success.—‘‘ Many
hearing believed, and were baptised.”

VII. Heavenly consolation.—Paul’s
vision of the Lord by night.


deliverance.—


Vers. 9,10. Thoughts for the Night
of Ministerial Despondency.

I. The heavenly master from whom
the faithful minister holds his com-
mission. The Lord (compare xxvii.
23). ;

390


II. The holy duty which that
Master has imposed on His servants.
To speak and hold not their peace
(compare v. 20; Isa. lviii. 1).

III. The encouraging arguments
against fear supplied by the Master
to His servants. 1. His presence with
them (compare Matt. xxviii 20). 2.
His protection of them (Matt. xvi. 18).
3. His preparation for them. Having
souls waiting to receive their word.
4, His prospering of them. Promising
their labours should be successful.


Paul's Midnight Vision at Corinth ;
or, The Lord’s interview with His
servant.

I. A sublime manifestation: The
Lord’s appearance to Paul.—1l. The
reality of this appearance. Unless on
a& priori grounds of objection to the
supernatural the historic credibility of
what is here narrated cannot be
assailed. 2. The timeliness of this
appearance. It came when Paul was
in some degree depressed. Man’s ex-
tremity is ever God’s opportunity. 3.
The olject of this appearance—to
cheer the heart and embolden the
spirit of the apostle.

II. A magnificent exhortation : the
Lord’s commandment to Paul.—1l. Woe
to be afraid. Hither of himself suffer-
ing injury or of his cause suffer-
ing defeat. Paul, though habitually
courageous and hopeful, obviously
laboured at the moment under some
apprehension as to both of these con-
tingencies. 2. But tospeak. Manfully,
openly, continuously, holding not his
peace, but, like an old Hebrew prophet,
crying aloud and sparing not, lifting
up his voice like a trumpet, showing ©
the Jews their transgression and the
Gentiles their sins (Isa. lviii. 1),

III. A cheering consolation: the
Lord’s assurance to Paul.—1. Of com-
panionship. “I am with thee”: a
promise which had been given of old
to Abraham (Gen. xxvi. 3), to Isaac
(Gen. xxvi. 24), to Jacob (xxviii. 15),
to Moses (Exod. xxxiii, 14), to Joshua
(i. 5), to Israel in exile (Isa. xliii. 2) ;
@ promise which had been renewed te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


nas


the disciples by Christ. before His
ascension (Matt. xxviii. 20). 2. Of
protection. “ No man shall set on thee
to harm thee.” This promise also had
been given to ancient Israel collectively
(Psalm xlvi. 1; Prov. ii. 7; Isa. xxxii.
218, xxx. 16, 20; Zech. ii: 5, 8),
was renewed to the Church of Christ
(Luke xxi. 18), and is now repeated to
the apostle. 3. Of success. “I have
much people in this city.” As Elijah
of old, in a time of despondency, had
been assured that Jehovah had seven
thousand faithful adherents who had
never bowed the knee to Baal (1 Kings
xix. 18), so is Paul now informed that
Jesus had many souls in Corinth who
were only waiting to be gathered into
His kingdom by the preaching of His
gospel.


Ver. 11. The Secret of Ministerial
Success.
I. Much prayer.
II. Much patience.
III. Much trust in God.
IV. Much diligence in work.—
Quesnel.


The Word of God.

I. “In complete sense the Word of
God is alone the living, historical
person, Jesus Christ, understood and
explained in the Divine spirit, and
according to His own word and will.
On this account are also the words
and discourses of Jesus, since these are
inseparable from His person and
activity, to be included and considered
as the Word of God.

II. “ Whilst, however, Jesus Him-
self in His person, in His works and
words, as in His sufferings and death,
is the Word of God, at the same time
also in a derived sense is the proclama-
tion of Him the Word of God. That
is, the gospel of Christ and of His
kingdom (xxviii. 31), at first only orally
diffused, later also laid down in writing,
becomes recognised in Christendom as
the Word of God in a special sense,
in distinction from all preparatory, pro-
phetic words of God as from all sorts of
subordinate revelation. In this sense
has Jesus Himself often and clearly


CHAP. XVIIf.


spoken, and the whole New Testament
agrees therewith. This gospel is, in
its contents, firm and _ unassailable,
homogeneous and all-embracing ; in its
formulation manifold and many-formed,
as every really living, spiritual great
thing is; and exactly, because it is
homogeneous and living, also in every
individual part somehow germinally
contained. Hence it can be shortly
described as the divine and gracious
will which has appeared in Christ, as
the proclamation of God’s salvation
work, as the Word of Christ the
crucified (1 Cor. i. 23), as the Word
of grace (xiv. 3, 7, xx. 24, 32), as the
Gospel of grace and repentance (xx.
21), as the Word of reconciliation
(2 Cor. v. 19), or as the Revelation of
the divine mystery (1 Cor. iv. 1; Eph.
vi. 19); or otherwise designated accord-
ing to some one particular item of its
contents. According to its peculiar
contents, therefore, is it not so much
a theoretic doctrine, as a joyous message
adapted to the actualities of life, and
consists principally of promises and
assurances of heavenly rights and pos-
sessions, conjoined with admonitions
and serious warnings which correspond
to those gifts and promises.”

ITI. “ Consequently in derived sense
is every oral and written proclamation,
which teaches men to understand the
person and work of Christ, inasmuch
as it prepares them for this, speaks of
it, leads to it, and teaches men to use
it, Revelation or the Word of God.
Hence also of preaching in public
worship, as of every written or printed
exposition cf the gospel, the expression
Word of God can be used. But-above
all does the title Word of God belong
both to the whole of the Old and New
Testament Scriptures, and, according
to its inner sense or its understanding
in graduated fashion, to particular
scriptures or to their particular exposi-
tions. This meaning of the Biblical
canon also becomes through this clear
and practical, that in the public church
doctrinal preaching the Holy Scriptures
must in some way be constantly
assumed asits basis.” —Bornemann, § 47.


391


CHAP. XVIII.
Vers. 5-11. Paul’s preaching at
Corinth.


I. The place of his preaching.—1.
The Jewish synagogue. According to
his custom. Dictated probably by three
motives. (1) To find a proper starting
ground for his work. The Jews knew
the Scriptures,.and were looking for
the Messiah. (2) To secure the con-
version of hiscountrymen. Paul loved
his kinsmen, and longed for their con-
version. (3) To prevent misunder-
standing of the nature of Christianity.
Christianity not antagonistic to, but
development and completion of Old
Testament religion. 2. The house of
Justus. To this Paul withdrew when
expelled from synagogue. In so doing
Paul (1) followed the example of
Christ ; (2) showed that Christianity
was not confined to special places (John
iv. 21); and (3) kept within earshot
of his countrymen.

Il. The subject of his preaching.—
That Jesus was the Christ, Jesus
Christ and Him crucified (1 Cor. iii.
2), which signified—l. That Jesus of
Nazareth had been the Messiah promised
to the fathers—to Abraham as a seed,
to David as a son, to Israel as the
Lamb of God. 2. That salvation was
attainable only through His Cross.
Not through his teaching alone, though
“Never man spake like this man”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








(John vii. 46), or through His example
alone, though “‘ He left us an example
that we should walk in His steps”
(1 Peter ii. 21), but through His blood
(Ephes. i. 7).

III. The manner of his preaching.
—1l. Biblical. Out of the Scriptures.
The proper basis of all right preaching.
2. Reasoning. Addressing himself to
the intellect. Paul knew the value
of great ideas. The road to the heart
lies through the understanding. 3.
Fervent. Paul wasno drone or dullard,
no merely formal talker or polite essay
reader, but a speaker aglow with holy
enthusiasm. 4. Fearless. Resulting
from (1) his confidence in the message
he delivered ; (2) his reliance upon God’s
promise of protection ; and (3) his hope
of ultimate success.

IV. The result of his preaching.—
Twofold. 1. Opposition. Jews re-
sisted. Not difficult to see why. If
Paul was right then Jesus had been
their Messiah, and they had been
guilty of awful sin in rejecting Him.
2. Success. (1) He gained a friend in
Justus. (2) Hesecured a large number
of converts, amongst whom were Aquila
and Priscilla, Titus Justus, Crispus,
the ruler of the synagogue, Sosthenes,
Crispus’s successor, Stephanas and his
house, Gaius, Paul’s host, Erastus,
the city chamberlain.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 12—17.


Paul before Gallio ; or, a Case of Unsuccessful Persecution.
I. Persecution attempted.—l. Zhe prime instigators of this hostile movement.


These were the Jews whom Paul had defeated in argument, causing them to
oppose and blaspheme (ver. 6), and from whom he had separated by withdrawing
from their synagogue and exercising his ministry in the house of Justts (ver. 7).
To this antagonistic course they were doubtless incited by a variety of motives,
as, é.g., (1) their hatred of the gospel; (2) their dislike of Paul the apostate Rabbi;
(3) their chagrin at the conversion of Crispus; and (4) their annoyance at the
favour which the new cause was finding among the Greeks. “It must be
acknowledged,” says Ramsay (St. Paul, etc., p. 256), “that Paul had not a very
conciliatory way with the Jews when he became angry. The shaking out of his
garments was undoubtedly a very exasperating gesture ; and the occupying of a
meeting-house next door to the synagogue, with the former archisynagogos as a
prominent officer, was more than human nature could stand. . . . It is not strange
that the next stage of proceedings was in a law court.” Perhaps not; but this
seems hard on Paul, who would have been almost superhuman if he had not
sometimes lost his temper with his much-beloved countrymen. 2. The exact date


392


; \
* HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xvut.





of this hostile movement. ‘When Gallio was the deputy, or proconsul, of
Achaia,” a.p. 53 (see “Critical Remarks”). Under Tiberius an imperial province
governed by a procurator, Achaia, when Claudius assumed the purple (a.p. 44),
was restored to the Senate and ruled by a proconsul. Giallio’s predecessor had
ended his term of government, and Gallio himself had just entered on office,
when this persecution arose. The Jews had probably been tempted to try this
assault upon their obnoxious countryman because of Gallio’s inexperience and
reputed easiness of character, the first of which might make him willing to curry
favour with the Jews, while the second might lead him to believe their com-
plaints without investigating whether these rested on any good foundation.
Originally called Marcus Annus Novatus, and afterwards known as Lucius
Junius Annus Gallio in consequence of having assumed the name of Lucius
Junius Gallio, a friendly rhetorician who had adopted him, Gallio was brother
to the well-known philosopher Seneca, who wrote of him: ‘“ No mortal man is so
sweet to any person as he is to all mankind,” and ‘‘even those who love my
brother Gallio to the very utmost of their power yet do not love him enough”
—language which, if it could scarcely be accepted as unimpeachable evidence of
Gallio’s merit, at least testified to the strength of Seneca’s affection. 3. The
special form of this hostile movement. A unanimous “ insurrection,” or uprising
of the Jewish populace against the apostle, in which, having arrested him, they
fetched him before the governor’s tribunal, as their kinsmen in Thessaloniea had
dragged him before the city rulers (xvii. 6), and as the owners of the divining
maid in Philippi had brought him and Silas before the magistrates (xvi. 20).
The accusation in this case ran in different terms from the indictments in those.
At Philippi the apostle had been charged with subverting Roman customs in
religion ; in Thessalonica the complainants urged that he had acted contrary to
the decrees of Cesar; here at Corinth the impeachment alleged that he per-
suaded men to worship God contrary to law—not of the empire (Spence,
Plumptre), but of Moses (Conybeare and Howson, Farrar, Alford, Hackett,
Holtzmann, Lechler), since under Roman rule Judaism was a religio lictta, and
Paul’s teaching in his countrymen’s eyes constituted a violation of the Hebrew
Lawgiver’s precepts.

II. Persecution foiled—Arraigned before the judgment seat of Gallio—a
chair or tribunal, three times mentioned in the story, from which Roman
justice was dispensed—Paul was about to open his mouth in self-defence, when
Gallio interrupted him, quashed the proceedings, and so protected the apostle,
but lost to the world and the Church a speech which the latter at least would
willingly have heard. 1. The ground of his procedure he made clearly known to
the prosecutors. (1) The case they had brought before him lay not within his
civil jurisdiction. Had it been a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, an act of
injustice or legal injury, such as fraud or dishonesty or wicked crime—i.e., a moral
offence or deed of wickedness—he would have felt it his duty to bear with them
and investigate their charges. (2) The case, however, was altogether outside his
functions. So far as he could see, it concerned questionings or disputes about a
word, or doctrine (Hackett), about names, as, e.g., whether Jesus had been rightly
or wrongly called Messiah, and about their own law, whether it was correctly ob-
served or not; and these were affairs they could look to themselves. As for him,
he had no mind to be a judge of such matters, even if they lay within his
judicial domain, which he practically acknowledged they did not. To infer that
his action was in any way dictated by secret sympathy for the Christian religion
would be, to say the least, extremely hazardous. 2. The end of his procedwre
was that he summarily quashed the indictment, announced that the prosecutors
had no case, and ordered the lictors to clear the court. ‘We may be sure they
made short work of ejecting the frustrated, but muttering, mob on whose disap-


393


cHap. xvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. -





pointed malignity, if his countenance at all reflected the feelings expressed by his
words, he must have looked down from his lofty tribunal with undisguised
contempt” (Farrar, The Life and Work of St. Paul, i. 569).

III. Persecution reversed.—Before the court was cleared the tables were
turned. 1. The ruler of the synagogue was trounced. The Jews who had
hastened before the governor's tribunal in hope of seeing Paul scourged reluct-
antly beheld their own leader beat. This leader was Sosthenes, who had
probably succeeded (ver. 8) if he had not been a colleague of Crispus. There is
no solid reason for supposing (Theodoret, Calvin, Ewald, Hofmann) him to have
been the Sosthenes our brother mentioned in Paul’s First Epistle to the Corin-
thians (i. 1). 2. The parties who trounced him were the mob. Not the Jews
(Ewald, Hofmann), who suspected their champion had bungled their case through
secret sympathy with Paul—which, by the way, forms the ground for supposing
him to be ‘Sosthenes our brother.” Certainly not the Christians, who, had it
been they, would have behaved most unworthily (Matt. v. 44), but the Gentiles
or Greeks, who may have been impelled to such a violent demonstration, either
because Sosthenes showed himself refractory and unwilling to depart from the
basilica, or because they felt indignant at the Jews for having trumped up a
baseless accusation against an innocent man, whom besides, through his having
withdrawn from the synagogue, they regarded as in a manner belonging to them-
selves. 3. The governor looked on with indifference. ‘My lord Gallio,” as his
brother styled him, was as completely unconcerned about the whipping which
the Greeks gave to Sosthenes as he had been about the charges of the Jews
preferred against Paul. Perhaps the whipping was, after all, not a violent
affair. ‘So long as they were not guilty of any serious infraction of the peace,
it was nothing to him how the Greek gamins amused themselves” (Farrar), If,
however, it amounted to bodily injury, then Gallio’s supercilious contempt was
a only wrong in itself but stood in flagrant contradiction to his pompous speech
ver. 14),

Lessons.—1. The lies told against Christianity and Christians by their
enemies. 2. The true province of the civil magistrate, secular affairs. 3. The
retribution which often comes on those who devise evil against others. 4. The
indifference of many to both religion and morality.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12-17. A Court Scene in Corinth.

I. The place of judgment.—The
agora or market-place. Justice should
always be dispensed in public, in order
to prevent abuses.

II. The person of the prisoner.—
Paul, a preacher of the gospel.
Preachers have often been called upon
to answer for their crimes in publish-
ing the good news of salvation.

IIT. The terms of the indictment —
That Paul taught men to worship God
contrary to law. It is no sin either
to worship God or to teach men so;
yet are all ways of worshipping God
not equally right.

IV. The rank of the prosecutor.—
Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue.


394


The Church’s dignitaries no less than
the world’s great men have sometimes
been found in the ranks of persecutors.

V. The character sof the judge—
Gallio, an indifferent and haughty
cynic. Rank and power often lead to
such unbecoming dispositions.

VI. The issues of the trial—l. To
the prisoner, acquittal, 2. To the
prosecutor, a beating. 3. To both,
perhaps, the unexpected.


A kemarkable Trio ; or, a character
study.

I. Paul, the representative of re-
ligious zeal.

II. Sosthenes, the
religious intolerance,


incarnation of


+ HOMILETICG COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





III. Gallio, the type of religious
indifference.


Sosthenes and Gallio; or, Paul's
accuser and judge.
I. The accuser.—Sosthenes. 1. His


person. Successor of Crispus. Perhaps
afterwards with Paul in Ephesus and
Macedonia (1 Cor.i. 1). 2. His motives.
Mixed. (1) Responsibility for the
dignity of the synagogue. (2) Anger at
Crispus’s defection. (3) Displeasure at
Paul’s success. 3. His action. Having
caused Paul to be arrested, he brought
the apostle before Gallio’s judgment
seat. Often easier to defeat a man at
law than to overcome him in logic.
4. His indictment. He accused Paul
of persuading men to worship contrary
to the law. No civil crime imputed to
Paul. Charged with propagating il-
legal tenets in religion.


II. The judge—Gallio. 1. A re-
markable man. Brother of Seneca.
2. A remarkable character. A person


of talent and great amiability. 3. A
remarkable utterance. ‘If, indeed, it
were a matter of wrong,” ete. Explain
what this means (see “Critical Re-
marks ” and “‘ Homiletical Analysis”).
4, A remarkable blunder. Looking on
with indifference while Sosthenes was
being maltreated.


Gallio’s Action.—“ This action of the
Imperial government in protecting
Paul from the Jews, and (if we are
right) declaring freedom in religious
matters, seems to have been the
crowning fact in determining Paul’s
conduct. According to our view, the
residence at Corinth was an epoch in


CHAP. XVIII.





Paul’s life. As regards his doctrine,
he became more clearly conscious of
its character, as well as more precise
and definite in his presentation of it;
and as regards practical work, he
became more clear as to his aim, and
the means of attaining the aim—
namely, that Christianity should be
spread through the civilised—i.e., the
Roman—world (not as excluding, but
as preparatory to, the entire world,
Col. ii. 11), using the freedom of
speech which the Imperial policy as
declared by Gallio seemed inclined to
permit. The action of Gallio, as we
understand it, seems to pave the way
for Paul's appeal a few years later
from the petty, outlying court of the
procurator of Judea, who was always
much under the influence of the ruling
party in Jerusalem, to the supreme
tribunal of the empire.”—Ramsay, St.
Paul, etc., pp. 259, 260.


Vers. 14-17. Gallio’s Behaviour.

I. How far it was right.—1l. In
declining to interfere in the settlement
of religious questions. 2. In expressing
his readiness to investigate civil com-
plaints.

Il. How far it was wrong.—l. In
not troubling himself to arrive at the
truth about Paul. 2. In taking no cog-
nisance of injustice towards Sosthenes.


Gallio, the Civil Magistrate.

I. His judicial equity and impar-
tiality.

II. His legal intelligence and dis-
crimination.

III. His moral and religious in-
difference.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verees 18—22.


Paul's Return to Antioch ; or, the Close of his Second Missionary Journey.

I. Departure from Corinth.—1. After a somewhat prolonged stay. At the time of
Sosthenes’s attempt to persecute Paul, the apostle, according to one view (Meyer),
had been eighteen months in Corinth, when the failure of that attempt, the con-
sequent notoriety his cause obtained, and the success which attended his labours,


induced him to “‘ remain yet many days” with his converts.


According to the


common interpretation (Alford, Lechler, Wendt, Hackett, Spence) the year and
six months of ver. 11 embraced the whole period of his residence in that city.
Tn either “ase, in addition to preaching and founding churches in the town and
neighbourhood (2 Cor. i. 1)—as, e.g., in Cenchrea (see Rom. xvi. 1)—he occupicd


395


cHap. xvut. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





a part of his time in writing letters to the Thessalonians (the First and Second
Epistles). 2. With affectionate leave takings. (1) Of his colleagues, Silas and
(most likely also) Timothy, though the latter is found with him again in Ephesus
on his third missionary journey (xix. 22). (2) Of his new friends—Stephanas
and Crispus, with their households, whom he had baptised with his own hands
(1 Cor. i. 14); Gaius, whom he also baptised (1 Cor. i. 14), and with whom he
lodged on his next visit (Rom. xvi. 23); Fortunatus, Achaicus, and Chloe
(1 Cor. i. 11, xvi. 17); with Erastus, the city chamberlain, and Quartus, a
brother (Rom. xvi. 23). (3) Of the general body of converts, among whom were
not many wise, or mighty, or noble, but only weak, ignorant, humble, and _ poor
people (1 Cor. i. 26, 27), whom he had tended as babes in Christ (1 Cor. iii. 2),
whom he regarded as his spiritual children (2 Cor. vi. 13), and for whose welfare
he continued ever after to be solicitous. 3. Accompanied by dear friends. What
induced Aquila and Priscilla to leave Corinth is not recorded. Perhaps they
desired to enjoy longer the society of Paul, or to proceed to their home in
Pontus, though circumstances, guided by providence, led to their being detained
at Ephesus (ver. 26) ; but whatever may have been the motive which prompted
them, their company would, without question, be helpful to Paul.

II. Embarkation at Cenchrea.—l. The harbour of Corinth. Cenchrea,
Kichries, ten miles distant from Corinth, formed its eastern port, from which ships
sailed to Asia; Lecheum, its western, for vessels bound to Italy, lay upon the
other side of the Isthmus. At Cenchrea a Christian Church was early planted,
presumably by the apostle’s abours (Rom, xvi. 1). 2. An incident before sailing.
Either Aquila (Grotius, Kuinoel, Meyer, Conybeare and Howson) or Paul
(Augustine, Calvin, Bengel, Olshausen, Neander, Alford, Hackett, Plumptre,
Spence, and others) shaved his head in consequence of having a vow. The only
reasons for supposing that Aquila was the person who thus released himself from
his vow are that the name Aquila immediately precedes the participle “ having
shorn,” and that one feels a difficulty in perceiving why Paul should have
entangled himself with such a worn-out Jewish custom while founding a Christian
Church in Corinth. But (1) There does not appear. sufficient cause for Luke
recording anything about Aquila’s vow, the principal actor in the story being
Paul. (2) If Aquila had been under such a vow as is here referred to he must
have proceeded to Jerusalem, and either shaved there in the temple, or, if the
modification of the law permitted him to shave at Cenchrea, he must still have
carried the hair to the temple and burnt it in the altar fire (Numb. vi.). (3) If
the vow spoken lay on Paul, it need only be remembered that Paul, though a
Christian,” was still a Jew, and delighted, when able, without compromising his
evangelical liberty, to observe Jewish customs—thus to the Jew becoming a Jew
in order to gain the Jews (1 Cor. ix. 20-22). (4) It is not certain that Paul’s vow
was that of a Nazarite ; but even if it was, the act performed was intended not
as an assumption, but as a discharge of the vow. (5) More than likely the vow
bound him to a modified asceticism as a sign and means of more earnest spiritual
consecration, and was assumed as a visible expression of gratitude for the pro-
tection and success he had experienced at Corinth. 3. The destination of the
voyagers. Immediately Syria, ultimately for Paul Jerusalem and Antioch.

III. Sojourn in Ephesus.—1. The sail across the archipelago. With afavourable
wind this may have been accomplished in two or three days, though Cicero once
spent fifteen on a voyage from Athens to Ephesus, and thirteen on the return
trip. As the ship threaded its way among “the Isles of Greece” many ancient
historieal associations may have presented themselves to the mind of the apostle ;
but if they did (which is doubtful), the thoughts they occasioned ‘have not been
recorded, and probably were not expressed. 2. The landing at Ephesus. The
ship, which was seemingly bound for Syria, would not stay long in the harbour of

396


o HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cnmap. Xvitt.





Ephesus, but Paul and his companions disembarked, and made their first ac-
quaintance with the famous ancient capital of Ionia, at that time the metropolis
of proconsular Asia, the seat of a flourishing trade, the centre of the worship of
Diana (xix. 14, which see), and afterwards the Christian metropolis of Asia
Minor (see “ Critical Remarks”). 3. The work in the city. Priscilla and Aquila
no doubt followed their ordinary calling as they had done at Corinth, but Paul
betook himself to preaching in the synagogue and reasoning with the Jews—
according to his work, losing no opportunity of making known the gospel of the
grace of God to the Jew first and also to the Gentile. Though not stated there
would doubtless be here, as elsewhere, proselytes attached to the synagogue.

IV. Voyage to Casarea.—l. After a brief stay in Ephesus. So favourable an
impression had he made upon his countrymen in that large commercial and in-
tellectual but superstitious city, that his hearers would willingly have persuaded
him to remain amongst them some time longer. This, however, they were
unable to do, “‘ He consented not.” 2. With kindly farewells to his countrymen.
Amongst these he had presumably made numerous friends and perhaps not a few
converts, and from these he tore himself only under the constraint of a higher
duty. For reasons not explained he deemed it incumbent on him to be present
at the approaching festival in Jerusalem—either the Passover (Ewald, Renan),
or more likely Pentecost (Wieseler), rather than Tabernacles, which would have
made the voyage too late—and so he told hiskinsmen. 3. Promising toreturn. If
God should permit (compare James iv. 15). A promise soon after fulfilled (xix. 1).
4. Unattended by his recent companions. That Priscilla and Aquila remained
behind in Ephesus appears to be the import of the clause—‘“‘and he left them
there” (see “Critical Remarks”); and that they stayed behind the context
shows.

V. Visit to Jerusalem.—l. The certainty of this visit. Having landed at
Cesarea (see viii. 40), he went up, not from the harbour to the town (Kuinoel,
Blass), but from Cesarea to Jerusalem. Compare the usual mode of expression
iat, sve 2,eaxd. 12,10; xxiv, Ll yoxxy. 1, 9; Gal. i, 1,:2; Mattoxx, 18;
Mark x. 32, 33; Luke ii. 42, xxiii. 31, xix. 28; John ii. 13, v. 1, vii. 8, 10,
xi. 55, xii. 20). It forms no valid objection to this visit that it is not mentioned
in Galatians. 2. The number of this visit. The fourth ; the others having been
—the first (ix. 26), the second (xi. 30), the third (xv. 2). 3. The object of this
visit. (1) To keep the feast (see “‘ Critical Remarks”). Whether he arrived in
time for this is not told. (2) Perhaps to complete his vow by burning his hair
in the temple. (3) Possibly to salute the Church there, which he did.

VI. Return to Antioch—1. How long he had been absent. Uncertain.
According to one computation (Wieseler) about three years, giving six months for
Paul’s journey between Antioch and Troas, six months for his work in Philippi,
Thessalonica, and Bercea, eighteen months for his stay in Corinth, and six months
for the voyage from Corinth to Ephesus and Cesarea, and the travel to Jerusalem
and back to Antioch. 2. Why he returned. Because Antioch was the place
from which he had been sent out, and was now practically become the Church’s
missionary centre. 3. When he left. After a brief stay. When he did depart
it was probably for ever. No intimation is preserved of his having ever again
visited the city. Antioch is not again mentioned by Luke.

Learn.—1. That earthly friendships should never be allowed to hinder the
onward movements of God’s servants and Christ’s missionaries. 2. That
legitimate vows voluntarily undertaken should be religiously paid. 3, That
promises made by Christian people should be faithfully kept. 4, That mission-
aries ought to stir up the home Churches by frequent rehearsals of missionary
intelligence. 5. That for the true apostle of Jesus Christ there can be no rest
so long as it is day.


297


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 18.
Life.

I. Are perfectly legitimate under
the gospel. Though not enjoined in
the Scriptures of the New Testament,
Paul’s example may be regarded as
giving them a quasi sanction.

II. Concern things which are, in
themselves, morally indifferent.—
Whatever is already commanded lies
outside the province, within which a
vow is permissible.

III. Should never be undertaken
rashly.—Otherwise unnecessary bur-
dens may be laid on weak consciences.


IV. When made should be faithfully


Vows in the Religious


Ver. 21. Keeping the Feast—a Com-
munion Sermon. ‘I must by all
means keep this feast” (the Lord’s
Supper) ‘‘ which cometh at Jerusalem.”

I. Because of the commandment I
have received.—‘ This do in remem-
brance of Me” (Luke xxii. 19).

II. Because of the company I shall
meet.—Christ and His friends who are
also my brethren (John xv. 14).

IIT. Because of the benefit I shall
receive.—Spiritual nourishment and
growth in grace (John vi. 55).

IV. Because of the good I shall do.
—By 1. Confessing Christ before His
Church and in sight of the world.


2. By encouraging my fellow-disciples


performed.—Better not vow than
to be steadfast in the faith.


having vowed neglect to pay.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23-28.


Paul’s Departure from Antioch ; or, the Commencement of the Third Missionary
Journey.

TI. On the way for Ephesus.—1. The time of starting. After Paul had spent
some time, obviously not long, in Antioch ; either because of his impatience to be
at his chosen lifework, carrying the gospel into regions beyond, or because he
desired to get back as soon as possible to Ephesus, or because the unpleasant
encounter with Peter (Gal. ii. 11-14), which most critics insert here, rendered it
desirable for him to quit Antioch. It was now about the end of 54 a.p., or the
beginning of 55 a.p. 2. The line of travel. Through the country of Galatia and
Phrygia (see on xvi. 6). Probably passing north from Antioch through the Cilician
Gates, visiting Tarsus on the way, and calling in upon the Churches of Lycaonia,
Pisidia, and Pamphylia, though these are not mentioned. At any rate, he seems
to have entered Galatia first and borne down on Ephesus through Phrygia. 3. The
business of the journey. ‘‘ Strengthening” or “ establishing all the disciples,” con-
firming the Churches and exhorting the believers (compare xiv. 22, xv. 32),
perhaps also counselling them to “ remember the poor,” and instructing them how
to lift contributions for this purpose (1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2). 4. The names of his com-
panions. Not stated. But obviously Silas did not attend him on this occasion
—possibly having stayed behind in Jerusalem, from which he had first started
out with Barnabas (xv. 22), and where he originally held a leading place
among the brethren ; or having been left behind by Paul at Corinth (see ver.
18). Whether Timothy accompanied him at the outset is not clear, though on
reaching Ephesus the two are again together (xix. 22). In Ephesus also
Erastus, the chamberlain of Corinth (Rom. xvi. 23), shows at his side (xix. 22),
having probably joined the apostle in that city. Probably also Titus, though
not named in the Acts, travelled with Paul on this third missionary tour (see
2 Cor. viii. 6, 16-24).

II. What occurred at Ephesus in the meanwhile.—1. The arrival of a dis-
tinguished stranger. (1) His name. Apollos, an abbreviation of Apollonius.
(2) His nationality. AJew. (3) His birthplace. Alexandria in Egypt, “ the
emporium of Greek commerce from the time of its foundation, where, since the


398


A HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuwap. xvut.





earliest Ptolemies, literature, philosophy, and criticism had never ceased to excite
the most intellectual activity ; where the Septuagint translation of the Scripture
had been made, and where a Jewish temple and ceremonial worship had been
established in rivalry to that in Jerusalem” (Conybeare and Howson, The Life
and Epistles of St. Paul, i. 36). (See “ Critical Remarks.”) (4) His reputation. A
learned or eloquent man, especially in the Scriptures, in the understanding and
exposition of which he was mighty. He had “ probably been well trained in the
rhetorical schools on the banks of the Nile” (Conybeare and Howson, ii. 7).
(5) His knowledge. He was “instructed or taught by word of mouth in the way
of the Lord,” perhaps by one of John’s disciples, or by John himself, whose
ministry he may have attended. He knew the things of the Lord or concerning
Jesus—i.e., from the standpoint of John, whose baptism alone he had received.
That he was not acquainted with the later facts of our Lord’s history—as, e.g., His
death and resurrection, with all the doctrinal significance these contained—seems
hinted in the narrative, which, however, may admit of his acquaintance with the
person and work of Jesus as taught by John. (6) His piety. He was fervent
in spirit (compare Rom. xii. 11); of a glowing religious disposition and ardent zeal
in promoting the spread of the gospel as understood by him. (7) His activity. He
taught carefully, and began to speak boldly in the synagogue. 2. His meeting
with Priscilla and Aquila. (1) The place where this occurred was most likely the
synagogue. “When Priscilla and Aquila heard him.” (2) The impression
made upon Priscilla and Aquila by his eloquent Scripture expositions was that
he sincerely believed in the Messiah whom John had proclaimed, but had not a
perfect knowledge of the facts of Christ’s history or an accurate understanding of
the plan of salvation which was grounded on them. (3) Accordingly they under-
took to expound, and in point of fact did expound to him, the way of God more
carefully. Whether Priscilla and Aquila had first learnt the story of the Cross
in Rome from Pentecostal pilgrims, or in Ephesus from Paul, cannot be decided
(see on ver. 3), neither can it be ascertained whether Apollos had been baptised
by John or his disciples, or whether, if he had been, he was a second time
baptised. The incident in xix. 1-7 would suggest rebaptism in the name of
Christ if that ordinance had previously been administered to him. 3. His de-
parture from the city. After learning the way of God more accurately he con-
ceived the design of crossing over into Achaia. (1) His reasons for doing somay
have been “‘a delicate reserve which prevented him from coming forward again
in Ephesus, where he had already appeared with such unripe and defective know-
ledge ” (Lechler), or a desire from what he heard of the Corinthian Church from
Priscilla and Aquila to labour there, or both. (2) His way was smoothed for
him by the brethren at Ephesus, who, willing to part with their eloquent teacher
for the good of Corinth, encouraged him (not exhorted the Corinthians), and gave
him to the Church there “letters of commendation” (2 Cor. iii. 1). (3) His
resolution was providentially stamped as right by the success which attended his
ministry in Achaia, which was both helpful to them who had believed through
grace, and effective in defending the truth against the Jews, whom “ he power-
fully confuted and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was
Christ.”

Learn.—1. That an imperfectly enlightened Christian may be instrumental in
doing much good. 2. That persons of eminent parts may be greatly helped in the
religious life by individuals of obscure position and slender gifts. 3. That private
Christians may sometimes do the work of theological colleges and ecclesiastical
boards. 4. That ministers of eminent gifts, grace being equal, may be expected
to do better service in the Church than ministers of lesser endowments. 5. That
Christian Churches should diligently seek out and train those among them who
appear best fitted for the ministry.


399


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 24. Apollos : a Model Preacher.
TI. Eloquent in speech.
II. Mighty in the Scriptures (ver.
24).
vit Fervent in spirit (ver. 25).
IV. Courageous in heart (ver. 26).
V. Humble in mind (ver. 26).
VI. Unwearied in service (ver. 27).
VII. Powerfulin reasoning (ver. 28).


Ver. 25. The Way of the Lord.

I. A Divine way. The same as the
way of God. The two expressions
imply the doctrine of Christ’s divinity.

II. A Prophetic way. Forean-
nounced by prophets and teachers of
the Old Dispensation. The Messianic
element in Old Testament prophecy.

III. A Scriptural way. The value
of Old Testament Scripture as a testi-
mony to Christ. Tho Old Testament
the basis and support of the New.


Ver. 26. Growth in Christian Know-
ledge.

I. Necessary for all, even for the
gifted (ver. cee

II. Attainable by humble desire of
learning (ver. 26).

III. Fruitful, by blessed working
for God (vers. 27, 28).


Ver. 27. All of Grace.

I. The faith of the Christian be-
liever (compare Eph. ii. 8).

II. The success of the Christian
minister (compare 1 Cor. iii. 7).


Vers. 24-28. The Biography of
Apollos.

I. The details of his early history.
—l. By descent a Jew. The honour
and privilege of having been descended
from Abraham (John viii. 39; Rom.
iii, 1, ix. 4, 5). 2. By birth an
Alexandrian. An additional privilege
to be born in a great centre of light
and civilisation. How much more to
be cradled in a Christianland! 3. By
talent an eloquent or learned man.


Neither possible without a combination
of remarkable powers, clearness of
perception, retentiveness of memory,
readiness of reproduction, quickness of
emotion. 4. By religion a half Chris-.
tian. Distinguished at this stage by
three things: (1) his large acquaintance
with Scripture; (2) his position as a
disciple of John ; and (3) his activity as
a preacher.

II. The story of his conversion to
Christianity.—1. How providentially it
was brought about. By meeting with
Aquila and Priscilla who, on their way
to Pontus probably, had stayed at
Ephesus. So the hand of God is in
every man’s conversion, though not
always as plainly seen. 2. How humbly
it was brought about. By no special
manifestation of Christ, such as Paul
enjoyed. By no angel ministers like
those who were commissioned to lead
the Eunuch and Cornelius into the
light. Not even by an apostle like
Paul or by an evangelist like Philip.
But by two private and comparatively
obscure Christians, named Aquila and
Priscilla. 3. How quietly it was
brought about. No vulgar noise or
sensational appeals. Simply quiet
teaching. Imparting the truth and
allowing it to do its own work.

III. His subsequent career as a
Christian preacher.—1l. He began with
his own people. As Christ commanded
His disciples to begin at Jerusalem
(Luke xxiv. 47); and as Andrew first
found his own brother (John i. 41).
2. He passed over into Europe. Visited
the Churches in Achaia, and specially
that of Corinth, where he laboured in
the house of Justus among the people
Paul had gathered—and laboured so
successfully that a party rallied round
him as if he had been a rival of the
apostle (1 Cor. i. 12), which he was
not. Nor was Paul ever jealous of
him, since he was afterwards in Paul’s
company when the First Epistle to the
Corinthians was written (1 Cor. xvi. 12).





400


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xtx.
ofthe at Gee ees ee Ee a EE ho Se


CHAPTER XIX.


Tae Progress or THE THIRD Missionary JouRNEY (PavuL anp TiMoTHy).


{§ 1. rag Pe to Ephesus; or, the Re-Baptism of some Disciples of John
vers. 1-7).

§ 2. A Three Years’ Ministry in Ephesus; or, a Great Door opened for the
Gospel (vers. 8-12).

§ 3. An Incident in Ephesus; or, the Story of Sceva’s Sons (vers. 13-20).

§ 4. Paul’s Last Days in Ephesus; or, Contemplating New Plans (vers. 21-22).

§5. A ee 4) Tumult in Ephesus ; or, the Temple of Diana endangered (vers.
23-41),


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. While Apollos was at Corinth.—A note of time for the incidents narrated in the
present chapter. The upper coasts, or the upper country.—The district mentioned above
(xviii. 23) as the region of Galatia and Phrygia, and commonly regarded as the territory of
Northern Galatia (see on xvi. 6), though Prof. Ramsay explains the term “ upper coasts,” or
“higher districts,” as the elevated mountain country of Phrygia which separates the
Sangarios from the salt lake Anava, both of which were situated in Low Phrygia, and under-
stands Luke to intimate that instead of pursuing the ordinary caravan route to Ephesus,
which “ passed along the coast of Lake Anava as it descends to Laodicea,” Paul “traversed
the higher districts—t.e., preferred the shorter hill road practicable for foot passengers, but
not for wheeled traffic, by way of Seiblia” (The Church in the Roman Empire, p. 94).
Came to Ephesus, and finding, should, according to the best authorities, be read came to
Ephesus, and found. One MS. (Codex D) begins the verse thus: ‘‘ But Paul, desirous accord-
ing to his own plan to proceed to Jerusalem, the Spirit told him to turn aside into Asia,”
(See “ Critical Remarks ” on xviii. 19.) Certain disciples.—Baur detects a contradiction, and
therefore a sign of untruthfulness, in these men being called disciples when they had not
been baptised.

Ver. 2. Whether there be any Holy Ghost.— Better, whether a Holy Spirit is ; probably (as
in John vii. 39) whether a Holy Spirit is given at baptism or on profession of faith.

Ver. 4. Omit verily and Christ. The verse is not to be read as if Paul intended to say that
John baptised in order that the people should believe (Meyer), but his meaning is that while
John baptised he spoke to the people that they should believe.

Ver. 7. Twelve men.—The truthfulness of this story is impeached on three grounds:
(1) the unlikelihood of Paul’s meeting accidentally with these, when Aquila could have
told him about them before; and (2) the improbability that none of these twelve had ever
heard of the Messiahship of Jesus and of the baptism of the Holy Ghost from some one of
their own kind who had been converted (Wendt); and (3) the difficulty of seeing why they
should have required to be baptised and Apollos not (Holtzmann). But, perhaps (1) Paul
knew of their existence before he met them; (2) they may never have met with Apollos or
Aquila ; and (3) Apollos may have been baptised.

Ver. 9. Believed not might also be rendered were disobedient. The way.—See on ix. 2.
Tyrannus.—Otherwise unknown. Hardly the possessor of a private synagogue (Meyer) ; may
have been a professor of philosophy or rhetoric, who rented his academy to Paul (Zimmer-
mann), or, if converted, gave the use of it free. From the circumstance that the name occurs
in the Columbarium of the household of Livia on the Appian Way, and as belonging to one
who is described as a medicus, Plumptre thinks Tyrannus may have been a physician whom
Luke knew, if not also a Jew who, like Aquila and Priscilla, had been expelled from Rome
by Claudius’s decree, and who also shared their faith. It is uncertain whether Tyrannus
may not have been dead, or at least removed from Ephesus (Overbeck), though his name still
adhered to the building in which he had taught.

Ver. 10. All they who dwelt in Asia heard the word.—This might well be, considering that
Ephesus constituted the commercial centre for the whole of Asia Minor.

Ver. 11. Special miracles.— Wot to be met with every day (compare xxviii. 2), uncommon,
extraordinary: in which Paul acted as an instrument in God’s hand. On the ground that

‘ these miracles resembled those performed by Peter's shadow (v. 15), their historical
credibility has been assailed (Baur, Zeller, Holtzmann). But if Peter’s shadow worked a


PD 40]


cuap. xix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








miracle, why should not Paul’s aprons have done the same? And if the Holy Spirit found
occasion to use such uncommon methods with Peter, why not also with Paul? ‘The special
circumstances of Paul in a superstitious city, whose population believed in magic, called for
special exhibitions of Divine power. (Compare on v. 15.) ; :

Ver. 12. Handkerchiefs.—Lit., sweat-cloths (covddpia, a translation of the Latin sudaria)—
i.e. cloths for wiping the sweat from the face ; made of white linen or cotton, and used alike
by kings and common people. Aprons (cjuxivOa, also formed from the Latin semicincta)
were such linen garments as artizans and servants were accustomed to wear at work. ‘

Ver. 13, Vagabond.—J.c., wandering about, or strolling Jews, exorcists, by profession
(compare Matt. xii. 28). ‘They appear to have regarded Paul as one of their own class, but
of a higher order” (Hackett). For we read JZ. :

Ver, 14. Which did so should be doing this, as a habit—i,e., pretending to do so, because it
cannot be assumed that they did so in reality. Christ’s language (Matt. xii. 27) does not
necessarily imply that the Jewish exorcists could successfully expel demons.

Ver. 16, And overcame them.—The best MSS. read doth instead of “them.” Naked need not
signify more than “ stripped of their outer garment.”| Compare Mark xiv. 52; John xxi. 7.

Ver. 17. And this was known should be rendered and this became known. Fear fell.—
érémece POBos, as in Luke i. 12.

Ver. 18. Many that believed.—Rather, of those who had believed—t.e., not of those who
were newly converted by this occurrence (Alford, Meyer, Holtzmann), but of those who had
believed and were still believers (Lechler, Zéckler, Plumptre, Spence). Confessed and shewed
would be better translated confessing and declaring. Their deeds.—Not their sins in general
(Kuinoel), but their superstitious practices (Olshausen, Meyer, Holtzmann).

Ver. 19. Those who used curious arts.—Lit., practised things over-wrought —i.e., superfluous,
curious things—a mild expression for magical arts. Their books.—Those which contained
their spells, charms, magical formule, and such like. The so-called ‘‘ Ephesian letters,”
ypdupara Epéowa, were ‘small'slips of parchment in silk bags, on which were written strange
cabalistic words, of little or of lost meaning ” (Plumptre).

Ver. 20. With regard to the preceding verses Ramsay (St. Paul, etc., 273) says :—“ In this
Ephesian description one feels the character, not of weighed and reasoned history, but of
popular fancy ; and I cannot explain it on the level of most of the narrative. . . . The puzzle
becomes still more difficult when we go on to ver. 23 and find ourselves again on the same
level as the finest part of Acts. If there were many such contrasts in the book as between
vers, 11-20 and 23-41, I should be a believer in the composite character of Acts. As it is, I
confess the difficulty in this part; but the existence of some unsolved difficulties is nota
bar to the view maintained in the present treatise”—the view, namely, of the historical
credibility of Acts asa whole. The literary contrast may be perfectly explained by supposing
that Luke compiled this chapter from papers written by separate authors.

Ver. 22. Timothy.—See on xvi. 1. Erastus.— Whether the city treasurer of Corinth (Rom.
xvi. 23) or Paul’s helper in Rome (2 Tim. iv. 20), or whether both were the same individual
is debated. For the nature of this mission of Timothy and Erastus see 1 Cor. iv, 17-19, and
compare “ Hints.”

Ver. 23. The way.—See on ix. 2.

Ver. 24, Demetrius.—The name has been found in an inscription, exhumed in Ephesus and
supposed (Hicks) to belong to A.D. 50-60, recording a public honour decreed to the Neopoioi
or temple wardens of Hphesus in the year of Demetrius. Silver shrines for (rather of)
Diana.—Not silver coins stamped with the picture of the temple (Beza, Scaliger, Piscator),
but miniature representations in silver of the temple, which strangers visiting the city were
accustomed to purchase. No small gain should be either no little business (R.V.), or no small
mages (Hackett) to the craftsmen.

Ver. 27. The temple of the great goddess Diana.—Reckoned one of the seven wonders of
the ancient world. This was in 1869, after having for centuries been buried, rediscovered by
the late Mr. J. T. Wood, F.S.A., who found remains of three separate buildings about a mile
from the nearest (or N.E.) city gate. The earliest of the three temples had keen commenced
B.C. 480, by Ctesiphon and his son Metagenes, completed by Demetrius, a priest of Diana,
and Peonius, an Ephesian, and destroyed soon after, The second was erected on the same
site by an unknown architect, and burnt down by Erostratus on the day Alexander was born,
B.C. 356, The third, of which Dinocrates, a Macedonian, was the designer, was in course of
erection when Alexander, having visited Ephesus, offered to complete it at his own expense
if the people would allow him (which they would not) to dedicate it, when finished, to
Artemis in his own name. This building, which was octostyle, having eight columns in
front, and dipteral, having two ranks of fluted columns in the peristyle, was 163 feet
93 inches in width from face to face of columns, and 342 feet 62 inches in length. The
cella or naos of the temple was 70 feet wide, and was doubtless hypsethral, or open to the
Eire ae Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus: Bypaths of Bible Knowledge,
Pp. ¥e, (4, ol. 4


402


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; THE ACTS, CHAP, XIX,
&





Ver. 29. The theatre ——Explored in 1866, this was found to have been built against the
steep western side of Mount Coressus, to have been 495 feet in diameter, to have had a
pulpitum or stage 22 feet deep and 110 feet in diameter, and to have been capable of con-
taining 24,500 persons (Zdid., p. 33).

Ver. 31. Certain of the chief of Asia.—oi‘Aciapyal. These were the ten presidents of the
Sacred Rites and public games, “ officials of the imperial cultus ” (Ramsay), in pro-consular
Asia (Enseb, H, H., iv. 15). In the same way other districts were provided with similar
officers ; as, ¢.g., Galatia with Galatiarchs, Bithynia with Bithyniarchs, Syria with Syriarchs.
These were commonly “ selected chiefly on account of their wealth, and sometimes against
their will” (Ramsay).

Ver. 33. Alexander.—His identification with the individual named in 2 Tim. iv. 14 is at
least doubtful. (See “‘ Homiletical Analysis.”)

Ver. 34. Great is Diana (or Artemis) fof the Ephesians.— MeydA7n 7) “Apreuus ‘Edeolwy. Codex
D reads, MeydAn “Apresus, Great Diana (Artemis), which, says Professor Ramsay, formed ‘‘a
stock phrase of Artemis-worship,” in which it was usual to insist upon the great power of the
goddess. He adduces “the invocations ‘Great Apollo’ at Dionysopolis, ‘Great Anaitis’ in
the Katakekaumene, ‘Great Artemis’ in Lesbos,” as affording “‘complete corroboration of the
title ‘Great Artemis’ mentioned in Acts” (Zhe Church in the Roman Empire, pp. 135-139).
He further cites as parallels an inscription in which the Cappadocian god, Zeus of Venasa, is
addressed as ‘‘Great Zeus in heaven”; and several coins found at Laodicea, on the Lycus,
which bear the legend Zevs Aceic, signifying, with probable accuracy, as M. Waddington
has suggested, “ Mighty Zeus.” Prof. Ramsay even thinks that the Baal worshippers on
Mount Carmel (1 Kings xviii. 26) may have used the epithet “ great ” (Zbid., p. 142).

Ver. 35. The town-clerk.—Often mentioned in Ephesian inscriptions. A worshipper.—Lit.,
temple keeper. vewxépos, a term founded on Ephesian coins struck about Paul’s time,
originally signified a temple servant whose business it was to sweep out and decorate the
temple, and ultimately grew to be an epitheton ornans, or honorary title of towns in Asia
Minor which were specially devoted to the service of any divinity, and possessed a temple
consecrated to that divinity. The image which fell down from Jupiter was the celebrated
statue of the many-breasted Artemis (Diana multimammia, Jerome), made, according to
Vitruvius, of cedar wood, according to Pliny, of vine wood, according to Xenophon, of gold,
and covered with mystical inscriptions on brow, girdle, and feet. The tradition of its origin
—similar to that which prevailed concerning a statue of Artemis in Tauris (Eurip., Iph. in
T., 977), and one of Pallas at Athens ([ph. in JI., xxvi. 6)—suggests that it was probably
‘‘a large aerolite, such as are found in Norway, and which, shaped by a sculptor of the day,
might have been pieced out and made to assume a form similar to the well-known statues of
Diana in the Museo Reale at Naples, and in the museum at Monreale, near Palermo” (Modern
Discoveries on the Site of Ancient Ephesus, pp. 77, 78).

Ver. 37. These men were Gaius and Aristarchus (ver. 29). Robbers of churches, or temples
(B.V.). “The temples among the heathen contained votive offerings and other gifts, and
were often plundered” (Hackett). Compare Jos., Ant., XVIII. iii. 5.

Ver. 38. The law is open.—Better, the courts are open, or court days are being held.
Deputies should be pro-consuls (see on xiii. 7). ‘The coins of Ephesus show that the pro-
consular authority was fully established there in the reign of Nero” (Hackett).

Ver. 39. A lawful, or, the regular assembly.—The ordinary civil tribunal, or popular gather-
ing, called and presided over by the chief magistrate of the city. This assembly is mentioned
in the Ephesian inscriptions (Wood, p. 38).

Ver. 40. To be called in question for this day’s uproar; or, to be accused of riot concerning
this day—The town clerk frightened them with the prospect of a Roman “execution” or
investigation into the tumult, for which he said “there was no cause,” rather than ‘‘for
which no one was the cause ” ( Vulgate).


NOTE ON THE HISTORIC CREDIBILITY OF ACTs XIX. 23-41.


J. Against,—“‘It is certainly possible, and even probable, that zeal for the great Artemis,
the boast of the city, and the interests attached to her cultus, occasioned Paul’s distress in
Ephesus; it is possible that the name of Demetrius, the leader of the movement against him,
is historical, that some such episode as that associated with Alexander took place, and that
Gaius and Aristarchus were menaced with Paul. But the description of events cannot be
correct—i.¢., according to the facts—and its separate points possess merely the value of a
faint and shadowy outline of actual reminiscences” (Weizsiicker, Zhe Apostolic Age [K. T.],
i, 391).

Mls or It is impossible for any one to invent a tale, whose scene lies in a foreign land,
without betraying in slight details his ignorance of the scenery and circumstances amid
which the event is described as taking place. Unless the writer studiously avoids details,

‘and confines himself to names and generalities, he is certain to commit numerous errors.


403


owap. xix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


nn nnn EEE UEEEnSSEES Sa


Even the most laborious and minute study of the circumstances of the country in which he
is to lay his scene will not preserve him from such errors...” But “ the more closely we
are able to test the story in Acts (xix. 23-41), the more vivid and true to the situation and
surroundings does it prove to be, and the more justified are we in pressing closely every
inference from the little details that occur in it. I entertain the strong hope that the
demonstration which has now been given of its accuracy in disputed points will do away
with all future doubt as to the faithfulness of the picture that it gives of Ephesian society in
A.D. 57” (Prof. Ramsay, The Church in the Roman Empire, p. 141).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.


Vers. 1-7. Paul’s return to Ephesus; or, the Re-Baptism of some of John’s
Disciples.

I. The Apostle’s meeting with these disciples.—1. When he encountered them.
On returning to Ephesus, which he reached (1) by way of the upper coasts (or
country), meaning probably the mountainous regions (as distinguished from the
lower elevations (see “ Critical Remarks ”) of Phrygia or of Asia as distinguished
from the low ground on which Ephesus was situated, and (2) after Apollos had
departed and was established in Corinth, where he laboured in the gospel with
such acceptance as to draw around himself a considerable body of adherents who
recognised him as their spiritual teacher (1 Cor. i. 12, iii. 4, 5, 6). 2. Who they
were. Certain disciples—i.e., believers in the Christian faith, twelve in number,
“living,” probably, “together as a kind of ascetic community, attending the
meetings of the Church, yet not sharing the fulness of its life” (Plumptre)—
who, like Apollos (xviii. 25), had some knowledge of the way of the Lord as
proclaimed by the Baptist, and had even been baptised by the forerunner or one
of his disciples—it is not certain that Apollos was baptised (but see “ Critical
Remarks,” ver. 7)—but were totally unacquainted with the later facts of Christ’s
history, and with the Spirit baptism of Pentecost. 3. His surprise at meeting them.
The credibility of the narrative is half suspected by Holtzmann on the ground
that Paul should not have felt any surprise at falling in with the twelve
followers of the Baptist, since Aquila must have prepared him for such a
meeting by relating his experience with Apollos; while Wendt is half inclined
to doubt whether the disciples spoken of could have been so ignorant as they
are represented, if they were really converted; and Ramsay cannot understand
how these men could have “escaped the knowledge of Aquila, Priscilla, and
Apollos, and yet attracted Paul’s attention before he went to the synagogue.”
But (1) Paul may have met these disciples on his first arrival in the city and
before he had resumed acquaintance with his old friends Aquila and Priscilla.
(2) The disciples in question may easily enough have accepted the Baptist’s
account of Christ and submitted to baptism without having subsequently learnt
about the Resurrection and Ascension, with the Pentecostal effusion of the Holy
Ghost. And (3) it is gratuitous to assume that Paul did not learn of the
existence of John’s followers from Aquila and Priscilla, while his knowledge of
the state of imperfectly developed Christianity in which Apollos was, may have
been the very. circumstance which led him to suspect that the disciples now
spoken of were in a similar condition.

II. The Apostle’s conversation with these disciples.—1. Zhe first question
addressed to them by Paul. “Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed?” or “Did ye receive the Holy Ghost when ye believed?” (1) The™
import of this question was, not whether they were acquainted with the personality
of the Holy Spirit, or whether they had received the Holy Spirit at any period
subsequent to their believing, but whether on the occasion of their first pro-
fession of faith (by baptism) they had been the subjects of any supernatural
endowment with spiritual gifts. (2) The object of the question was to ascertain


404


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xix.
-





whether they had been baptised after a full and distinct profession of faith in
the crucified and risen Christ. (3) The sufficiency of the question arose from
this, that had they been baptised with true Christian baptism, then undoubtedly
they must have received some spiritual gift (compare x. 44, 45; Rom. i. 11),
whereas if they had not received any such gift, then they could not have been
baptised with Christian baptism, and must still be imperfectly instructed
Christians. 2. The answer returned by them to Paul. ‘We have not so much
as heard” (or, we did not so much as hear) “whether there be any Holy
Ghost” (or, whether the Holy Ghost was given). Again (1) the sense of this
reply can hardly have been that they had never heard of the existence of a Holy
Spirit (Hackett), since, as Bengel remarks, they could scarcely have been
followers either of Moses or of the Baptist without attaining to such knowledge
(Exod. xxxi. 3, xxxv. 31; Numb. xxvii. 18; Matt. iii, 11); but (2) must have
been that when received into the faith either nothing had been said about the
Holy Spirit at all (Alford), or nothing had been spoken about a dispensation of
the Spirit being connected with the act of reception into the Church by faith
(Lechler). 3. The second question addressed to them by Paul. ‘ Unto” or into
“‘what then were ye baptised?” What was the object of your faith and the
subject of your confessioa when ye were baptised? The questions presuppose
that some declaration was made either by them of their faith, or by the
administrant of the baptismal rite of the significance of the ordinance, perhaps
by both. 4. The second answer returned by them. ‘They said, Unto (or into)
John’s baptism.” Not unto John as the Messiah, or unto John as their spiritual
leaders which would certainly have been “opposed to the humility and the entire
character of the Baptist ” (Lechler) ; but into that repentance and faith in the
coming Messiah which John preached, and to the exercise of which he took those
bound who submitted to the rite of baptism. 5. The further instruction supplied
them by Paul. This consisted in (1) an exposition of the true purport of John’s
baptism, which was designed to point his hearers to a Messiah who was to come
and commit them to faith in that Messiah when he did come, and (2) an
intimation that that Messiah had come in the person of Jesus, on whom there-
fore it was now their duty to believe. 6. The response given by them to this
instruction. When they heard it they did not dispute the correctness of the
apostle’s teaching, but believed. This, though not stated, must be assumed. |

III. The Apostle’s re-baptism of these disciples.—1. The fact of it. The text
cannot be read in this way—‘“ When they (John’s disciples) heard (what their
Master, John, said) they were baptised (by John) in the name of the Lord
Jesus,” as if it were a continuation of Paul’s remarks (Beza and others),—even
to wrest it from the Anabaptists. That the baptism was performed by Paul
is as clear as it is true that John never baptised into the name of the Lord
Jesus. 2. The manner of it. ‘ Most likely, as was Paul’s usual practice
(1 Cor. i. 14), by the hands of another than himself, though this is not
absolutely certain. 3. The accompaniment of it. The laying on of hands upon
the baptised disciples. This was performed by the apostle, and was instantly
followed by the descent upon them of the Holy Ghost so that they forthwith
“spake with tongues and prophesied” (compare x. 44-46). 4. The inference
from it. Not that re-baptism is always necessary when conversion intervenes
after the first. It is not demonstrable that those who had been baptised by
John’s baptism were always re-baptised on becoming Christian disciples. Doubt-
less among the thousands baptised at Pentecost were many who had been
baptised by John; but no evidence appears that the apostles who had only
received John’s baptism were re-baptised. Possibly in their case the baptism
with fire at Pentecost rendered the repetition of the water rite unnecessary.
The re-baptism of Apollos is also problematical,


405


_ OHAP. XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Learn.—1. That genuine faith may coexist with very imperfect knowledge of
Christian truth. 2. That sincere faith will always be ready to receive further


enlightenment.
rests on the name of the Lord Jesus.
the reception of the Holy Spirit.
not need to be repeated.


3. That a properly instructed faith always looks towards and
4, That true faith is always followed by
5. That Christian baptism once received does


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. On receiving the Holy Ghost.

I. The necessity of receiving the
Holy Ghost.—That one who has be-
lieved in Jesus must also receive the
Holy Ghost was: I. Theexpress declara-
tion of prophecy. See the utterances on
this subject of Isaiah, Joel, Ezekiel,
Zechariah, John the Baptist. 2. The
explicit promise of Christ Himself. As,
for instance, to the woman of Samaria
(John iv. 14) and to the Jews in the
temple (John vii. 38, 39); to the
twelve at the supper table (John xiv.
16, 17, xv. 26, xvi. 7), and again to
the eleven after His resurrection
(Luke xxiv. 49). 3. The unambiguous
assertion of Christ's apostles. Examine
the language of Peter (ii. 38, v. 32),
of Paul (Gal. iv. 6; Eph. i. 13), and
of John (1 John iii. 24).

II. Marks by which the Holy Ghost’s
presence in the heart may be known.—
In the early apostolic age of the Church
the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
a believer revealed itself in certain
miraculous endowments which were
thereby communicated to him, such as
the gift of tongues (ver. 6), the gift of
prophecy, or of healing or of discerning
spirits, or of interpretation of tongues
(1 Cor. xii. 9, 10). Now it is recog-
nised by such signs as: 1. Inward
illumination, the Holy Ghost being a
spirit of truth (John xiv. 17), whose
office it is to guide into all truth
(John xvi. 13); compare 1 John ii. 20.
2. Growing sanctity, the Holy Ghost
being a spirit of purity, as His name
implies, and bringing holiness into the
heart as Heimparts light to the under-
standing (Eph. v. 9). 3. Habitual
devotion, the Holy Ghost being es-
sentially a spirit of grace and supplica-
tion (Zech. xii. 10).

III. Advantages that result from


406


receiving the Holy Ghost.—The re-
ception of the Holy Spirit by a believer
constitutes 1. A true bond of union
between the believer's soul and Christ.
The union of Christ to His people and
of believers to Christ is not merely ex-
ternal, forensic, legal, but also internal,
moral, and spiritual (1 John iv. 13).
2. A seal of the believer as Christ's pur-
chased possession. By the gift of the
Holy Spirit, Christ, as it were, claims
the believer as His own (Eph. i. 13).
3. An earnest of the believer's in-
heritance. The indwelling of the Holy
Ghost is the foretaste of future glory
(Eph. i. 14).


Have ye received the Holy Ghost
since ye believed? The influences of
the Holy Spirit are extraordinary and
ordinary. His ordinary influences are
those which are exerted in conver-
sion and after conversion. It is of the
Spirit’s work in believers I shall now
speak. 1. Have ye received the Holy
Ghost as a teacher? Believers need
instruction. They do not receive a
new revelation. The author of the
Book explains it to them. On what
subjects? The house of the interpreter.
2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost as
a guide? Believers need guidance as
well as instruction. Practical religion.
No Urim and Thummim. The Bible a
guide-book. Ministers and Christian
friends convey information about the
route. The Holy Spirit is the guide.
Mentor. 3. Have ye received the
Holy Ghost as a sanctifier? Believers
do not learn all at once the plagues of
their own heart. They are led from
one apartment to another of the
chambers of imagery. They desire to
be holy as the miser desires gold,
or the scholar knowledge, or the


f HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIX.





statesman power. They use the means,
but rely on the Holy Spirit. 4. Have
ye received the Holy Ghost as a com-
forter? He is a comforter because He
administers consolation to believers in
seasons of affliction. But more. He
supplies to them strength adequate to
every exigency. And more. He
bestows on them true and lasting hap-
piness. 5, Have ye received the Holy
Ghost as an intercessor? Distinguish
between the intercession of the Spirit
and that of Christ.—G. Brooks.


Ver. 3. On the Import of Baptism.—
«Into what were ye baptised?” Into
I. Repentance of sin.
II. Faith in Jesus Christ.
III. Resolution after new obedience.
IV. Submission to the leading of
the Holy Ghost.


Vers. 3, 5. The two Masters, John
and Christ.

I. Human masters may transmit
their words; Christ only can impart
His Spirit.


II, Human masters may teach the
elements; Christ only can conduct to
the goal.

III. Human masters may establish
schools; Christ only can found a
Church..-—Gerok., -

Ver. 6. The Tongues which the Holy
Ghost gives.

I. The tongue of the wise.—The
tongue of truth, the tongue of know-
ledge (Prov. xv. 2; Mal. ii. 7; Eph.
iv. 25).

II. The tongue of the holy.—The
tongue of righteousness, the tongue of
purity (Psalm xxxv. 28, xxxix. 1;
2 Pet. i. 21).

III. The tongue of the loving.—The
tongue of kindness, the tongue of soft
speech (Prov. xxxi. 26 ; Eph. iv. 15).

IV. The tongue of the learned.—
The tongue of eloquence, the tongue of
persuasive speech (Isa. 1 4; Psalm
xlv. 1).

V. The tongue of the earnest.—The
tongue of fire, the tongue of zealous
utterance (Isa. vi. 7; Acts ii. 3).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 8—12.


A Three Years’ Mimstry in Ephesus ; or, a Great Door opened for the Gospel
(1 Cor. xvi. 8, 9).

I. Three months in the synagogue of the Jews.—1. Paul’s unchanging theme.
“The things concerning the kingdom of God.” “This one thing I do”
(Phil. iii. 13), constituted Paul’s motto in preaching. “Jesus Christ and Him
crucified ” formed his unvarying text, whether in Corinth or Ephesus. (1) He
knew none loftier to set before the human intellect, or (2) better suited to his
hearers’ wants, or (3) more worthy of the consecration of all his powers to
proclaim. Besides (3 it had been assigned him by his exalted Master, and
(5) possessed for him exhaustless fulness of meaning as well as of perennial
interest. The preacher or evangelist, minister or missionary, who substitutes for
this any branch of secular science has both mistaken his calling and thrown
away his best weapon for combating the ills of life and saving the souls of men.
2. Paul’s customary manner. (1) Reasoning and persuading, addressing himself
to the intellects and hearts of his hearers (compare xviii. 4). (2) And doing so
not apologetically, which is apt to degenerate into apologisingly, but boldly, as one
who knew that what he spoke was true and understood that he had a secret ally
in the bosom of every man and woman who listened to him (2 Cor. iv. 2).
3. Paul's usual experience. ‘ Divers were hardened and believed not, but spake
evil of that [or the] way ” (compare xvii. 5, 13, xviii. 6); which implies that some
were subdued by the apostle’s preaching and led to believe. The same gospel
that softens some hardens others, It is a savour either of life or of death to
every man who hears.

Il. Two years in the school of Tyrannus.—1. The place here mentioned was


407


cHap. xx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


= a re ee ee a





the building or semicircle in which one Tyrannus, otherwise unknown, but pro-
bably a teacher of philosophy or rhetoric, or a physician (Plwmptre)—perhaps one
of Paul’s converts—was accustomed to instruct his pupils or cure his patients.
Whether it was rented by the apostle and his friends, or freely opened to them
by Tyrannus, as Justus’s house had been (xviii. 7), cannot be decided. 2. The
work carried on in this school was the old business that had occupied the apostle
in the synagogue—viz., preaching, “ disputing,” or reasoning. Nor was it only
on the Sabbaths, but on all the weekdays, that the apostle so laboured. 3. The
result of his efforts was that, in spite of the exertions of his enemies to hinder the
progress of the gospel, “all who dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord, both
Jews and Greeks.” If all who heard were not converted, many were; and these
in turn would help to bear the truth into regions beyond.

III. Three years with the people of the city.—For this item of information
we are indebied to Paul’s subsequent address to the Ephesian elders (xx. 31).
His occupation during this period was varied. 1. Preaching in the synagogue on
Sabbaths for a space of three months, as above stated. 2. Teaching in the school
of Tyrannus for two years, as just mentioned. 3. For nine months more, or for
three years in all, visiting from house to house, and testifying both to Jews and
Greeks repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ (z 20,
21). 4. Working, or God working through him, miracles of a special kind—i.e.,
greater than ordinary—lit., not such as may be met with any day (compare
xxviii. 2), because of the special circumstances in which he was placed, in the
midst of a heathen population that trusted in ‘‘charms, amulets, and mystic
letters.” Amongst these miracles were healings of diseased and demonised
persons, which were effected by the apostle’s handkerchiefs or aprons (lit.,
sweat-cloths, for wiping the sweat from the brow or face, or girdles, such as artizans
and servants were accustomed to wear when about their work) being seized upon
and brought into contact with the bodies of the afflicted. These miracles were
obviously like those wrought by the hem of Christ’s garment (Luke viii. 43-46),
and by Peter’s shadow (v.15). (See “ Critical Remarks”). 5. Writing an epistle
to the Corinthians—probably a letter which is now lost (1 Cor. v. 9), but certainly
the first of the two letters which have been preserved. 6. Paying a brief visit to
Corinth, of which Luke has handed down no account (see 2 Cor. xii. 14, xiii. 1).
7. Working at his trade. An additional item of information derived from the
address at Miletus (xx. 34). Compare xviii. 3.

Learn.—1. That Christ’s people have in every age been evil spoken of.
2. That Christ’s ministers and people should not resist evil, but retire from
before it. 3. That a faithfully preached gospel cannot be kept from spreading
throughout the land. 4. That God can work miracles by any sort of means,
and even, if need be, without means. 5. That Christ’s gospel is the most
powerful remedial agency the world has ever seen.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Speaking Evil of the Way.—
A sin—

I. Common.—Christianity is slan-
dered by every class of its opponents.

II. Old.—Christianity has been ex-
posed to such treatment ever since it
began its victorious career.

III. Foolish.—To tell lies about
Christianity is not the way to prove it
untrue ; to call it bad names does not


408


show it to be bad; to insinuate against
it will not eventually hinder it. “
IV. Mean.—Most of those who ad-
vance charges against Christianity
know these charges to be groundless.
V. Heinous.—To speak evil of the
way is to speak evil of Him whose way
it is ; and God will not hold him guilt-
less who slanders His son, “ For this
is an heinous crime; yea,‘it is an


> ; HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XIX.





iniquity to be punished by the judges ”
(Job xxxi. 11),


Ver. 9. Separation and Schism.

I. The separation of believers from
unbelievers a duty.—1. For a testi-
mony against the unbelievers. 2. For
the protection of believers, who might
otherwise be both hindered in their
work and tainted in their characters.

II. The separation of believers from
each other a sin—1. Because they
are commanded by Christ to remain
together. 2. Because they need the
countenance and help of each other.
3. Because by withdrawing into
separate communities they mar the
unity of the body and weaken each
other’s hands.


Ver. 10. Heuring the Word of God.
I. A glorious privilege. ©
II. A solemn duty.
ITI. A high responsibility.


Two Years’ Work in Ephesus. ‘In
these two successful years, when Paul
taught in Ephesus, four Churches
were collected in the province of Asia ;
besides the stem Church in Ephesus,
the branch Churches of  Colosse,
planted by a helper of Paul in Ephesus


(ver. 22), the Colossian Epaphras
(Col. i. 7, iv. 12), Laodicea (Col. iv.
15, 16), and Hierapolis (Col. iv. 13).
Three times four Churches of apostolic
planting have we therefore seen bloom-
ing forth (unnumbered the Churches
in the upper lands), twelve trees to the
praise of the Lord sprouted from the
root of Jesse (Rom. xv. 12), four in
Lycaonia and Pisidia, four in Mace-
donia and Greece, and four in the pro-
vince of Asia” (Besser, Bibelstunden,
li., 343, 344),


Vers. 8-12. How Ministers should
Preach.

I. Boldly.—Like men who fear God,
know the truth and value of their
message, and tremble not before their
fellows.

II. Daily._Embracing every oppor-
tunity, allowing no day to pass without
telling the good news.

Ill. Intelligently. — Like leaders
who understand their lesson.

IV. Persuasively. — Endeavouring
not to coerce, but to win the judgment.

V. Persistently.—Not abandoning
the sacred work after a short while,
but continuing steadfast unto the end.

VI. Effectively.—So that their gospel
may gain adherents, and spread.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS. —Verses 13—20.


An incident in Ephesus ; or, the Story of Sceva’s Sons.

I. Their social standing.—1. Their father’s name. Sceva, or Sheva, Sxeva, -
otherwise unknown. The number of obscure individuals whose names have
found a place in Holy Writ is remarkable. Fathers of no celebrity have
frequently had sons who have risen to celebrity or achieved notoriety. 2. Their
father’s dignity. A Jewish chief priest. Whether an actual high priest who had
been deposed, or an individual connected with the high priest’s family, or the
head of one of the twenty-four courses that officiated in the temple, or a priest
of the higher class, or head of the priests attached to the local synagogue, cannot
be determined. “There is no warrant in the text for the view sometimes
advocated that Sceva was merely an impostor who pretended to be a chief
priest ” (Ramsay).

II. Their professional character. —‘“‘ Vagabond ”—7.e., wandering “ exorcists.”
According to the best information, the whole Orient at this time was full of such
worthies, exorcists of demons, interpreters of dreams, fortune-tellers, charmers,
masters of the black art, jugglers ; which renders the presence of such a detach-
ment of this fraternity as Sceva’s sons formed perfectly credible.

_ JII. Their ill-advised experiment.—1. The natwre of it was to attempt the
expulsion of demons by calling over such as were possessed the name of the Lord


409


cHAP. x1x. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








Jesus, and saying, “I adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.” (2. The
motive which impelled them was undoubtedly a consciousness that Paul, by
employing the name of Jesus, could do in reality what they with their incanta-
tions and mystic arts only pretended to do, but were well aware they did not and
could not do (see “ Critical Remarks”). 3. The number of those who took part in
the particular attempt recorded is not clear. According to one view, while all
the seven addicted themselves to this practice of imitating Paul, only two (after
the best reading in ver. 16) were engaged in this special instance (Lechler,
Alford). Another explanation runs that though all the seven employed them-
selves about the business, only two, who acted as ringleaders, were set upon by
the demon. A third suggestion (but not so good) is that all were overcome by
the demon on both sides—i.e. when they stood before and afterwards when they
fled from him (Ewald).

IV. Their richly-merited punishment.—l. From whom it proceeded. The
man in whom the evil spirit was, and who now fiercely turned on the impostors.
As, however, the man was more or less the involuntary instrument of the demon,
the real author of their punishment was the “spirit” rather than the man.
2. To what extent it was carried. The man leaped upon them with wild fury,
and, endowed like the Gadarene demoniac, with almost preternatural strength
(Mark v. 3, 4), overcame and prevailed against them both, stripping their (outer)
garments from them and inflicting on them bodily wounds, so that, like the
cowards they were (and all like them are), they were glad to flee from the house
in a semi-nude and, perhaps, bleeding condition. 3. By what argument it was
justified. This was contained in the saying of the man, “Jesus I know (or
recognise) and Paul I know ; but who are ye?” For the moment the conscious-
ness of the man was taken possession of by the demon, who, as in the similar
instance mentioned in the gospels (Matt. viii. 29; Mark v. 7; Luke viii. 28),
acknowledged the authority of Christ, and, as in the case of the pythoness at
Philippi (xvi. 17), recognised that of the apostle as Christ’s servant; but had no
knowledge whatever of the sons of Sceva. 4. Zo what good results i led.
(1) To the impression of the public mind. Becoming known it caused a tremen-
dous sensation in the city among both Jews and Greeks. “Fear fell upon them
all” (compare v.11). (2) To the exaltation of the name of the Lord Jesus. The
occurrence showed that Christ’s name, which Paul preached in the school of
Tyrannus, stood on a different platform from that of any of the names which
had been employed by the exorcists (see Phil. ii. 9). (3) To the repentance of
many in the Church, This humiliating admission that many of those who had
professed to believe under Paul’s ministry in the city had been leading lives
wholly inconsistent with the holy gospel, to the extent even of trafticking with
these “vagabond exorcists,” indirectly proves the historic faithfulness of Luke ;
while the confessions of the converts themselves offered no small testimony to
the impression created by the incident and to the sense of the unseen felt by the
Ephesian Christians. Whether this confession was made to Paul in private or
in public before the Church is not stated. The Romish Church accepting the
former hypothesis grounds on this text the institution of the confessional.
(4) To the conversion of not a few of the exorcists themselves. The practisers
of curious or magical arts, literally of things over-wrought, curious and recondite,
were so struck with awe that they renounced their superstitious practices,
collected their books which contained their magical incantations, charms,
nostrums and such like, to the value of fifty thousand pieces of silver—nearly
£2000 of English money—and burned them in the sight of all. “ It was a strong
proof of honest conviction on the part of the sorcerers, and a striking attestation
of the triumph of Jesus Christ over the powers of darkness” (Conybeare and
Howson). (5) To the accelerated progress of the gospel. ‘The word of the

410


*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XIX.





Lord grew mightily and prevailed,” as it did years before in Jerusalem on the


death of Herod (xii. 24).


Learn.—1l. The danger of using Christ’s name unlawfully.
preaching Christ’s gospel without knowing Christ Himself.


2. The sin of
3. The involuntary


‘testimony Christ can extract from His foes. 4. The certainty that all who oppose


either Christ or His gospel will ultimately suffer loss.


hindering the progress of the gospel.
their sins.


5. The impossibility of


6. The duty of believers acknowledging
7. The power of the truth to excite to repentance.
sacrifices to which Christianity sometimes calls its adherents.


8. The great
9. The absolute


exclusiveness of Christianity which admits of no compromise.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. The Name of the Lord
Jesus.

1. The most exalted in the universe.
1. In heaven higher than that of
principalities and powers. 2. On earth
more widely known than that of any
other teacher or founder of religion.
3. In the Church, more trusted, loved
and honoured by believers than any
other.

II. The most powerful in the uni-
verse.—l. The Healer of disease.
2. The conqueror of Satan. 3. The
Saviour! from sin, 4. The awakener
from death.

III. The most permanent in the
universe.— His name shall endure
for ever.”


Jesus whom Paul preacheth.

I, Jesus, the incarnate Son of God,
sent forth in the fulness of the times
and declared to be God’s Son by His
resurrection from the dead.

II. Jesus, the sinner’s substitute,
set forth to be a great propitiation
through faith in His blood,

III. Jesus, the Messiah of Israel,
proved to be so by the meeting in Him
of Old Testament prophecies.

IV. Jesus, the Saviour of believers,
who accept God’s testimony concerning
Him, and trust in His finished work,
who renounce their own righteousness
and embrace the righteousness which
is of God by faith.

V. Jesus, the conqueror of the
devil, who came indeed to destroy the
works of the devil, and who triumphed
over the principalities and powers of
darkness through His cross.


Ver. 15. Jesus and Paul.
I. The Saviour and the saved.
II. The Lord and the servant.
III. The agent and the instrument.
IV. The sovereign and the ambas-
sador.
V. The subject and the preacher.


Jesus I know, and Paul I know ;
but who are ye?” —A sermon by an
evil spirit ; or the (sound) doctrines of
devils.

I. That Jesus is the Son of God and
the conqueror of the devil (Matt. x. 29 ;
Luke iv. 34; Heb. ii. 14).

II. That the gospel is a message of
salvation for guilty men, or of deliver-
ance from the bondage of the devil
(Luke iv. 18; Heb. ii. 15).

III. That the ministry is an institu-
tion appointed by Jesus Christ for the
propagation of this gospel of soul
emancipation.

IV. That those who preach the
gospel without themselves standing in
personal relation to Jesus Christ or
having been appointed by Him are
false teachers and cannot really harm
them, the devils (2 Cor. xi. 4; Gal. ii.
4; 1 Tim. iv. 1).

V. That false teachers willeventually
bring upon themselves swift destruc-
tion (2 Peter ii. 1).


Ver. 17. The Name of the Lord Jesus
magnified. This happens—

I. When it is openly, widely and
courageously preached as by Paul.

II. When it is explicitly, extensively
and firmly believed in.

ITI. When it is seen to be power-


411


CHAP. XIX.





fully influential ever men’s hearts and
lives, leading the unbelieving to faith,
and the faithful to repentance and self-
sacrifice.


Magnifying the Name of the Lord
Jesus.—The Ephesians saw in this,
and so should Christians to-day—

J. The founder of God’s kingdom on
the earth.

II. The author of salvation in the
individual soul.

III. The conqueror of the devil and
his emissaries.

IV. The deliverer of the captives of
Satan and sin.


V. The ruler of His people’s hearts


Ver. 19. The Burning of the Books.

I. Some books have been burnt
which should have been preserved.—
E.g., many noble volumes of science,
philosophy and literature in the library
of Alexandria.

II. Some books are preserved which
should be tossed into the flames.—Z.v.,
“the pernicious fugitive pieces of a
frivolous superficial knowledge, the
seductive works of an impure light
literature, and the arrogant decrees of
an unchristian tyranny of the con-
science.”

IIT. Some books, though cast into
the fire, will not burn.—The magical
books of the Ephesians perished ; but
the sacred books of the Old and New
Testaments though they have often been
committed to the flames, have always
come forth again fresher, livelier and
with more power than ever.


Ver. 20. The Growth and Power of the
Word of God.—Exemplified in Ephesus.

I. The word grew.—Mightily : 1. Jn
clearness of exposition. This to be ex-
pected considering that Paul was the
preacher. 2. In intensity of impression.
Also natural, remembering what was
Paul’s theme—the things concerning
Jesus and the kingdom of God, and
who was Paul’s keeper—the Holy
Ghost. 3. In extensiveness of reception.
“ All they which dwelt in Asia” heard


412


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS,





the word, while ‘many believed.”
Scarcely less wonderful, seeing that
Paul’s word was accompanied by special
signs. 4. In productiveness of fruits.
It led to marvellous deeds of self-re-
nunciation as well as to the manifesta-
tion of great solemnity and joy.

II. The word prevailed. — Also
mightily. 1. Over the corruption of the
natural heart. Leading those who
heard the gospel to turn from dead
idols to serve the living God. 2. Over
the opposition of the powers of evil.
Manifested in the exposure of Sczva’s
sons and the deliverance of the man
possessed. 3. Over the besetting sins of
believers. Enabling those who had
received the word to shake themselves
free from the love of magic and the
fascinations of money.


Vers. 8-20. A Three Years’ Mission in
Ephesus.—During this period the cause
of the gospel as represented by Paul
was—

I. Energetically pushed. — Paul’s
activity was remarkably displayed in
three directions. 1. In preaching the
word of God (vers. 8,10). 2. In working
miracles, or signs of the Holy Ghost
(ver. 11). 3. In founding churches of
Jesus Christ. Though not stated, it
was doubtless during this period that
the Churches of Ephesus, Colosse,
Laodicea, and Hierapolis were founded.

II. Vehemently opposed.—By the
attempted imposture of Sczva’s sons.
1. The form 2 took. Attempting to
exorcise an evil spirit by naming over
it the name of Jesus, 2. The motives
inspiring it. Many. Perhaps (1) On
the part of the devil, to counterfeit
the work of the Holy Ghost. (2) On
the part of the Jews, to oppose the
work of Paul asa preacher of the cross.
(3) On the part of the jugglers, to
make money, since they saw that Paul’s
charm was more effective than theirs.
3. The result to which it led. Defeat,
exposure, and damage. So will every
attempt to hinder Christ’s cause even-
tually recoil on its author’s head.

III. Wondrously prospered.—The
impression made upon the community


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  citap. xrx.





as well as on the Church was deep and Church. It stirred to confession and


lasting. 1. On thecommunity. It led reformation, both voluntary—“ they
to fear and veneration, if not to con~ came”—and real—they burned “ their
viction and conversion. 2. On the books.”


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 21—22.


Paul's Last Days in Ephesus ; or, Contemplating New Plans.

I. A run through Macedonia and Achaia.—These the main divisions, northern
and southern, into which Greece under Roman rule was divided. The apostle’s
object in this second crossing into Europe was to visit the Churches which had
there been established, as e.g., in the towns of Philippi (xvi.), Thessalonica and
Bercea (xvii.), and Corinth (xviii.), for the twofold purpose of first establishing
them in the faith, and correcting such disorders as he knew had crept in among
them, and secondly of bringing to a close the collection for the pocr saints at
Jerusalem, which had for upwards of a year been going on among the Churches
there. This part of the apostle’s plan was subsequently carried out (xx. 1, 2);
but in the meanwhile he remained in Ephesus, and sent over Timothy and
Erastus to Macedonia.

II. A visit to Jerusalem. As the Redeemer, when He had fulfilled His
course, set His face steadfastly to go to Jerusalem (Luke ix. 51), so Paul also
turns back to that city where the Lord was crucified, and where He had
founded His first Church” (Lechler). Why he wished again to journey to
Jerusalem is not stated by Luke, but from the Epistles to the Romans (xv. 26)
and Corinthians (1 xvi. 1-4, 2 viii. 1), it may be inferred that he contemplated
bearing to the poor saints there the above mentioned munificent contribution
from the Churches of Macedonia and Achaia. That he carried out this his fifth
and last visit to Jerusalem is reported by Luke (xx. 16, xxi. 17).

III. A journey to Rome.—The first notice of any desire on the apostle’s part
to visit the metropolis of the Gentile world. That he actually had this desire
and really used the words ascribed to him by Luke is confirmed by his letters to
the Romans (i. 10-15, xv. 23). The necessity which constrained him does not
appear to have been any externally revealed intimation of the divine will, but a
strong inward impulse in this direction which had been imparted to his spirit,
doubtless by the Holy Spirit. The plan projected by himself was after visiting
Jerusalem to start upon a fourth missionary tour, proceed to Rome and travel
westward as far as Spain. How different this was from God’s plan for him will
afterwards appear.

Learn.—1. The propriety of forming purposes always in subordination to the
divine will (James iv. 15). 2. The wisdom of avoiding undue haste in carrying
out our plans. 3. The advantage of always waiting upon God to direct one’s
path.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 21. “ After I have been there, I
must also see Rome.” Compare with
Rom. i. 13, xv. 23-28. “The con-
formity between the history and the
epistle is perfect. In the first quota-


in the apostle’s mind ; in the quotation
from the Acts we find that design
expressed a considerable time before
the Epistle was written. In the history
we find that the plan which Paul had


tion from the Epistle we find that a
’ design of visiting Rome had long dwelt


formed was to pass through Macedonia
and Achaia; after that to go to


413


CHAP. XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Jerusalem; and when he had finished
his visit there to sail for Rome. When
the Epistle was written, he had executed
so much of his plan as to have passed
through Macedonia and Achaia, and
was preparing to pursue the remainder
of it by speedily setting out towards
Jerusalem ; and in this point of his
travels he tells his friends at Rome
that when he had completed the busi-
ness which carried him to Jerusalem
he would come to them, when he should
make his journey into Spain.” Also
“the very inspection of the passages
will satisfy us that they were not made
up from one another.... If the
passage in the Epistle was taken from
the Acts, why was Spain putin? If the
passage in the Acts was taken from the
Epistle, why was Spain left out? If
the two passages were unknown to
each other, nothing can account for
their conformity but truth.”—Paley,
Hore Pauline, chap. IL., iii.


Ver. 22. The Mission of Timothy
and Erastus into Macedonia.—< Of
Timothy’s special mission in Macedonia
we know nothing, but from 1 Cor. iv.
17-19, we learn that this trusted com-
panion of the Gentile apostle was
directed to pass on to Corinth to pre-
pare the Church there for the approach-
ing visit of the apostle. Erastus was
most likely the same as the person
alluded to in Rom. xvi. 23, as the
chamberlain of Corinth, and was not
improbably chosen as the companion
of Timothy on this difficult and delicate
mission with which he was charged, on
the supposition that his rank and
station among the citizens would be a
support to Timothy, who was the
bearer of Paul’s stern, grave message
to his well-loved Church.” —Spence.


Presumption or Piety—Which ?—
“ After I have been there I must also
see Rome.”

I. Presumption.—This Paul’s utter-
ance might have been had he formed the
resolution it expresses in his own mind


414


and with dependence for carrying it out
in his own strength. In this case, the
signs of sinful arrogance would have
been—1. The double use of the pro-
noun “TI,” whereas he should have
remembered God and connected his
purpose with Him, who alone orders
and guides man’s ways. 2. The taking
for granted that he would ever reach
Jerusalem, which he might never have
done, and certainly could not have done
without the divine help and protection.
3. The self-confident assertion that he
must see Rome, whereas again he
ought to have said, “ If the Lord will !”
remembering that there can be no
“must” in any plan or purpose outside
of God’s arrangement or permission,

II. Piety.— This Paul’s utterance was
because—1. The purpose to which it
referred was (1) Formed under the
guidance of the Holy Ghost. Though
not expressly stated this may be in-
ferred. 2. Indicative of his love for
the brethren—at least if his motive in
desiring to visit Jerusalem was to carry
gifts to the poor saints residing there.
3. Expressive of ardent zeal for the
extension of the gospel. In this way
must the desire and resolution to visit
Rome be regarded. 4. Perhaps also
suggestive of the loftiness of Paul’s
faith, which confided in the divine
assistance and support until these
great desires of his heart were
accomplished.





Timothy and Erastus.

I. Diverse.—1. In race. Timothy
a half Jew and half Greek: Erastus
either a whole Jew or a whole Greek.
2. In birthplace. Timothy a native
of Lystra: Erastus most likely of
Corinth (Rom. xvi. 23), or perhaps of
Ephesus. 3. Jn station. Timothy the
son of an obscure father: Erastus, if
of Corinth, the treasurer of the city.

Il. United.—1. In Christian disciple-
ship. Both believers and adherents of
the way. 2. In relationship to Paul.
Both numbered among his helpers.
3. In missionary service. Both sent
into Macedonia,


‘ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. x1x.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23—A41.


A Popular Tumult in Ephesus ; or, The Temple of Diana Endangered.

I. The speech of Demetrius, the silversmith.—1l. Jts hearers. The masters
and workmen of the guild of silversmiths, with others, employers and employed,
of a like occupation; Demetrius, himself one of those master silversmiths,
employed a large number of craftsmen, or skilled artisans with high wages, and
carried on an extensive trade in manufacturing and selling silver shrines of
Diana (or Artemis). These were portable miniature temples containing a
statue of the goddess, which were purchased by the inhabitants of the city as
well as by strangers visiting it, and either dedicated to the goddess at the
temple, or set up on returning home as objects of worship, and sometimes even
carried about on the person as amulets or charms. Having collected his brother-
tradesmen in some convenient building, if not upon the street, Demetrius,
perhaps the chairman of the guild, directed their attention to a danger to which
their business was growingly exposed. 2. Jts object. To stir up hostility against
Paul, or as Demetrius contemptuously said, ‘ this (fellow) Paul,” who, according
to Demetrius’s admission, had been carrying on a successful work of evangelisa-
tion in the city, not only preaching such abominable (!) doctrine as that “ they be
no gods which are made with hands ”—a doctrine of which the Hebrew Scriptures
are full (Psalm exv. 4-8; Isa, xliv. 19, xlvi. 6, 7; Jer. x. 5, xvi. 19; Hos. viii. 6)
—but doing this with such persuasive eloquence as “ not alone at Ephesus but
almost throughout all Asia” to turn away much people from the worship of
Diana. <A splendid testimony to the success of the gospel in Ephesus! 3. Jés
.. motive. Fear of losing his trade. ‘‘ The most sensitive part of ‘civilised’ man
is his pocket” (Ramsay). Hence one may fairly be doubtful whether Demetrius
would have been concerned about Diana’s honour, if his business had not been
injured and his profits reduced by her decline in popular estimation. It may even
be questioned whether Demetrius would have been distressed about the “turn over”
of his brother-silversmiths going down, if his own had increased, or even kept up.
But in any case it is significant that Demetrius’s opposition to this fellow Paul
had its origin in this, that Paul’s preaching was interfering with his (Demetrius's)
pocket. The like phenomenon is not unknown to-day. Men frequently oppose
the gospel because the gospel goes against their trade. Yet the converse
phenomenon is not unknown. Men profess to believe the gospel so long as the
gospel, or their profession of it, favours their financial prosperity. Nors.—The
account here given of the origin of Demetrius’s assault has been challenged as
incorrect by Canon Hicks (Hxzpositor, June 1890, pp. 401-422), who on the
strength of the inscription already referred to (‘‘ Critical Remarks”) holds the
hostile action against Paul to have been due to the priests of Artemis, whose
“jealousy only waited for an opportunity of attacking the apostle ;” but Prof.
Ramsay (The Church in the Roman Empire, pp. 130, 200) convincingly shows
that ‘the first way in which Christianity excited the popular enmity outside the
Jewish community was by disturbing the existing state of society and trade, and
not by making innovations in religion.” 4. /ts arguments. (1) From self-
interest. This the most persuasive argument that can be addressed to the
ordinary human mind. The wealth of Demetrius and his guild, in fact,
their living depended on the making and selling of these Diana shrines,
and the selling, at least, of them was absolutely incompatible with Paul’s
further preaching in the city. Already their trade receipts had gone down.
The market for their wares was declining. Unless in some way they asserted
themselves they would be ruined. If this contemptible little Jew were
allowed to continue denouncing Diana and her temple nobody would want


415


cuap. xix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








their silver shrines and such like articles as they traded in, and then what
would besome of themselves, their wives and families? A modern trades
unionist could hardly have spoken better. (2) From religious zeal. ‘“ Not only,”
said Demetrius, “will our trade be endangered, but what is of vaster moment
(one wonders if he believed this !), the temple of the great goddess Diana will be
made of no account, and she whom all Asia and the world worshippeth will be
deposed from her magnificence.” The language, though extravagant, contained
an element of truth. The temple at Ephesus had been built at the common
expense of all the Greek cities of Asia Minor, and was visited by pilgrims from
all nations and countries (see “Critical Remarks”). 5. Jts results. (1) The
populace were filled with indignation, not at the loss of Demetrius’s profits, but
at the dishonour done to Diana. Even false religions exercise a wondrous
fascination over men’s hearts, and are capable of exciting strong enthusiasm in
their behalf (see 1 Kings xviii. 26). (2) The air was rent with shouts in praise of
their patron goddess—“ Great is Diana of the Ephesians!” This ery, which
may have been “the usual chorus of the festivals of Artemis” (Plumptre), was
kept up for some time—in all perhaps “ about the space of two hours” (ver. 34)
—and was designed to vindicate the insulted majesty of the goddess, to whom
the epithet “ great” was coasidered to rightfully belong (Xenophon, Hphes., i. 15).
One would say her honour had not been much hurt if the hurt was repaired by
three hours of hurrahing, shouting, and yelling. (3) The whole city was plunged
into confusion. The loud shouts of Demetrius and his workmen attracted
towards them the mob, who, catching up the idea that some one had been
attempting to overturn their accepted worship, naturally broke out into wild
and fanatical excitement—all the wilder and more fanatical because they
properly had no idea what it was all about. (4) Two of Paul’s companions were
arrested. Having learnt that the daring assailants of Diana were the Jewish
strangers who had for some time past been residing in the town, and in particular
that fellow Paul, with one accord they rushed to the apostle’s lodging, or to the
school of Tyrannus where he taught, in the hope of apprehending him ; but not
finding him, he having been absent, as had been the case at Thessalonica (xvii. 6),
they seized on Gaius (see 1 Cor. i. 14), and Aristarchus (xx. 4, xxvii. 2), two ot
his companions, men of Macedonia, and dragged them off to the theatre, an
immense building capable of holding twenty thousand persons, where it was the
custom to hold public meetings and transact public business, as well as celebrate
public sports (see “ Critical Remarks”). What object they had in view in making
these arrests and crowding to the theatre with their prisoners, they most likely
could not state and did not know. The whole movement was a tumultuous
proceeding for which they could offer no explanation except this, that somebody
had been meddling with their goddess, and they had apprehended the two
Macedonians on suspicion.

II. The proposal of Paul the Apostle.—1. Brave. Having come to know what
had happened, the apostle, with that courageous chivalry for which he was
distinguished, wished to force his way into the theatre (1) to intercede for his
two companions who had been arrested without cause; (2) to take upon himself
the full responsibility for any dishonour that had been done to the goddess; and
(3) to explain the nature of his gospel to the multitude there and then assembled,
in the hope, doubtless, that in this way the uproar would be stilled and the
tumult allayed. 2. Jmprudent. At least, so it seemed to certain of the chief
officers of Asia, literally, Asiarchs. These were public functionaries, ten in
number, who were chosen annually from the chief towns of proconsular Asia,
and from the wealthier citizens in those towns, whose business it was to provide
at their own expense and superintend in their own persons the games and
festivals held every year in honour of the gods and Roman emperor. Being

416


re HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XIX





—_—


friendly disposed to the apostle, and knowing their countrymen better than the
apostle, they entreated him not to venture into the theatre. That they
succeeded, though not without a struggle, in preventing him from carrying out
his expressed intention may be inferred; and the recollection of this passage in
his history when, had his friends permitted him he would have plunged into the
heart of the frantic mob, was probably the inspiration of the well-known phrase
about his fighting with wild beasts at Ephesus (1 Cor. xv. 32).

III. The intei position of Alexander the Jew.—1l. The personality of this
individual. That he was a Christian Jew or an adherent of the new faith has
been supposed by not a few expositors (Calvin, Baumgarten, Meyer, Aiford, and
others), but the greater likelihood is that the name belonged to an unconvertcd
Jew (Kuinoel, Neander, Olshausen, Lechler, Hackett, and others) who formed
one of Demetrius’s guild. Whether he and the coppersmith of that name, whom
Paul afterward mentioned to Timothy (II. iv. 14) as one who had done him
much evil (Zéckler), were one and the same person, must remain undeter-
mined,—though the supposition is by no means impossible. If he was, and
if the Alexander who made shipwreck of his faith (1 Tim. i, 20) was the
same person—both of which points, however, are dovbtful—then he appears
to have at a later time become a Christian, though only in name and of
pronounced Judaistic proclivities. 2. The reason of his coming forward. His
countrymen, having detected him among the crowd and laid hold of him, thrust
him forward—if a Christian Jew, that he might serve as a victim for the popular
fury, or if an unbelieving Jew, that he might shift the guilt of vilifying Diana
from their shoulders to those of the Christians. In either case the Jews were
apprehensive lest at any moment the senseless rage of the mob might swing
round and direct itself against them, both because the heathen multitude did not
as yet with sufficient clearness distinguish between Jews and Christians, and
because even from them at that time literary assaults upon the worship of the
gods, and especially of the Ephesian Artemis, were not unknown (Zimmerman,
quoted by Holtzmann). (Compare Hausrath’s Der Apostel Paulus, p. 347; see
“ Hints” on ver. 34). 3. The failure of his attempt. No sooner had he opened
his mouth in defence of his countrymen, having first beckoned to the multitude
with his hand for a hearing, than “with a divine irony of fate similar to that
which was manifested before Gallio’s tribunal” (Zéckler), they, the multitude,
recognising him for a Jew, drowned his words in a volley of frenzied exclamations,
shouting, ‘‘ Great is Diana of the Ephesians!” as Demetrius and his workmen
had done, and keeping. up the outcry for a space of two hours. (Compare
1 Kings xviii. 26; and see Matt. vi. 7.) “The Mahommedan monks in India
at the present time often practise such repetitions for entire days together ”
(Hackett).

IV. The address of the town-clerk.—1. His official designation. The state-
seribe, or recorder; a public functionary whose business it was to register the
various laws and preserve the legal documents of the city ; who was authorised
to preside over public assemblies, and who is mentioned on the marbles as acting
in that capacity. Unlike the Asiarchs who were appointed annually, the town-
clerk was probably a permanent official. 2. His influential character. The
instant he appeared upon the rostrum the cries of the multitude were hushed.
Different from their dealing with Alexander, they made no attempt to howl him
down, but listened to him in respectful silence ; and at the close of his harangue
allowed themselves to be quietly dispersed. “He was, if we may so speak, the
Gamaliel of Ephesus, not without parallels among the princes and statesmen and
prelates who have lived in the critical times of political and religious changes,
and have endeavoured to hold the balance between contending parties” (Plumptre).
3. His dexterous oration, (1) He humoured their vanity by reminding them


EE. 417


cHap. xx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





of their religious loyalty to the great goddess Diana, whose magnificent temple
adorned their city ; of which temple also and of the image it contained—an image
which had fallen from heaven or from Jupiter—their city was known throughout
the world as the keeper (see “ Critical Remarks”). To suppose then that any-
thing said or done by these poor infatuated Jews could either dim the majesty of
their world-renowned goddess or tarnish their loyalty was surely the height
of folly and, in fact, wholly ridiculous. (2) He set before them the legal
bearing of the then situation. The men they had arrested had been guilty of no
crime against either Diana or her temple—they were neither “‘ robbers of temples
nor blasphemers of our goddess”—and accordingly should not be treated as
criminals. If the cause of this indignation against Paul and his companions was
some private grievance, as, for instance, about some trade law or civic regulation
which had been infringed, then Demetrius and his brother craftsmen should
proceed against them before the proconsuls in the ordinary law courts which
were at that moment open, Ephesus being an Assize town and the proconsul on
circuit having arrived thither (vers. 37, 38); if the cause was any matter that
concerned the public, then it should be dealt with in a lawful, ze. a regularly
called and constituted assembly (ver. 39), and not before a disorderly rabble like
that then collected in the theatre. (3) He played upon their fears by suggesting
that they might be brought to book by their Roman masters and asked to
explain the cause of such a riotous proceeding as that of which they had been
guilty—an explanation they would not find it easy to give.

Note—As has often been remarked, this speech of the town-clerk was a
complete vindication of Christianity and Christians in apostolic times, with
regard to the groundless charges of lawlessness and violence which were so
frequently preferred against them by their enemies. “This address is so
entirely an apologia of the Christians,” says Ramsay (St. Paul, ete., p. 282),
“that we might almost take it as an example of the Thucydidean type of speech,
put into the mouth of one of the actors, not as being precisely his words, but as
embodying a statesmanlike conception of the real situation. At any rate it is
included by Luke in his work, not for its mere Ephesian connection, but as
bearing on the universal question of the relations in which the Church stood
to the empire.”

Learn.—1. The world-disturbing character of the religion of Christ.
power of self-interest to hinder a reception of the truth.
foolish behaviour of idol worshippers. 4, The virtue of flattery in appeasing
a mob. 5. The unconscious testimony sometimes given by the world to
Christianity and Christians.


2. The
3. The supremely


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 23. Vo small Stir about that
Way; or, Reasons why Men oppose
Themselves to Christianity.— Because it

I. Interferes with their (sinful)
gains.

II. Explodes their foolish delusions.

III. Disturbs their cherished ease.

_ IV. Subverts their accustomed
practices.


Ver. 24. Demetrius of Ephesus.
I. A wealthy tradesman.


418


II. An influential citizen.
III. A blind idolater.
IV. A dexterous orator.


Vers. 24-27. Demetrius and his
Brother Craftsmen ; or, Ancient Types
of Modern Men.

I. Of the abject slaves of business
who in the pursuit of temporal gain
have lost all regard for eternity.

II. Of the blind adherents of esta-
blished customs, who, from every fresh


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


-


movement of the Spirit fear the dis-
turbance of their ease, indeed, the
destruction of the world.

III. Of the self-satisfied priests of
the beautiful who in idolatrous venera-
tion for nature and art acknowledge
no consciousness of sin and no need of
grace.—Gerok.


Ver. 26. Hand-made Gods.

I. Widely worshipped.— All nations
outside of revelation have drifted into
idolatry.

II. Strongly condemned.—l. By
Scripture, which proclaims them to be
vanities. 2. By reason, since the less
cannot make the greater or the creature
its creator. 3. By experience, which
has shown them to be useless, gods
that neither hear nor help, neither
see nor save.

III. Certainly doomed.—1. To ex-
posure. Of their worthlessness. 2. To
desertion. —By their followers. This
process Demetrius observed had begun.
3. To destruction. ‘ The idols He will
utterly abolish.”


Ver. 28. Diana and Jesus.

I, Great was Diana of the Ephesians
in her (supposed) divinity ; but greater
is Jesus of the Christians in His (real)
Godhead.—Diana was an idol; Jesus
is the true God. Diana was a manu-
factured goddess ; Jesus is the Almighty
Maker of the universe. Diana was a
creation of the degraded and benighted
human intellect ; Jesus is the ‘“ Word
of the Father, in our flesh appearing.”

II. Great was Diana of the Ephesians
in the magnificence of her temple; but
greater is Jesus of the Christians in
the shrines which He inhabits. —The
temple of Diana was a structure de-
corated by the highest art of the day,
but at the best was only a limited and
mean habitation ; the temples of Jesus
are first the boundless universe, next
the Christian Church, and lastly the
soul of the belsever—the first of which
has lavished on it all the wisdom and
power of an infinite mind, and the
second and thira of which are being
beautified by all the glory that divine
grace can impart to them,


CHAP. XIX.


III. Great was Diana of the
Ephesians in the number of her wor-
shippers ; but greater is Jesus of the
Christians in the multitude of His
disciples.—All Asia and the world
worshipped Diana, said Demetrius;
but to day the name of Jesus is adored
by more millions than at that time
inhabited the globe.

IV. Great was Diana of the Ephe-
sians in the enthusiasm of her devotees ;
but greater is Jesus of the Christians
in the love of His people.—Diana’s
admirers spent much time and physical
energy in their insane orgies, and if
howling and shouting could do her
honour she was a highly exalted
divinity ; but the homage paid to Jesus
is of a more spiritual, rational and
beneficent sort, consisting of the con-
secration to His service of loving hearts
and holy lives.

V. Great was Diana of the Ephe-
sians in the duration of her reign ; but
greater is Jesus of the Christians in
the permanence of His.—For long
centuries the superstition of Diana
worship sat like a nightmare upon
the souls of men, though it is now for
ever perished and gone; but the name
of Jesus shall endureforever. ‘“‘ Jesus
shall reign where’er the sun,” etc.


Ver. 35. The Town-clerk of Ephesus.

I. His fearless courage.—In facing
the frenzied mob.

Il. His admirable tact.—In humour-
ing the crowd by endorsing their
estimate of Diana.

III. His prudent advice.—In ex-
horting the people to do nothing rashly.

IV. His impartial justice.—In ad-
mitting the innocence of Gaius and
Aristarchus,

V. His great influence.—In calming
and dismissing the assembly.


Ver. 40. The Uproar at Ephesus.—A
picture of rebellion against the gospel.

I. In the dark heathen world; on
the part of brutal, yea, Satanic heathen
nature.—FPictures of persecution from
the missionary field.

II. In unconverted Christendom ;


419


CHAP. XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





on the part of the carnal mind, which
will not suffer itself to be rebuked by
God’s word, and of the materialistic
spirit of the age which will know
nothing of heavenly things.

TIT. In the hearts of true Christians ;
on the part of proud reason, of the
self-righteous heart, and of the flesh
which shuns the cross.—Gerok.


Vers. 24-41. A Group of Typical
Characters.

I. Paul.—A type of 1. Evangelical
zeal. Preaching in Ephesus. 2.
Christian influence. Persuading much
people. 3. Heroicself-sacrifice. Will-
ing to rescue his companions by rush-
ing into the theatre.

II. Demetrius.—A type of 1. The
successful merchant, who makes no
small gain from his trade. 2. The
hypocritical religionist, who worships
because it pays. 3. The crafty de-
magogue, who plays upon the ignorance
of his townsmen.

III. Gaius and Aristarchus.—
Typical of those who 1. Suffer on
account of their religion; 2. Bear the
consequences of other people’s acts,
and 3. Come safely out of their tribu-
lations.

IV. Alexander.—Typical of the man
1. Who is disliked for his religion.
The Ephesians refused to hear him
because he was a Jew. 2. Who is
punished by mistake. The Ephesians
confounded him with the Christians
who alsc were regarded as Jews. 3.
Who is not allowed to speak in his
defence, but is condemned without
being heard.

V. The Town-clerk.—Typical of 1.
The influential citizen. 2. The prudent
counsellor. 3. The just judge.


Notse.—The Jews and the Temple of
Diana. It has been suggested that
the opposition shown to Alexander by
the Ephesian mob may have been
occasioned by the assaults which the
the Jews were known to have made
against the worship of Diana, On
this subject the following sentences
may be read with interest :—‘‘ Long
before the days of Paul and Apollos


420


the synagogue of Ephesus had waged
war against the prevailing heathenism ;
and, if Paul and John pitched their
tents here, that was only because others
before them had hewed a clearance in
this primeval forest of superstition.
From of old the synagogue at Ephesus
had found the better class of citizens
actively disaffected towards the existing
religion, and by means of this prepared
the way for Christianity. For a long
time had Jews existed in Ephesus.
Already the Diadochi had allowed
them, contrary to the opinion of the
settled citizens, to call themselves
Ephesians, and their speedy transition
to Rome (as her subjects) bore for
them here also good fruits. They
knew how to acquire for themselves,
from Dolabella and other Roman
authorities, numerous privileges con-
cerning which Josephus communicates
information. Their religious worship
was placed under the protection of the
Archons, whilst their youth were
exempted from military service. From
their petitions about free intercourse
with the temple, as also from the
fortunes of the apostle Paul, one may
gather in how lively commerce with
Jerusalem the Jewish quarter in
Ephesus continued. Even the narra-
tives in the Acts give the impression of
a very vigorous religious life. So
zealous a community must have felt
itself doubly called forth to open a
propaganda among its heathen fellow.
citizens, seeing that all the intelligent
among these were weary of the dis-
order of the Diana worship. The
apostolic history itself points to this,
that only the material interests of
Ephesus! as a place of pilgrimage, of
the vendors of images, and of those
who were entitled to the rich endow-
ments of the Diana temple sufficed to
keep up the wild cultus. Accordingly
from Jewish circles in Ephesus numer-
ous attempts were made to waken up
against this condition of things the
moral susceptibilities of their Greek
fellow-citizens. Even before the aboli-
tion by Domitian of the Eunuch
worship (Suet., Dom., 7; Pseudo-


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XIX.





Heraclit., Ep. 9), and therefore in the
time of the first Cesar, a Jew under-
took a bold assault against the temple
of Diana, regardlessly, uncovering all
the evils of the holy disorder, and,
through keen satire generally directed
against idolatry, pressing to the recog-
nition of the One God. A _ pretended
letter of the philosopher Heraclitus
suggested to this Jewish writer the
thought to avail himself for the
purpose of his raillery of the solemn
mask of the people-deriding philosopher,
of whom the story ran that he had
declared the entire manhood of Ephesus
to be deserving of strangulation. He,
as no other, was qualified to castigate
the Ephesians, and so, like one well-
versed in Scripture and well read in
Aristotle’s ethic, this son of the
synagogue composed some fictitious
letters in which the obscure Heraclitus
explained to the Ephesians why he
had never in his life laughed. En-
tirely from an Old Testament stand-
point Heraclitus proposes the question
why it goes well with the wicked, and
why their city flourishes in spite of all
its vice, and arrives at the Biblical
solution :—That ‘God punishes not by
the withdrawal of riches, but rather
He gives these to the evil that they,
by being in possession of means, might
sin on to conviction; adding with a
grim glance upon the wealth in the
haven of Panormus, ‘so may your
good fortune never fail that your
wickedness may call forth chastise-
ment.’ Then, proceeding to direct his
weapons against the excesses of the
Ephesian idolatry, with the com-
placency of hatred he dissects all its
institutions, in order to abandon every
one of them to contempt. Because the
cell in which the idol image is accus-
tomed to stand receives its light for
the most part only from the door, and
accordingly is half dark, he makes fun
of the god placed in the darkness.
Because it is an insult (especially to a
god) to say that it ‘is of stone’
(Odyss., xix. 163), he finds every stone
god blasphemous. Even the narrow
pedestal of the idl is a mockery of


Him whom heaven and earth cannot
contain. Next from idolatry generally
the author turns himself to the
Artemis (Diana) worship in particular,
which he finds below the practices of
the beasts. Should not the chief priest
in the first instance curse the wooden
image, since, in order to serve it, he
requires to be mutilated? And is it
not foolish to charge the goddess her-
self with unchastity when only eunuchs
are allowed to approach her? But
the essence of all wickedness to him
are the orgies of the worship of Cybele,
the nightly torch feasts, and all the
ancient rites which exist only for the
purpose of covering with their mantle
abomination and crime. ‘On _ this


" account,’ says the pretended Heraclitus,


‘have I given over laughing. I feel
lonely in the town. To a wilderness
have you made me through your wicked-
ness. Should I laugh when you go
round about as mendicant priests with
the kettle-drum, each one filled with
a separate vice? Should it move me
to laughter when I see men do such
like things, or when I consider your
clothing and your beards, or when I
see what useless labour is expended on
your head-gear; when I see how a
mother seizes her child for poisoning ;
how the substance of minors is de-
voured, how a citizen is robbed of his
wife; how a maid, during pious night
festivals, is forcibly deprived of her
virginity ; how a girl not yet arrived
at womanhood is the victim of all
woman’s troubles ; how one who is only
a youth is the lover of the whole town ;
or when I see the squandering of oil
or of ointment, or the extravagance of
mirth in the social meals got up by
the pledging of rings; or the assembled
town gatherings at which truly very
important judicial decisions in matters
of the plays are published? On account
of these things have I discontinued
laughing.’ This lively representation
of the domestic and public life at
Ephesus is only the basis from which
the author seeks to lead to faith in the
true God” (Hausrath: Der <Apostel
Paulus, pp. 346-349).


42]


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,


nn ne ee ESET EI ane ESS


CHAPTER XX.
Tue Turrp Misstonary Journey (Paut anp TimoTHy)—CoNTINUED.


. A Second Visit to Europe ; or, Across the ASgean and Back (vers. 1-6).

. A Communion Festival at Troas ; or, the Story of the Young Man Eutychus
(vers. 7-12).

. Sailing past Ephesus; or, bound for Jerusalem (vers. 13-16).

. A Halt at Miletus; or, a Farewell Address to the Elders of Ephesus (vers.
17-38).


(Mem thw
H Go bo ee


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. After the uproar was ceased.—Soon after, but not necessarily because of the uproar.
The best authorities insert and exhorted, wapaxadécas, before and embraced or took leave of
them—i.e., the disciples; the word domacdevos referring to the farewell blessing and the
farewell kiss (compare xxi. 6). Departed for to go into Macedonia, vid Troas (see 2 Cor. ii.
12, 13), where he awaited for some time the coming of Titus, whom, however, he did not
meet till he reached Macedonia (2 Cor. vii. 6).

Ver. 2. The word for Greece, E\\ds, stands for Achaia as distinguished from Macedonia
(xviii. 12, xix. 21).

Ver. 3. And there abode three months.—Lit., having acted or worked there—viz.. in Corinth
(1 Cor. xvi. 6), three months, a plot having been laid against him by the Jews, etc. ovjoas,
an anakolouthon, instead of rowjoavrt. During this stay in Corinth the Epistle to tte
Romans was written (see Rom. xvi. 22, 23). He purposed to return through Macedonia.—
Lit., there was to him an opinion, or intention—i.e., it was not by accident, but in accordance
with deliberate counsel and determination that he, when on the eve of embarking for Syria,
changed his route and proceeded northwards through Macedonia.

Ver. 4. As far as Asia is omitted by many ancient authorities, possibly because Trophimus,
in spite of 2 Tim. iv. 20, appears in Paul’s company in Jerusalem (xxi. 29), and Aristarchus
sails with Paul from Cexsarea (xxvii. 2). The retention of the clause, however, does not
necessarily imply that the persons here named proceeded with the Apostle no farther than
to Asia. The best MSS. also add to Sopater of Berea the words “the son of Pyrrhus,”
probably to distinguish him from Sosipater, Paul’s kinsman (Rom. xvi. 21).

Ver. 5. These (the seven) going before.—Rather, having gone before, most likely by ship
from Corinth (Lewin), though some suppose by land through Macedonia and ship fron
Philippi (Alford, Hackett), tarried for us at Troas (sce xvi. 8). Why Paul stayed behind at
Corinth or at Philippi is not recorded. Hither he had work to doin Philippi or Corinth
(Alford), or he may have wished to keep the days of unleavened bread (Meyer). The use of
us (ver. 5) and we (ver. 6) shows that Luke rejoined the Apostle’s company at Philippi.
Holtzmann thinks that Paul, accompanied by the seven, may have reached Troas by the
land route, crossing over the Hellespont, and that Luke with some others followed after by
sea from Philippi.

Ver. 6. The days of unleavened bread meant the Passover week (compare xii. 3, xxvii. 9).
The voyage from Philippi to Troas was accomplished in five days instead of three (xvi. 11,
12). The sojourn in the city extended over seven days, as afterwards at Tyre (xxi. 4),

Ver. 7. The first day of the week.—Lit., the first of the Sabbaths, as in 1 Cor. xvi. 2, meaning
not on one of the Sabbaths or Jewish festivals, but on the first day of the week, the term
“Sabbaths” being put for the period of seven days (compare Matt. xxviii. 1).

Ver. 8. Many lights.—Mentioned that all suspicion might be removed from the assembly
(Calvin, Bengel) ; to account for the young man’s drowsiness (Alford); to show how his
fall was observed (Meyer); but most likely to impart liveliness to the scene (Hackett),

Ver. 9. In a window should be in the window of the upper chamber—i.e., on the seat of
it. “The windows” of Oriental houses “had no glass. They were only latticed, and thus
gave free passage to the air and admitted light, while birds and bats were excluded” (Kitto’s
Cyclopedia: art. House), The third loft.—Or story, The middle classes usually lived in
large houses in flats—the artizans in the third stories, just under the roofs—on the same
plan as in some of our great cities (Stapfer, Palestine in the Time of Christ, pp. 172, 178).
Taken up dead.—Not deel vexpds (Mark ix. 26) (Holtzmann), but vexpés, dead.

Ver. 10. Fell on him.—-As formerly Elijah and Elisha acted in performing similar awakenings
(1 Kings xvii. 17; 2 Kings iv. 34). Trouble not yourselves —Make ye no ado, Compare
Christ’s words in Jairus’s house (Mark v. 39). 7


422


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, XX,
-





Ver. 11. Broken (sc. the) bread,—Points to the celebration of the Lord’s Supper.

Ver. 12. Brought the young man alive.—The miracle is certainly a parallel to Tabitha’s
awakening by Peter (ix. 36-40), but yet not on that account an invented story. According
to Ramsay, who in this follows Blass, this verse shows “a very harsh change of subject,” the
persons who brought the youth alive, not being those who were comforted. But this is surely
unmeaning criticism. One would naturally conclude that they who brought the lad alive
were Paul and those who assisted him ; and that these were greatly comforted as well as the
other Christians present.

Ver. 13. To go afoot.—Or, by land. “A paved road extended from Troas to Assos; so
that starting even as late as seven or eight A.M. Paul could have reached Assos, twenty
miles distant, in the afternoon” (Hackett).

Ver. 14. And when he met with us. Ramsay thiuks the imperfect cwvéBaddev (was meeting)
may imply that Paul did not actually enter Assos, but was descried and taken in by boat, as
he was nearing the city. Mitylene.—On the east coast of Lesbos, of which island it was the
capital.

Ver. 15. Having tarried at Trogyllium is omitted in the R.V. after the best MSS., but is
supported by many ancient authorities.

Ver. 16. For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus. Alford thinks these words show
that Paul had hired the ship at Philippi for the voyage to Patara. Ramsay thinks that had
the ship been under Paul’s command he would have stopped at Ephesus instead of sending
for the elders to Miletus. Because he would not spend the time in Asia. Lit., that it might
not come to pass that he spent time in Asia, 1.e.,in Ephesus. The next clause supplies the
reason, :

Ver. 17. Miletus.—Thirty-six miles south of Ephesus, and on the south-west of the Latmian
Gulf. ‘Now a desolation: then an emporium of trade with four ports or docks crowded
with shipping” (Lewin). The stay at Miletus must have continued over three or four days.

Ver. 19. Omit many before tears, and for lying in wait read plots.

Ver. 22. Bound in the spirit.—J.c., his own spirit (Kuinoel, De Wette, Ewald, Holtzmann,
Wendt, Hackett, Spence, and others), not the Holy Spirit (Calvin, Beza, Wordsworth,
Yockler).

Ver. 23. The Holy Ghost witnesseth.—Not in the apostle’s own spirit, but through the
voices of prophets.

Ver. 24, But none of these things move me.—Lit., J make account of nothing—i.e,, which
I may suffer, neither count I my life as dear unto myself.—Or, drawing the clauses together,
but I hold not my life of any account as dear unto me (Tischendorf, Meyer, Holtzmann,
Zockler, R.V.). So that.—Is sometimes rendered, though wrongly, as a comparative, thus:
“neither count I my life so dear to me as the finishing of my course,” etc. (Bengel).

Ver. 25. Shall see my face no more.—Literally fulfilled, though perhaps not in the sense
anticipated by the Apostle, who appears to have expected an early death.

Ver, 26. Pure from the blood of all men.—As in xviii. 6.

Ver. 28. Overseers.—Translated bishops (R.V.), were the same as “elders” (ver. 17). Not
so much a term of office as a characterisation of function. The elder’s duty was to oversee
the flock (John xxi. 15-17 ; 1 Peter v. 2). It has been suggested that Gentile Churches were
governed by “bishops” and Jewish’/Churches by “elders” (lindsay); but this seems a doubtful
distinction in face of Paul’s use of the words here, The Church of God.—Or, according to many
ancient authorities, of the Lord—i.e., Christ. In favour of the former reading, éxxAnola rod
Geo, stands the fact that this expression occurs in Paul’s epistles eleven times, and the read-
ing, éxxAnola rod xuplov, never ; in favour of the latter witness the preponderance of external
testimony, the circumstance that the customary reading is more likely to have been substi-
tuted for an unusual one than vice versd, and the expression “ with His own blood,” which is
confessedly more appropriately applied to Christ than to God. If the former reading be
adopted then “ God” must refer to Christ.

Ver. 29. After my departing.—An ambiguous phrase, but probably signifying here, “after
my death” (Alford, De Wette), rather than ‘‘after my leaving” (Hackett), or, “after my
coming,” Primum venit Paulus, deinde venient lupi (Bengel, Hackett). Baur sees in the
use of this phrase a proof the whole speech was a vaticiniwm post eventum put into the
apostle’s mouth by the writer of the Acts! !

Ver. 31, Watch.—That the apostle’s admonition was not in vain see Rev. ii. 2, 3.

Ver. 32. The best MSS. omit brethren; and some read the Lord instead of God. Whether
which should be read (Kuinoel) or who (Calvin, Bengel, De Wette, Meyer, Alford, Hackett,
Holtzmann, and others) is debated, though the personal reference is the better. An should
be the inheritance. Compare Eph. i. 13.

Ver. 33. I have coveted, better, Z coveted no man’s silver, etc. (compare 1 Cor, ix. 4-18;
2 Cor. xi. 7-12, xii. 14-18; 2 Thess. iii. 8, 9).

Ver. 34. These hands.—Probably holding them up to view. Them that were with me
meant Timothy, Erastus, Luke, and others, This allusion to Paul’s manual labour in Ephesus,


423


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








though not mentioned by Luke (xix. 1), is rendered credible by what is recorded of his
practice while in Corinth (xviii. 3 ; 1 Cor. iv. 11, 12).


Ver. 35. The weak were not the feeble in faith, as in Rom. xiv. 1; 1 Cor. viii. 9 (Calvin,
Bengel, Neander, Meyer, Tholuck, Lechler, Holtzmann, Zéckler) but the poor in worldly
estate, the necessitous in temporal means (Chrysostom, Kuinoel, Olshausen, De Wette,
Hackett, Alford, Plumptre, and others). The words of tho Lord Jesus were sayings, alluded
to by Paul as familiar, which had not found a vlace in the gospel records but had been
handed down by tradition. Many such must have been in existence during the apostolic
age, See ‘“ Hints.”


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—6.


A Second Visit to Hurope ; or, Across the Archipelago and Back.

I. The point of departure.—Ephesus (see xix.1). 1. When heleftit. “ After
the uproar had ceased.” Not necessarily immediately, but soon after the
disturbance recorded in the preceding chapter. If he stayed till Pentecost
(1 Cor. xvi. 8), then he probably left the city in the spring or summer of a.p.
57 or 58. 2. Why he left it. Not because of the just-mentioned disturbance,
at least not wholly on its account, but in pursuance of a plan, already formed,
to visit Macedonia (xix. 21). 3. How he left it. Neither hastily nor secretly,
as he had formerly left Bercea (xvii. 14) and Damascus (ix. 25), but deliberately
and openly, after having convened, exhorted, and embraced, or saluted (with a
farewell kiss) the disciples. ‘‘ At the same time he was greatly dispirited by the
strong opposition which had driven him prematurely from the city” (2 Cor. i.
8 #7.) (Ramsay).

II. The place of destination Macedonia (see xix. 21, xvi. 9, 10). 1. How
he reached it. By way of Troas (2 Cor. xii. 13), where he expected to meet-
Titus, whom he had sent to Corinth with or soon after his First Epistle to the
Corinthians, where he stayed some considerable time—long enough to lay the
foundations of a Christian Church (2 Cor. ii. 12)—and from which he broke up
only because of the non-arrival of Titus. 2. Who accompanied him. Luke omits
to mention the companions of his voyage, but these most probably were Tychicus
and Trophimus (xx. 4), since these again returned with him from Macedonia to
Asia. 3. What he did there. He went through those parts, visited the Churches
which had been established in them—the Churches of Philippi, Thessalonica, and
Berea, with perhaps others—and gave them much exhortation. Here also he
wrote his Second Epistle to the Corinthians (2 Cor. ix. 2, 4), and sent it by the
hands of Titus (2 Cor. viii. 18).

‘III. The course of travel.This led him into Greece—i.e., into Achaia
(see xix. 21), and more particularly to Corinth (1 Cor. xvi. 6). 1. The route by
which Corinth was approached. Most likely “round about by Ilyricum”
(Rom. xv. 19). At least this appears the only place in Luke’s narrative where
Paul’s evangelising tour in those parts can be inserted. On his first visit to
Macedonia “‘he moved along the eastern side of the peninsula, and was kept at
a distance from Illyricum. When he passed through Macedonia next (ver. 3)
he had already written the Epistle to the Romans” (Hackett). 2. The time
spent im Corinth, “Three months,” which probably carried him through the
winter of a.p. 57 or 58 (see 1 Cur. xvi. 6). 3. The work done in Corinth.
(1) The gospel was preached as before, and probably, as before, in the house of
Justus, if by this time another place of meeting had not been obtained. (2) The
disorders of the Corinthian Church were composed. “He was returning to
converts who had cast off the morality of the gospel, to friends who had forgotten
his love, to enemies who disputed his Divine commission” (Conybeare and
Howson), and with all these he doubtless had special dealings (see 2 Cor. x. 2, 4,
6, 8, xiii. 2). (3) The Epistle to the Galatians was written in consequence of
bad news having come from Galatia, and the Epistleto the Romans “to pave


424





; HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XX.





the way for his” contemplated visit. 4. The date of leaving Corinth. When
his Jewish adversaries had formed another plot against him. There is no
reason to suppose that Paul’s departure was hastened by the discovery of this
conspiracy, yet the machinations of the Jews were apparently the cause of his
changing his route, and instead of sailing direct for Syria, journeying northwards
through Macedonia, and embarking at Neapolis. “The style of this plot,” says
Ramsay, (St. Paul, etc., p. 287) “can be easily imagined. Paul’s intention must
have been to take a pilgrim ship carrying Achaian and Asian Jews to the
Passover. With a ship load of hostile Jews it would be easy to find opportunity
to murder Paul. He therefore abandoned the proposed voyage and sailed for
Macedonia,”—rather as already suggested travelling to Macedonia by land.

IV. The journey towards home.—1. The companions of the Apostle. Seven in
number. (1) Sopater of Bercea, the son of Pyrrhus—perhaps characterised so to
distinguish him from Sosipater (Rom. xvi. 21), and named first because Paul, in
travelling vi@ Macedonia, would pick him up first at Berea. (2) Aristarchus
of Thessalonica, who was with Paul in Ephesus (see xix. 29), afterwards accom-
panied him to Rome (xxvii. 2), and shared his imprisonment in that city
(Col. iv. 10; Philemon 24). (3) Secundus, also of Thessalonica, but otherwise
unknown. (4) Gaius of Derbe, not the Gaius who attended Paul in Hphesus
(xix. 29), but probably the individual of this name to whom John wrote his
Third Epistle (3 John i.), (5) Timothy, whose birthplace, Lystra (xvi. 1), is
passed over, presumably as well known. (6) Tychicus of Asia, one of Paul’s
most trusted associates (Eph. vi. 21; Col. iv. 7; Titus iii. 12) and the bearer of
Paul’s Epistle to the Asiatic Churches (2 Tim. iv. 12; Titus ii.12). (7) Trophi-
mus, a native of Ephesus (xxi. 29), whom Paul left behind at Miletus sick
(2 Tim. iv. 20), but who subsequently followed the apostle to Jerusalem, where
his presence in the temple led to the apostle’s apprehension. That they were
seven in number has (but without reason) suggested the idea that they were
intended to represent at Jerusalem the converted Gentile world (Baumgarten),
or the seven deacons of chapter vi. (Plumptre). 2. The cowrse they pursued.
Leaving Corinth they travelled northwards through Macedonia to Bercea, Thessa-
lonica, and Philippi, at the last of which towns they picked up Luke, the beloved
physician (ver. 6). From Philippi the seven above named proceeded in advance
to Troas, where they announced the coming and awaited the arrival of Paul and
Luke, who did not leave Philippi till after the days of unleavened bread—i.e.,
the passover of a.p. 58 or 59—and, after a stormy passage of five days—i.e., two
days longer than the voyage westward (xvi. 11, 12)—anchored in Troas, where
they tarried seven days, obviously waiting for another vessel in which to prosecute
their voyage, or, if the same vessel proceeded southwards, passing the time while
it discharged and took in cargo.

Learn.—1l. That Christ’s servants should never flee from the post of duty
simply on account of danger. 2. That faithful pastors should bestow much care
on the edification and consolidation of the Church. 3. That so long as earnest
ministers preach the gospel, they may lay their accounts with plots to hinder
their work, if not to injure their persons. 4. That those who are engaged in
the Lord’s service should keep themselves in life as long as they can. 5. That
siX or seven pious people with a Paul to lead them are “a formidable enemy to
the devil” (Lindhammer, quoted by Besser).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. How often did Paul visit is commonly urged: 1. That the Acts

Corinth? Twice, or thrice? speak of only two visits (xviii. 1,

I. Twice.—In favour of this view xx. 2, 3). 2. That between Paul’s
425


I


CHAP. XX.





first visit and his first imprisonment
at Rome his time is sufficiently ac-
counted for. 3. That 2 Cor. xii. 1
does not necessarily imply that he had
already been twice in Corinth, while
2 Cor. xiii. 2 seems to say that his then
contemplated visit would be his second.
4, That in 1 Cor. i. 15 he distinctly
speaks of his then contemplated visit
as his second. 5. That 2 Cor, xii. 14
proves the sense of 2 Cor. xiii. 1 to be
that then was the third time Paul had
been in readiness to visit them. 6. That
the Alexandrian MS. in 2 Cor. xiii. 1
reads, “This is the third time I am
ready to come to you” (see Paley,
Hore Pauline, iv. 12).

II. Thrice.—This view is based on
the following considerations: 1. That
2 Cor. xiii. 1, according to the best
texts, refers, not to a third intention,
but to a third visit. 2. That 2 Cor.
i. 15, 16 speaks, not of the benefit of
a second visit, but of the advantage of
being visited twice on the same tour.
3. That as Paul had been three times
shipwrecked when he wrote the Second
Epistle to the Corinthians (xi. 25), and
as the only recorded voyages on which
he could have been wrecked were those
from Cesarea to Tarsus (ix. 30) and
from Ephesus to Macedonia (xx. 1), of
both of which absolutely no account is
given, in order to make the number
three he must have undertaken another
voyage, which most probably was from
Ephesus to Corinth. 4. There were
urgent reasons why he should have
visited the Corinthian Church while
residing at Ephesus. 5. Communication
between thetwo cities was easy to obtain
at any time. 6. Its omission by Luke
is susceptible of explanation by remem-
bering that occasionally long journeys


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


are dismissed in a few words (see xv. 41,
xvi. 6, xviii. 23, xix. 1, xx. 2, 3), while
several important events, such as the
founding of the Syrian and Cilician
Churches (Gal. i. 21), and the journey
to Arabia (Gal. i. 17), are not men-
tioned at all, and by supposing that
nothing remarkable occurred during
this second visit to the commercial
capital of Achaia.


Vers. 1-6. The routine of a mis-
sionary’s life, as exemplified in that of
Paul.

I. Bidding farewell to friends (ver. 1).
—Earthly ties and gracious bonds have
often to be broken by those who would
follow the cross.

II. Exhorting the people of God
(ver. 2).—Almost as hard a task as
that of winning men to, is that of keep-
ing men in the faith.

III. Evading the plots of enemies
(ver. 3).—They that will live godly,
and much more they that will propa-
gate the cause of Christ, must lay their
account with persecution.

IV. Enjoying the society of fellow-
Christians (ver. 4).—Communion of
kindred souls with each other forms
one of the Christian’s sweetest solaces.

V. Unfurling the banner of the
cross (ver. 6).—This the favourite occu-
pation of a true minister or missionary,


Ver. 4. Paul’s friends ; or, the Sacred
Circle of Seven.

I. Trophies of Paul’s gospel.

Il. Companions on Paul’s Journey.
III. Helpers in Paul’s work.
IV. Sharersin Paul's renown. Having
found with him a place in the Inspired
Record.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 7—12.


A Communion Festival at Troas ; or, the Story of the Young Man Eutychus.

I, The crowded congregation.—1. The persons composing it. (1) The disciples at
Troas (xvi. 8), who must have been present in considerable numbers, since Eutychus
could only obtain a seat in the window. The Troas Christians forsook not the
assembling of themselves together (Heb. x. 25). (2) The apostle and his company


(ver. 4)
426


These, though parted at Corinth or Philippi had rejoined each other


2 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XX.





in Troas. 2. The time of meeting. On the first day of the week, the Lord’s day
(Rev. i. 10), an intimation that thus early the practice of meeting for worship on
Sunday was observed by the followers of Christ. In the evening, as is indicated
by the “ many lights” or lamps that are said to have been burning. The cessation
of work on this day, though it may have been the custom with some, was
manifestly not as yet common. 3. The place of assembly. Not the Jewish
synagogue, which shows that a separation of the Christians from the Jewish
community had here taken place. Nota public academy or school as in Ephesus
(xix. 9), scarcely even a house of any pretensions like that of Justus at Corinth
(xviii. 7), which perhaps reveals that not many mighty.or wise had been con-
verted in Troas, but an upper chamber, doubtless a room in some obscure house,
on the third story and next the roof (see i. 18, ix. 37). 4. The business of the
hour, Twofold. (1) To break bread—i.e., to celebrate the Lord’s Supper, which
consisted then, as now, in the breaking of bread and drinking of wine in remem-
brance of Christ, and was then, though not now, followed or accompanied by a
lovefeast. (2) To hear Paul preaching, or rather to hear the word discoursed
by Paul, who doubtless sat at table while he talked, since the modern practice
of formally orating on a text of Scripture had not then been introduced.

II. The protracted preaching.—Two things noticeable: 1. The preacher
wearied not in speaking. (1) A remarkable phenomenon. Though Paul appears
to have commenced discoursing in the early hours of evening, midnight arrived,
and still the stream of holy converse flowed on—yea, when the interruption
which occurred through Eutychus’s death and resuscitation had passed, the talk
was resumed and sustained through a sleepless night till dawn. As a mere
physical effort it would have taxed the energies of a strong man; how much
more then must it have tested the powers of one so infirm as the apostle! Be-
sides, since a speaker like Paul cannot be supposed to have kept on repeating the
same things over and over, what a demand must that midnight preaching have
made on his mental resources! And if to this be added the tender emotions
which constantly uprose within his bosom when he either spoke or wrote to his
converts about his Lord and theirs, it will not be hard to see that the strain on the
apostle’s body, soul, and spirit, must have been immense, must, in fact, have been
almost unparalleled. (2) A reasonable explanation. Three things must have con-
tributed to enable Paul to undergo such a laborious performance. First, the
circumstances in which he and his hearers were then assembled. It was a flying
visit he had made to their town; it was the last time, probably, they would look
each other in the face, it was a farewell sermon; and it was the most solemn of
all occasions on which Christ’s people could meet. Second, the theme upon which
he descanted to his hearers was one that inspired him with “thoughts that
breathe and words that burn,” that drew him on from topic to topic with never-
failing enthusiasm, that so lifted him out of himself that he never felt his weari-
ness or weakness, and probably knew not whether he was in the body or out of
the body (2 Cor. xii. 2). Thirdly, the grace of his glorified Master, which never
failed him, would no doubt strongly support him that night, so that he could
achieve what to common men would seem impossibilities (2 Cor. xii. 9; Phil. iv.
13). 2. The audience wearied not in hearing. How different from modern con-
gregations of Christ’s professed followers, who, so far from listening to the
preached gospel from evening until midnight, and from midnight until dawn,
cannot, without impatience, endure a thirty minutes’ sermon, and would almost
clap their hands with joy if the preacher’s discourse could be huddled through in
ten minutes, or perhaps dispensed with altogether. No doubt modern congre-
gations have not Pauls for preachers; but if they had it is to be questioned
whether their behaviour would be different. The present-day outcry against long
sermons—by which are meant discourses of half an hour—has its origin not in


427


CHAP. XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








the small ability of the preachers, but in the lack of religious zeal on the part: of
the hearers.

III. The alarming accident.—1. The sleeper in the window. Eutychus (con-
cerning whose antecedents nothing is known) has often been held up—unjustly
and unkindly—to reproach on account of his unseemly conduct (as it is called)
of sleeping in the church. But there are times when it is wholly inexcusable to
yield to the “drowsy god” when engaged in Divine worship ; on the other hand,
there are occasions when it may be justified, and this it may be reasonably main-
tained was one. (1) Eutychus was obviously a youth to whom sleep, especially
at midnight, was a natural right, a physical necessity, a heaven-prepared boon
which he could not be blamed for accepting. (3) The upper chamber was as
manifestly crowded, and the hot breaths must have speedily produced such an
atmosphere that the wonder is not that Eutychus dropped over into slumber, but
that many more did not follow his example. (3) The strain of listening to Paul’s
preaching—in which it may be assumed Eutychus was interested—could not fail
to exhaust the young man’s nervous energy, and cause him to drop off through
sheer weariness into a sound sleep. All who have as satisfactory excuses as
Eutychus may sleep in church with easy consciences. 2. The fall into the court.
How it happened is not explained. The window, after the manner of the
eastern houses, opened into the area below. Most likely the shutter was closed
when the young man ensconced himself in the recess. Perhaps the fastening
gave way while he leant upon the shutter, or wakening with a start from his
deep sleep he may have unwittingly pressed against and burst it open. In any
case he fell from the third flat to the ground, a distance probably of twenty feet,
and was taken up, not as, but really—dead. .

IV. The gracious miracle.—1l. The young man’s restoration. (1) By whom
it was effected. Really, of course, by God, but instrumentally by Paul
(2) How it was effected. Though not so mentioned, doubtless by prayer. Paul
went down and fell upon the young man as Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 21) and Elisha
(2 Kings iv. 34) did, using, it may be supposed, words borrowed from the foimer,
“Lord! let this young man’s soul come into him again.” 2. The credibility of the
story. Baur and his disciples find in this miracle only a counterpart of the
raising of Dorcas by Peter (ix. 36-42), and accordingly pronounce it unauthentie.
But the reality of the miracle was attested by those who saw the young man
after he had been restored to life while the truthfulness of the account is
vouched for by the extreme likeliness of the narration, and can only be disputed
by those who are unwilling to believe in the supernatural.

Learn.—1. The duty of Christians to assemble for worship on the Lord’s day.
2. The place assigned to both the preaching of the word and the administration
of the sacraments in the edification of believers. 3. The justification accorded
to long sermons, at least on special—e.g., sacramental occasions. 4. The dangir
of sleeping in church, since if not always sinful it may sometimes be hurtful.
5. The inferiority of modern preachers, who, if they excel Paul in the art of
setting men to sleep, fall immeasurably below him in the power of working
miracles, 6. The reality of the communion of saints. 7. The solemnity and
sadness of earth’s farewells.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 7. Light from Early Christian rection is apparent, though it is more
Practice. than likely Jewish Christians, for a
I. On the sanctity of the Lord’s day. considerable time after, continued also
—That they kept the first day of the to observe the seventh day as a day
week as a memorial of Christ’s resur- of rest. Gentile Christians may not


428


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAPS XX:





have been able to devote the first
day entirely to rest; the narrative
shows they consecrated its evening hours
to worship.

II. On the nature of Christian wor-
ship.—This consisted: 1. Jn the ad-
ministration of the Lord’s Supper—
which perhaps has not so high a place
as properly belongs to it in modern
Christian worship. 2. Jn listening to
edifying discourse upon the gospel—
which also in some modern Churches is
not accorded the place to which it is
entitled. 3. Jn the enjoyment of Chris-
tian fellowship—which, again, is largely
overlooked in modern congregations of
believers. Without reviving the love-
feasts of those early times, that which
they pointed to and promoted, the
spirit of love and the sense of brother-
hood, should be diligently cultivated.

III. On the length of gospel sermons.
—These should be: 1. Neither so short
as to admit no room for the utterance
of any ‘valuable doctrine, or the ex-
pression of any holy feeling. 2. Nor
so long as to exhaust the physical,
mental, and spiritual energies of either
preacher or hearer. 3. But always
suited to the audience and the occasion.
Some audiences and occasions require
long, and others short discourses,


The First Day of the Week.

I. A solemn religious assembly.—
1. The time was the first day of the
week, 2. The occasion was the observ-
ance of the Lord’s Supper. 3. The
place was an upper room with many
lights—obscure, but not secret.

II. The preacher.—1. The preacher


was Paul. 2. He preached a farewell
sermon. 3. He preached a long
sermon.


III. A careless hearer.—l. His in-
firmity. 2. His death. 3. His resto-
ration to life.—G. Brooks.


Vers. 7-12. Communion at Troas.

I. The congregation.__The disciples
at Troas. Who were: 1. Probably
many. May be inferred from the fact
that Paul had previously visited and
preached in Troas. 2. Certainly poor.


Their meeting place, an upper chamber
or room in a top story, showed this.
3. Obviously eager. Longed to hear
the word, not afraid of long sermons,
Not a good sign when Christians are
impatient of preaching. 4. Intensely
sympathetic. ‘Their hearts beat in uni-
son with both the service and the
preacher.

II. The preacher.—Paul, the apostle
of the Gentiles. An object of interest
from: 1. His personal character and
history. A man of feeble body but of
tremendous spiritual power. 2. His
missionary labours and travels. No
doubt full information about these
would have been imparted during the
week, if not by Paul himself, at least
by his companions. 3. His previous
visit and preaching. Most likely all
regarded him in the light of an old
friend, while many would behold in
him their spiritual father.

III. The sermon. — About which
many things were worth noting; as,
e.g., that it was: 1. A spoken sermon.
Not read, but delivered face to face.
Read discourses neither unlawful nor
unprofitable; but not the best for
either preacher or hearer. 2. A fare-
well sermon. Therefore without doubt
uttered with much tender and solemn
feeling, and listened to with avidity.
Compare farewell address to elders at
Miletus (ver. 17). 3. A communion
sermon. Whence the subject may be
guessed. Not the story of his travels,
but the story of the cross. Not him-
self the hero but Christ. 4. A long
sermon. Probably three hours to begin
with. And yet the Troans wearied
not, but heard for three hours more.
Short sermons may be often best ; but
occasions surely arise when long dis-
courses are befitting.

IV. The miracle.—The raising of
Eutychus. 1. The accident. (1) The
subject of it—a young man, Eutychus,
otherwise unknown. (2) The manner
of it. Falling from a window (see
“Critical Remarks”). (3) The issue of
it. Death. Sad that he should have met
his death through attending Church ;
but better that he died so than in a


429


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ca ee


drunken brawl. (4) The effect of it.
Produced great commotion in the meet-
ing. Many lamentations over the
poor boy’s untimely fate, and much
sympathy for his mother if she was
present. 2. The restoration. (1) Eft
fected by Paul, who, in recalling the
lad to life, followed the example of
Elijah and Elisha. (2) Attested by the
people, who witnessed the miracle, saw
the young man alive again, and were
comforted.

V. The communion.—1. The solemn
impressions under which it was cele-
brated. Those who took part in it had
just been listening to a discourse about
the risen Saviour, and had just wit-
nessed a display of that Saviour’s
power. What must have been their
emotions when they returned to the
upper room to celebrate their memorial
feast? 2. The sacramental actions were
unquestionably those of the Lord’s
Supper. ‘Breaking of bread” alone
mentioned; but “drinking of wine”
implied. The narrative affords no
countenance to the idea of Communion
in one kind. 3. The post communion
address was not omitted. Paul talked
with his hearers a long while till break
of day, about the significance of the
meal, and its foreshadowing of heaven,
about how they should live and walk
in the world, and about their impend-
ing separation. And so the sacred
service ended. With the dawning of
the day the apostle departed.


Vers, 8-12. The Night Service at
Troas.

I. An admonitory example of Chris-
tian zeal for God’s word.—1. On the
part of the apostle, who wearies not of
preaching. 2. On the part of the
congregation, who grow not tired of
hearing.

II. A warning example of human
weakness and sloth—The sleep and
the fall of Eutychus. “ Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into tempta-
tion.” “ The spirit is willing, but the
flesh is weak.”

III A consolatory example of Divine
grace and faithfulness.—The resusci-


430


tation of the young man, the comfort
of the Church.—Gerok.


Ver. 9. On sleeping in Church.

I. Pardonable — When it results
from physical causes, over which one
has no control; such as: 1. Exhaus-
tion through previous labour. 2. The
imperative demands of nature which
call for such repose as sleep gives.
3. The soporific atmosphere of the
church through defective ventilation.
4. The weariness induced by a too
constant strain upon the mental facul-
ties in listening to the preacher.

II. Inexcusable.—When it springs
either: 1. From indifference to the
truth that is preached; or 2. From
dislike to the preacher by whom it is
spoken ; or 3. From lack of interest in
the object which the preacher by his
preaching seeks to attain.

III. Hurtful.—l. It disconcerts and
discourages the preacher. 2. It infects
and contaminates the hearers. Sleep-
ing in Church is contagious. 3. It in-
flicts loss and sometimes positive hurt
upon the sleeper.

IV. Preventable.—By removing its
causes. 1. Providing comfortable and
well-ventilated churches. 2. Preach-
ing interesting and not too long
sermons. 3. Preparing the heart by
previous prayer and meditation, for
the reception of the truth.


The young man Eutychus ; an example
to all the unsteadfast in the Church.

I. By his dangerous sleep.—In the
midst of the assembled congregation,
during the hearing of the divine word,
the heart may be overpowered by the
sleep of false security.

II. By his terrible fall—From the
third storey to the street pavement ;
an admonitory representation of the
great fall from an imaginary height of
faith to sin and perdition. ‘

TIT. By his miraculous deliverance.
—In the arms of a Paul, who pene-
trates him with his power of life ané
warmth of love, even the deeply fallen.
he who is thought dead, may by the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


t


CHAP. XX,





wonderful grace of God again become
living.—Gerok.


The Accident at Troas.
suggested.

I. The uncertainty of life—Even
to the good, and the consequent neces-
sity of preparing for death. Eutychus,
a young man, full of life, hope, and
promise, employed also at the best of
work, and yet he died suddenly as the
result.of an accident.

II. The moral and spiritual uses of
accidents.—This accident at Troas was


Thoughts


common prudence and foresight even
when engaged about the things of
religion and eternal life.

III. The power of a great calamity
to open the flood-gates of human sym-
pathy.—How deeply the congregation
was moved by the young man’s death
is revealed by the comfort they ex-
perienced in his resuscitation (ver. 12).

IV. The mission and the power of
the gospel_—To quicken dead souls as
Paul restored Eutychus to life. As
God’s power flowing through Paul’s
body reanimated the dead youth, so


fitted to remind the Christians there


the might of God’s grace streaming
of the propriety and duty of exercising


through the gospel can revive dead souls.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 13—16.


Suiling past Ephesus ; or, bound for Jerusalem.

I. From Troas to Assos.—l. When Paul and his companions left Troas.
Obviously after the assembly spoken of in the preceding paragraph had broken
up, on the morning of the tenth day of April, a Monday. Possibly Paul’s
companions may have departed before the conclusion of the service, since they
are said to have preceded him. Paul himself not only closed the meeting, but
may have lingered an hour or two before setting out. 2. How Paul and his
companions reached Assos. (1) Paul’s companions went by ship from the harbour
of Troas. Assos lay upon the Mysian coast, about twenty-four miles south of
Troas by land, and forty by sea. The voyage would probably, with favourable
winds, occupy four or five hours. (2) Paul himself went the land way to Assos,
and would most likely meet the ship on arrival. The road lay “through the
southern gate, past the hot springs, and through the oak woods—then in full
foliage—which cover all that shore with greenness and shade, and across the
wild water-courses on the western side of Ida” (Conybeare and Howson, ii. 229).
3. Paul's reasons for selecting the land route. These can only be conjectured.
Perhaps he wished (1) to visit friends on the way (Meyer, Wendt) ; or (2) to
enjoy the company of his Troas friends, who could convey him on the road but
could not well obtain accommodation on the ship; or (3) to recruit his health
(Calvin) ; or (4) to secure a brief interval of quiet for meditation and communion
with heaven, after the exciting scenes and incidents of the week at Troas
(Baumgarten, Ewald, Lange), though after all it is doubtful whether he would
be allowed to make the journey alone (Zéckler).

II. From Assos to Mitylene.—1. Zhe voyagers. Paul, on reaching Assos, at
once stepped on board the ship, which was probably lying to and waiting his
arrival, The missionary company, with him at its head, was complete. 2. The
voyage. As Mitylene was distant from Assos thirty miles, the entire voyage from
Troas to Mitylene, seventy miles, might easily be accomplished in one day.
3. The port. Mitylene (the modern city being called Castro), where the ship
appears to have anchored for the night “because it was the time of dark
moon” (Conybeare and Howson), was the chief city of Lesbos (now Metilino or
Metelin). ‘The beauty of the capital of Sappho’s island was celebrated by the
architects, poets, and philosophers of Rome” (Conybeare and Howson).

III. From Mitylene to Miletus—1. First day's (Tuesday's) journey. From
Mitylene to Chios, the modern Scio, one of the largest and most beautiful islands


431


CHAP, XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


on the coast of Asia Minor. Chios, “ whose green fields were the fabled birth-
place of Homer” (Farrar), was celebrated both for its beauty and for its wines ;
in modern times the levity of its inhabitants appears to have passed into a
proverb, ‘It is easier to find a green horse than a sober-minded Sciot ” (Cony-
beare and Howson). 2. Second day’s (Wednesday's) journey. From Chios to
Samos, passing by Ephesus, and from Samos to Trogyllium. Samos, the island,
was separated from the mainland by a narrow channel, at one point not more
than a mile broad. Samos, the town, was in Paul’s day a free city. Here, how-
ever, the vessel did not anchor, but pushed ona mile further south to Trogyllium,
a harbour on the mainland of Ionia, at the foot of Mount Mycale, and opposite
the island where it is nearest the shore. In Trogyllium the ship lay to for the
night. 3. Third day’s (Thursday's) journey. From Trogyllium to Miletus, on
the confines of Caria, and twenty-eight miles south of Ephesus, Why the
apostle passed by Ephesus is stated by Luke. It was not because he had
not command of the ship, which be may have had (Hackett thinks he may
have chartered it for himself and his friends; but see “ Critical Remarks ”),
or because he did not long to revisit his Ephesian converts, or was afraid of the
enemies he might encounter there (1 Cor. xvi. 9) ; but because his desire to reach
Jerusalem before Pentecost rendered every delay, whether voluntary or involun-


tary, dangerous.


Why if he anchored at Trogyllium he did not summon the


Ephesian elders thither must be left unanswered (see next Homily).
Learn.—1. That persons who go on God’s business may travel by sea or land


with easy minds.
life.


argument in favour of its truthfulness.


assemblies of the saints.


2. That solitude and society are alike helpful to the religious
3. That the geographical accuracy of Luke’s narrative is an indirect


4, That good men delight in the


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. Paul alone on his Way to
Assos ; or, the Quiet Hours of a Much-
employed Servant of God. As hours—

I. Of testing intercourse with him-
self.

II. Of holy communion with the
Lord.

III. Of blessed rest from the tumult
of the world.

IV. Of earnest collectedness for new
conflicts.—Gerok.


Ver. 16. Paul's desire to be in Jeru-
salem at Pentecost. The motives for
this were probably various.

I. For his Jewish brethren’s sake.—
He knew that his presence at that feast
would be acceptable to his stricter
fellow-countrymen, and he was ready
to become all things to all men to gain
some,

II. For his own sake.—The feast of
Pentecost would revive memories of
the great birthday of the Christian
Church, and so might perhaps inspire


432


him with fresh zeal, since even he could
not dispense without times of revival.

III. For the gospel’s sake.—The
immense gathering of foreign Jews in
Jerusalem at that feast would afford
him ample opportunity for bringing
the claims of the gospel before his
countrymen; and Paul was not the
man to forget to enter in by every open
door.

IV. For the Gentile Churches’ sakes.
—He may have wished to present the
Gentile contributions for the poor saints
in Jerusalem to the Church there, at
a time when the spectacle of their libe-
rality would be witnessed by vast
numbers of his Jewish brethren, who,
he may have hoped, would be favour-
ably impressed thereby.

V. For his future plan’s sake.—
As Paul was contemplating a journey
to Syria and Rome after he had visited
Jerusalem, he may have deemed it
better not to wait till Tabernacles, but
to repair to the metropolis at Pentecost.


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XX.


eee


Hastening to Jerusalem.

I. A proof of Paul’s diligence.—
The apostle was no idler, who had
time to waste, but a busy worker, who
improved every moment.

II. An evidence of Paul’s wisdom.—
He wished to reach the capital at the
best time for preaching the gospel—


viz., when he could meet the largest
number of his countrymen.

IIIf. A mark of Paul’s love.—If, as
there is reason to believe, he was carry-
ing the Gentile contributions above
referred to, he desired not to keep
them from their destined recipients a
moment longer than was necessary.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17—38.


a Halt at Miletus ; or, a Meeting with the Elders of Ephesus.

I. Introductory notes.—1. The parties summoned. The elders, presbyters, or
overseers (ver. 28) of the Ephesian Church. That these were not bishops in the
modern Anglican sense of diocesan prelates, but only in the ministerial sense of
presiding over separate congregations, is generally conceded. 2. The place of
meeting. Why Paul did not call them to Trogyllium, which lay consideably
nearer to Ephesus than Miletus, can only be conjectured. Possibly the ship’s
stay at Trogyllium was too short for such an interview as Paul contemplated.
Perhaps the means of communication between Miletus and Ephesus were better
than those between Trogyllium and Ephesus. Perhaps, according to the best
text, the ship did not call at Trogyllium at all. But, in any case, Miletus, to
which they were summoned, was in Paul’s day a seaport of considerable import-
ance and a strong rival to Ephesus, being the political, as Ephesus was the
religious, metropolis of Western Asia (Zéckler). The locality where they assembled,
though not stated by the historian, was most likely “‘some solitary spot upon the
shore.” 3. The messenger despatched. This also is left unrecorded, but may have
been Luke himself, who, with becoming modesty, says nothing of any services
performed by himself. 4. The arrival of the elders. The journey to Ephesus,
a distance of from thirty to forty miles, would easily be accomplished in a day.
If the messenger set out immediately on the ship’s arrival at Miletus, which
might be at noon, the elders might reach Miletus on the second day after. If
they hurried off at once, they would most probably come alone. If time were
allowed for the news to spread, they might easily be attended by presbyters
“from the neighbouring towns where churches had been established ” (Hackett).
5. The person of the speaker. Paul, who had laboured for three years in the city
of Ephesus as their honoured teacher and beloved friend, and who was now to
look upon their faces for the last time. The emotion with which both speaker
and hearers confronted each other can be better imagined than described.

II. The farewell address.—1. An outline of its contents. Two main divisions.
(1) Relative to Paul himself. First, a retrospect of his past labours at Ephesus
(vers. 18-21), setting forth the character of his ministry in that city as one that
had been carried on (a) with whole-hearted consecration to the Lord—.e., the
glorified Christ (ver. 18); (@) with profound personal humility (ver. 18)—com-
pare Eph. iii. 8; (y) with fervent sympathy, amounting even to tears (ver. 18)—
compare ver. 31; 2 Cor. ii. 4; Phil. iii. 18; (8) with great bodily risk, arising
from the “temptations” or “trials” which befell him from the plots of the Jews
(ver. 19)—compare 1 Cor. xv. 31, 32, xvi. 9; 2 Cor.i. 8-10; (e) with unreserved
fulness, which kept back nothing from his hearers which might be spiritually
profitable unto them (ver. 20), not shunning to declare unto them the whole
counsel of God (ver. 27)—compare 2 Cor. iv. 2; Gal. i. 10; 1 Thess. ii. 4;
(€) with unwearied diligence, which caused him to teach publicly in the synagogue
first (xix. 8), and latterly in the school of Tyrannus (xix. 9), and privately from


FE 433


CHAP, XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


aD,


‘house to house or in private assemblies (ver. 20)—compare Rom. xvi. 5; 1 Cor.
xv. 19; (y) with unambiguous plainness, insisting on repentance toward God
and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ as the only and the all-sufficient way of salva-
tion (ver. 21)—compare xvii. 30, xxvi. 20; Gal. ii. 20; 2Tim.i12. Secondly, an
outlook into his future career (vers. 22-27), declaring (a) his irrepressible convic-
tion that trials and dangers, he knew not of what sort, perhaps amounting to
death, lay before him, the Holy Ghost witnessing to him to that effect in every
city (ver. 23), by means of prophetic communications through others, which,
though not specified, may have been made to him at Philippi, Troas, and Assos,
as afterwards they were at Tyre (xxi. 4) and at Cxsarea (xxi. 11); (8) his firm
determination, notwithstanding, to proceed in the path of duty which pointed
towards Jerusalem (ver. 22); (y) his absolute willingness to lay down his life
rather than fail in accomplishing the ministry he had received from the Lord
Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God (ver. 24)—compare Phil. ii. 17 ;
2 Tim. iv. 6-8; (8) his perfect knowledge that he and they “amongst whom he
had gone preaching the kingdom” would see his face no more (ver. 25)—compare
ver. 29, and see “ Critical Remarks” ; (e) his clear consciousness of having faith-
fully performed his duty towards them as a minister, so that with unfaltering
confidence he could call God to witness he had declared unto them the whole
counsel of God, and so was “pure from their blood” (vers. 26, 27)—compare
xviii. 6; Ezek. iii. 18. (2) Relative to his hearers, the elders of Ephesus. ist,
a solemn caution (vers. 28-31), in which are expounded—(a) the exalted character
of the Church to which they belonged and in which they were office-bearers, as the
Church of God—i.e., of Jesus Christ—who was thus expressly by Paul declared
to be Divine (see “ Critical Remarks”), as a Church which had been purchased
for Himself as a possession by His own blood, and as a Church which was
superintended and governed by the Holy Ghost (ver. 28); (8) the important
relation in which they as office-bearers stood towards the Church and its members,
being bishops, overseers, or (under) shepherds of the flock, whose great (Heb.
xiii. 20) or chief (1 Peter v. 4) Shepherd Christ is (John x. 14, 16), and holding
their appointment not from the flock, but from the Holy Ghost or Divine personal
representative of Christ; (y) the specific duties they were expected to perform
towards the flock, not to act as lords over it (1 Peter v. 3), but to feed it with
spiritual nourishment (John xxi. 15-17; 1 Peter v. 2), the tender lambs or babes
in Christ with the sincere milk of the word (1 Peter ii. 2; Heb. v. 13), those of
mature age with the strong meat of Christian doctrine (Heb. v. 14); (8) the
constant watchfulness they would require to exercise over both themselves and
their flock (compare 1 Tim. iv. 16), lest either they or their flock should grow
remiss in Christian duty, and so decline from Christian faith ; (e) the impending
peril which would render necessary such faithful superintendence of themselves
and those committed to their charge—viz., the certainty that subsequent to his
departure, first after his sailing from them, and next after his decease, which he
believed to be not distant, false teachers, whom he designated ‘ grievous wolves”
(compare Matt. vii. 15), would intrude themselves from without into the fold,
not sparing but devouring the flock (compare 2 Tim. iii. 1-8), and would even
arise from within (1 Tim. i, 19, 20; 2 Tim. i. 15, ii. 17, 18), speaking perverse
things and drawing away disciples after them (vers. 29, 30); () the touching
argument by which he hoped to incite them to watchfulness, the recollection of
his own anxious ministry among them for three years, during which he “ ceased
not to admonish every one night and day with tears” (ver. 31). Secondly, a
fervent commendation, in which the elders and those over whom they presided
were (a) committed tothe care of God and the word of His grace (sce “ Critical
Remarks”), which (or who) was able to build them up (compare Eph. ii. 20, 21,
iv. 12, 16, 29), and give them an inheritance among them who were sanctified


434


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XX.
ct MM. Lee


(compare xxvi. 18; Eph. i. 18); and (@) encouraged to eschew the sin of
covetousness in discharging their sacred duties (compare 1 Tim. iii. 3, vi. 11;
Titus i. 11; 1 Peter v. 2), by recalling the example of himself (Paul), who
coveted no man’s silver or gold or apparel, but whose own hands ministered to his
necessities and those -of his fellow-labourers (xviii. 3; 1 Cor. iv. 12; 2 Thess.
iii. 8), and to practise the Christian virtue of liberality, the strong labouring to
help the weak (Eph. iv. 28), by remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, of
which perhaps he (Paul) had been wont to speak (in his preachings), how He
said: “It is more blessed to give than to receive” (compare Matt. v. 42; Luke
vi. 38). 2. A proof of its yenuineness. That this address to the elders of Miletus
was not historical, but manufactured by the writer of the Acts and put into the
mouth of Paul, has been argued (Baur, Zeller, Weizsicker, and others) chiefly
on the ground that it closely corresponds in thought and language to the pastoral
epistles, which it is assumed (without satisfactory evidence) were of a later date
than Paul. But if, on other grounds, the Pauline origin of this speech can be
established, the harmony between it and the pastoral epistles will contribute an
important element in proof of the authenticity of these. Now, that this speech
was actually delivered by Paul may be inferred from the following considerations :
its perfect agreement with the situation as well as with the history, character,
doctrine, and style of Paul, as these are set forth in the Acts and Epistles.
(1) It is precisely such an address as Paul might have been expected to deliver
to the elders of a Christian Church whom he had summoned to a farewell
interview, and accordingly is different from all his previous addresses which were
spoken in the hearing either of Jews (xiii. 16-41) or of Greeks (xvii. 22-31).
(2) It agrees with the history of Paul, which represents him as having laboured
for nearly three years in Ephesus, teaching in the synagogue and in the school
of Tyrannus, and working with his own hands for his support (xviii. 3, xix. 8-10;
1 Cor. iv. 12; 2 Thess. iii. 10-12). (3) It harmonises with the character of Paul,
manifesting the same tender solicitude as he was ever accustomed to show
towards his converts (2 Cor. i, 14, 24, vi. 11, xi. 21; Phil. i. 8; Gal. iv. 19;
Col. i. 29) and the same care to give no offence that the ministry might not be
blamed (2 Cor. vi. 3). (4) It accords with the Pauline doctrines of salvation
by grace through faith and unto holiness (Eph. i. 4-6, ii. 8-10), of redemption
by the blood of Christ (Eph. i. 7), and of sanctification through the truth
(Eph. v. 26; 1 Thess. ii. 13, iv. 6). (5) It bears the stamp of Paul’s style, as
the following examples show: “Serving the Lord” (ver. 19), found six times in
Paul, occurs elsewhere only in Matt. vi. 24 and Luke xvi. 13; “ Lowliness of
mind” (ver. 19), five times in Paul, once only elsewhere, in 1 Peter v. 5;
“Kept back” in vers. 20, 27, and again in Gal. ii, 12; “ That was profitable ”
(ver. 20), once in Heb. xii. 20, and three times in 1 Cor.; “I take you to record,”
or “I testify ” (ver. 26), also in Gal. v. 3 and Eph. iv. 17 ; “‘ Remember” (ver. 31),
seven times in Paul; ‘“‘ Watch” (ver. 31), elsewhere only in 1 Cor. xvi. 13.

III. Theclosing scene.—1. The last prayer. Kneeling down upon the sea-beach
(compare xxi. 5), he prayed with them all, in words which Luke appears to have
felt too sacred to report. Kneeling “ was the attitude in prayer which prevailed
among the early Christians, except on the Sabbath and during the seven weeks
before Pentecost, when they generally stood” (Hackett). 2. The parting em-

brace. They all fell upon the apostle’s neck, as Joseph did on that of Benjamin his

brother (Gen. xlv. 14) and of Jacob his father (Gen. xlvi. 29), shedding tears of
holy grief and kissing him tenderly again and again, with mingled love and
anguish, sorrowing most of all for the word he had spoken that they should see
his face no more. 3. The final separation. Unwilling to be parted from him
till the last moment, they accompanied him to the ship (compare xxi. 5), which
soon after weighed anchor and bora him from their anxious gaze.





435


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


EEE EEUU EEEEEESEEREEEEERREEEE


Learn.—1l. The care which a true shepherd ever takes of his flock. 2. The
fidelity with which a true preacher should declare the counsel of God. 3. The
affection which Christian people should ever manifest towards their teachers.
4, The grief which ever arises when true pastors are separated from their flocks.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. The Elders of the Church.

I, Their designations.—Presbyters.
So called, because usually selected from
the elder brethren.

II. Their functions.—1. Primarily
to rule, superintend the flock, and
generally guard the spiritual interests
of the believing community. 2. Secon-
darily, to teach—more especially when
and where the services of the apostles,
prophets, and teachers of the early
Church were not available,

III. Their election.— By the people.
In this respect they differed essentially
from the above-named apostles, pro-
phets, and teachers who were both
qualified for and called to their offices
by the Holy Ghost.

IV. Their ordination—By the
apostles originally, afterwards by the
laying on of the hands of the Presby-
tery (1 Tim. iv. 14).


“Originally there were in the
separate communities only a multi-


plicity of chosen office-bearers, who


were promiscuously designated as
’Exickorot (overseers) and ape Bvrepou
(presbyters or elders), as bearers of
one and the same office. This office is
not a branch of the apostolic teaching
office, since for this had the oldest
communities along with the apostles
other teachers, and the work of teach-
ing was free to all believers (later
certainly the office of teaching was
combined with that of bishop or pres-
byter), but it consisted primarily in
the disciplinary oversight of the com-
munity (or congregation), in the ad-
ministration of the community’s goods,
andthe conducting of the (community’s)
regular worship. This community
office, but not a Church constitution,
did the apostles ordain.” (Sell. For-
schungen der Gegenwart tiber Begriff und
Entstehung der Kirche, Zeitschrift fiir


436


Theologie und Kirche, 1894, p. 357),
“Hatch finds that the later Church
constitution, bishop, college of pres-
byters and deacons, as distinguished
from the people, is not to be explained
out of an original office of community
superintendence like that of presbyter-
bishop, but that this organisation
arose through a combination of a
number of equally original institutions
which had been developed according to
previously existing analogies. Com-
munities in which care of the poor,
public Divine worship, and mutual
fellowship of the brotherhood played
a great roll, possessed administration
officers, finance officers, who along with
their assistants, after the analogy of
the club treasurers of antiquity, looked
after the important business of ad-
ministering the society’s goods. These
officials were the "Exicxorrou (overseers)
and didKxovor (deacons), who were also
divided into different classes, the old,
the mature, or middle aged, and the
young ; while for the determination of
questions of manners and customs, for
Church discipline, for the decision of
legal controversies, and afterwards for
admonition, a special order in the com-
munity—viz., tlie presbyters” (Jbid.,
pp. 359, 360). “ Harnack, in his
edition of the Teaching of the Twelve, has
drawn attention to this, that in the
oldest believing communities, along
with the bishops, deacons, and presby-
ters, there were other charismatically
endowed persons—viz., apostles, pro-
phets, and teachers,who, as servants, be-
longed not to individual congregations,
but to the whole Church of Christ, and
who were not chosen, but ordained by
the Holy Ghost ” (Zbid., p. 360).


Vers. 18-35. Paul’s Address to the
Elders at Miletus. “This, the third
long speech attributed to Paul in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


sa


Acts, was certainly from a pastoral
theological point of view the most
important, as that in Athens was, dog-
matically and apologetically considered,
and that in Antioch of Pisidia when
regarded in an evangelistic or mission-
ary light. It divides itself into four
sections of almost equal length :—

I. A reminiscence of the Apostle’s
long - continued and _ self-sacrificing
oe among the Ephesians (vers. 18-
21).

II. An expression of prophetic an-
ticipation as to tribulation and danger
awaiting him in Jerusalem (vers. 22-
27).

ne An admonition to the elders or
overseers to faithful shepherding and
courageous protection of the flock
(vers. 28-31) ; and

IV. An exhortation to unselfish
exercise of their office, after Paul’s
example and in accordance with the
Lord’s word (vers. 32-35). Zéckler,
Die Apostelgeschichte, p. 246.)


Ver. 19. Minister's tears. These may
be either—1. Tears of love (ver. 31) ;
2. Tears of sorrow (Phil. iii. 18); or
3. Tears of joy ; or thus ;


Minister’s tears: 1. A painful tax of
human weakness, 2. A precious orna-
ment of holy souls, 3. A fruitful seed
for a harvest of joy (Gerok).


Vers. 19-21. Marks of a True Minis-
ter of Jesus Christ.

I. Devotion to Christ whom he serves.

II. Humility with regard to himself.

III. Sympathy with those he desires
to teach.

IV. Fortitude in face of foes from
without.

V. Fidelity to the truth he preaches.

VI. Diligence in the work he under-
takes.

VII. Authority in the message he
proclaims.


Ver. 20. Precepts for Preachers.

I. The theme of their preaching.—
1. What it should not be. It should
never be only what is new, or learned,


CHAP. XX,





or beautiful, or sublime, or rare.
These certainly, if they can be made
subservient to the highest ends of the
ministry. But never these if they
interfere with this. 2. What it should
be. Only what is profitable for the
hearers—for their conviction and con-
version, for their edification and
instruction in righteousness, for their
reproof or correction, for their en-
lightenment and growth in grace.

II. The manner of their preaching.
—l. With personal humility, counting
themselves less than the least of all
saints (Eph. iii. 8), 2. With tenderness
of speech, addressing their hearers with
melting tones and moving them with
tears (Phil. ii. 18). 3. With holy
courage, fearing not the face of man or
the opposition of the world (Ephes. vi.
19, 20). 4. With absolute fidelity,
keeping back nothing (ver. 20) but
declaring the whole counsel of God
(ver. 27), so as to be free from the
blood of all men (ver. 26).

III. The place of their preaching.—
1. In the public assembly, wherever
men congregate, in the church from
the pulpit, or in the hall from the
platform. 2. In private houses, by a
due discharge of the pastoral office.


Ver. 21. The Substance of the Faith.

I. Repentance toward God.—Im-
plies—1l. Acknowledgment of sin
against God. 2 Humility of heart
before God. 3. Submission of soul to
God. 4. Hope of the Spirit in God.

II. Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ.—Involves—1. Belief in the
supreme divinity of His person.
2. Trust in the atoning efficacy of His
work. 3, Confidence in tne steadfast-
ness of His promised word.

III. The relations between the two.
—1l. Faith without repentance is like
a house without a foundation, and like
a tree without either root or fruit.
Faith of a saving sort springs from a
sense of guilt and sin, and leads to
godly sorrow and heart contrition.
“The pupil of faith is a broker heart.”
2. ‘ Repentance without faith is either
inconsolable and ends in despair, or


437


CHAP. XX.





self-righteous and ends in making re-
demption superfluous.”


Ver. 22. Bound in the Spirit; or,
the True Preacher’s ‘‘ Necessity” (1 Cor.


ix. a ;

I. To go wherever the Spirit of
Christ directs (ver. 22).

II. To leave the future in the
hands of his heavenly Master (ver. 22).

IIT. To confront all sorts of peril,
even death itself, in the discharge of
his ministry (ver. 23).

IV. To be faithful unto death, in
testifying the gospel of the grace of
God (ver. 24).


Ver. 24. The Gospel of the Grace of
God.—The grace of God is—

I. The fountain whence the gospel
flows.

II. The
message.

III. The blessing which the gospel
bestows.

IV. The end at which the gospel
aims. <All for the glory of His grace
(Eph. i. 6).


burden of the gospel


The Gospel of the Grace of God.

I. The gospel as the gospel of the
grace of God.—l. There is grace in the
method by which its blessings are
secured. The substitution and sacri-
fice of Christ. 2. There is grace in the
influence by which its blessings are
applied. The influence of the Holy
Spirit in the principle and in the mode
of His operation. 3. There is grace in
the nature of its blessings. The pri-
vileges of the righteous. 4. There is
grace in the extent to which its bless-
ings are diffused. It is fitted and
designed to be a universal religion.

II. Our duty in reference to it—
1. We should cordially believe it. It
is revealed not for speculation but for
belief, and it is authenticated by the
most conclusive evidence. 2. We
should steadily adhere to it. Let us
strenuously resist all who deny, or
modify, or philosophise, or explain
away the doctrines of grace. 3. We
should zealously propagate it, Every


438


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :


THE ACTS.


Christian should be a missionary.—G.
Brooks. ;


The Office of the Ministry.

I. From whom it is received—The
Lord Jesus. Not only is it in general
of Christ’s appointment (1 Cor. xii. 28 ;
Eph. iv. 11), but in every separate
instance it is of His bestowal. No
man should take this office upon
himself, but wait until He receives it
from Christ, who will intimate His
will by (1) the inward prompting of
the Spirit in the individual's heart,
(2) by imparting the requisite qualifi-
cations for the office, and (3) by
sending him the call of his brethen to
undertake the office. ‘‘ No one should
force himself, purchase himself, marry
himself, or beg himself into the
ministry and thus run and preach
without a divine mission and call, but
wait until he receives it and is sent”
(Starke, quoted in Lange).

II. For what it is appointed.—To
testify the gospel of the grace of God.
Not to teach morals, science, or philo-
sophy, but to publish to sinful men
the glad tidings of salvation from sin
and death—salvation proceeding from
the grace of God, through the obedience
unto death of Jesus Christ and the
sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost,
“* Millions of moral sermons, and folios
of moral books will not, in a thousand
years, bring you so far as this despised
little word ‘ grace’ will bring you in
one minute, when faith understands and
the heart embraces it” (Gossner, in
Lange).

IIT. How it should be executed —
1. With self-sacrificing devotion that
counts not life itself dear in order to
fulfil it faithfully and truly. 2. With
persevering resolution that will not
slack in the sacred work till life itself
ends. 3. With solemn earnestness, as
realising the immediate neighbourhood
of death (ver. 25).

IV. How it will be rewarded.—
1, With a sentence of acquittal, declaring
the faithful preacher free from the
blood of all men (ver. 26). 2. With
an influx of heavenly joy, when the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XX,


eee


Master. says, “ Well done! good and
faithful servant: enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.”


Ver. 28. Take heed; or, Words of
Warning for Christian Ministers.

I. The minister’s relation to his
people.—1. That of a shepherd towards
his master’s flock. The image of a flock
which had been employed in Old
Testament to describe Israel was
selected by Christ to designate His
Church (Matt. xxvi. 31; Luke xii. 32;
John xxi. 15-17), and from Him
adopted by both Peter (1 Peter v. 2)
and by Paul. As of this flock Christ
was the good (John x. 14), the chief
(1 Peter v. 4), and the great (Heb.
xi. 20) Shepherd, so were the elders,
or bishops, or presbyters undershep-
herds. 2. That of an overseer over his
master’s property. Christ’s proprietor-
ship in the Church rests on the fact
that He has purchased it with His
own blood (compare Eph. i. 14); hence
elders, bishops, presbyters, and minis-
ters generally cannot be owners of the
flock, but only its keepers ; or lords of
the congregation (1 Peter v. 3), but
only its overseers.

II. The minister’s duty to his people.
—1. To take heed unto himself (1 Tim.
iv. 16). Since otherwise he cannot
take heed unto them. In order to
properly discharge his duty as a
shepherd and an overseer, the minister
must see (1) to his own personal re-
lation to the Master whom he serves ;
(2) to the liveliness of his own faith ;
(3) to the extent and correctness of his
own knowledge in religion; (4) to the
purity of his own heart and life, (5) to
the sincerity and uprightness of his
own motives. A true minister takes
heed to himself when he nourishes his
own soul by sound doctrine, purifies
his own heart by loving obedience to
the truth, strengthens his own spirit
by habitual devotion, and generally
lives in inward communion and fellow-
ship with Jesus Christ. 2. Vo take
heed unto his flock—in which at least
three things are comprised: (1) feeding
the flock (John xxi. 15-17; 1 Peter


v. 2)—i.e., nourishing them up in sound
doctrine (1Tim. iv. 6), instructing them
with ‘wholesome words, even the
words of our Lord Jesus Christ,” and
with “the doctrine which is according
to godliness” (1 Tim. vi. 3), exhorting
them with sound speech that cannot
be condemned” (Titus ii. 8) ; (2) tending
the flock, or taking the oversight of it
(1 Peter v. 2), watching over the cha:
racter and deportment of its several
members, and administering such
discipline as may serve to promote
their religious welfare (1 Cor. v. 4, 5;
2 Cor. ii. 6; Gal. vi. 1; 2 Thess. iii.
Of 14 1059 L Time ve lis 2eTimi ives 2:
Titus i. 13, iii, 10; (3) guarding the
flock against the entrance of “ grievous
wolves” or false teachers (ver. 29), who
by promulgating erroneous doctrine
should subvert the faith of the ignorant
and unwary (1 Tim. i. 3, 4, 6, 7, 19,
iv. 1, vi. 5; 2- Tim. i. 18, iii. 6; Titus
i. 10; 2 Peter ii. 1, 2, 3; 1 John iv. 1).


“Take heed to yourselves.’—A_ ser-
mon for ministers.

I. How?—1. Lest you should be
void of that saving grace which you
offor to others and be strangers to the
effectual workings of that gospel which
you preach. 2. Lest you live in those
actual sins which you preach against
in others. 3. Lest you be unfit for the
great employment you have under.
taken, since he must not be a babe in
knowledge that will teach men all
those mysterious things that are to be
known in order to salvation. 4. Lest
your example contradict your doctrine
and you lay such stumbling blocks
before the blind as may be the occasion
of their ruin.

II. Why ?—Because—l1. ‘“‘ You have
heaven to win or lose for yourselves,
and souls that must be happy or
miserable for ever. 2. You have a
depraved nature and sinful inclinations
as well as others. 3. Such works ag
yours do put men on greater use and
trial of their graces, and have greater
temptations than most other men.
4, The tempter will-make his first and
sharpest onset upon you. 5. There


439


CHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a Sree


are many eyes upon you, and therefore
there will be many observers of your
fall. 6. Your sins have more heinous
ageravations than those of other men.
7. The honour of your Lord and
Master, and of His holy truth and
ways, doth lie more on you than on
other men. 8. The souls of your
hearers, and the success of your labours,
do very much depend on your taking
heed unto yourselves” (Baxter, Zhe Re-
formed Pastor, chap. I.).


A Pastor's Duty towards his Flock.

I. To feed the flock by diligent
preaching of the word.—A work re-
quiring—1. Spiritual wisdom and
understanding in the mysteries of the
gospel (1 Cor. ii. 4-7; Ephes. iii. 8-11).
2. Experience of the power of the
truth (John iii, 11; 2 Cor. iv. 18).
3. Skill to divide the word aright
(2 Tim. ii. 15). 4. A prudent con-
sideration of the state of the flock.
5. Zeal for the glory of God and
compassion for the souls of men.

Il. To continue in fervent prayer
for the flock (vi. 4).—1. For the success
of the word among its members.
2. For their protection against those
temptations to which they are generally
exposed. 3. For the especial state and
condition of individuals, as these be-
come known tohim. 4. For the presence
of Christ in the assemblies of the
Church.

III. To administer the seals of the
covenant—.e., the sacraments. 1. At
suitable times. 2. According to Christ’s
appointment. 3. Unto those only who
are meet and worthy.

IV. To preserve the truth or doctrine
of the gospel received and professed in
the Church, and to defend it against
all opposition (Phil. i. 17; 1 Tim,
i) (3, “4p 982 6,07,) 16 Sv 205 es Tim,
i, 14, ii. 25, iti. 14-17).

V. To labour for the conversion of
souls unto God.—To enlarge the king-
dom of Christ, to diffuse the light and
savour of the gospel, to be subservient
unto the calling of the elect, or
gathering all the sheep of Christ unto
His fold, are things that God designs


440


by His Churches in the world.—from
Owen., vol. xvi., chap. v. P


Vers. 28-30. Characteristics of the
Church.
I. Owned by God.

II. Redeemed by Jesus Christ.
III. Ruled by the Holy Ghost.
IV. Served by Christian elders.

V. Assailed by false teachers,
VI. Betrayed by insincere friends.


Vers. 28, 29. Three Things of which
Christian Pastors should take heed.

I. Of themselves.—1. Lest preaching
to others they should themselves be
castaways (1 Cor. ix. 27). 2. Lest
while preaching they should publish
another gcspel which is not another
(Gal. i. 6-9).

II. Of the flock.—1. Lest any of them
should be lost. 2. Lest any of them
should be sickly or weak (1 Cor.
xi, 30).

III, Of the wolves.—1. Lest any
should arise within the fold. 2. Lest
any should break into it from without.


Ver. 32. A Pastor's Farewell.

I. His affectionate regard for his
people.—Designating them as _ his
brethren, which they are in a double
sense. 1. By nature, as being par-
takers of the same flesh and blood
(xvii. 29): and 2. By grace, as being
members of the same houshold of faith
(Gal. vi. 10).

II. His fervent desire for his people.
-——l. That they should be edified or
built up in faith, love, and holiness
(Eph. iv. 16; Jude 20). 2. That they
should at last obtain an inheritance
among the sanctified, ae. among the
spirits of just men made perfect
(Heb. xii. 23).

III. His solemn commendation of
his people.; or 1. Zo God. (1) To
whom they rightly belong, being His
children by creation and regeneration ;
(2) because He alone is able to build
them up and bring them to the
heavenly inheritance; and (3) has
graciously promised to preserve and
perfect all that trust in Him and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHA: XX.





+

believe upon His Son. 2. To the word
of His grace. Meaning not the personal
word, but the truth of the gospel, and
signifying that he, Paul, prayed that
his brethren might be enlightened by,
and sanctified through that truth,
since through that alone does God
advance His gracious work in the
souls of His people (John xvii. 17).


Ver. 35. The Duty of the Strong
towards the Weak.

I. Its nature.—To extend material
aid to the poor.

II. Its imperativeness.—Ye ought.
The relief of poorer brethren is not
optional, but obligatory on Christians.

III. Its motive.—Obedience to the
Lord Jesus Christ.

IV. Its blessedness.—It is more
blessed to give than to receive.


More Blessed to Give than to Receive.

I. Because it delivers us from our-
selves.—1. From the bonds of selfish-
ness. 2. From the cares of superfluity.
3. From the burden of dependence.

II. Because it unites us to the
brethren.—1. By their friendly attach-
ment. 2. By their active gratitude.
3. By their blessed intercession.

III. Because it brings us nearer to
God.—Making us 1. Imitators of God,
the All Good. 2. Sharers in the delight
of the All Loving. 3. Expectants of
the reward of the Eternal Rewarder.
—From “ Gerok.”


The Unrecorded Words of Jesus.
—Of these Dr. Westcott (Jntro-
duction to the Gospels, Appendix C.)
gives the following list : 1. Remember
the words of the Lord Jesus, How He
said, Jé is more blessed to give than to
receive (Acts xx. 35; compare Luke
vi. 30). 2. On the same day, having
seen one working on the Sabbath, He
said to him, O man, if indeed thou
knowest what thou doest, thow art
blessed ; but af thou knowest not, thou
art cursed and art a transgressor of the
law (Cod. D.; after Luke vi. 4).
3. But ye seek to increase Strom little,
and from greater to be less (Cod, D.)


4, The Son of God says: Let us resist
all iniquity and hold it in hatred
(Epistle of Barnabas, 4). 5. Thus
He (Christ) saith, They who wish to see
Me and to lay hold on My kingdom
must receive Me by suffering and
affiction (Hpistle of Barnabas, 7).
6. Shew yourselves tried money-changers
(Origen in Joann. xix). 7. He that
wonders shall reign ; and he that reigns
shall rest (Ex. Ev. Hebr. Ap. Clem. Al.,
Strom). Look with wonder ut that which
is before you (Ap. Clem. Al., Strom., ii. 9,
45. 8. I came to put an end to
sacrifices, and wumless ye cease from
sacrificing (God’s) anger will not cease
Jrom you (Ev. Ebion. Ap. Epiph. Her.,
xxx. 16). 9. Jesus said to His disciples,
Ask great things and the small shall be
added unto you; and ask heavenly
things and the earthly shall be
added unto you (Origen, de Orat., 2).
10. Our Lord Jesus Christ said, Jn
whatsoever I may find you in this I also
will judge you (Clem. Al., Jwisdives, 40).
Such as I may find thee, I will judge
thee, saith the Lord (Nilus., Ap. Anast.
Sim., Quest., 3). 11. The Saviour him-
self says, He who is near Me is near the
Jjire; he who is far from Me is far
from the kingdom (Orig., Hom. in
Jerem. iii., p. 778; Didymus in Psalm
Ixxxvili. 8). 12. The Lord says in the
gospel, Jf ye kept not that which is
small, who will give you that which is
great? For I say unto you, that he
that is faithful in very little, is faithful
also im much (Clem. Rom., Ep., ii. 8)
13. The Lord says, Keep the flesh pure.
and the soul unspotted, that we (perhaps
ye) may receive eternal life (Clem. Rom.,
Cop., ii. 8). 14. The Lord himself
having been asked by some one when
His kingdom will come, saith, When
the two shall be one, and that which ¢s
without as that which is within, and the
male with the female, neither male nor
female (Clem. Rom., Hp., ii. 12). 15.
Jesus says, For those that are sick, I
was sick, and for those that hunger I
suffered hunger, and for those that thirst
I suffered thirst (Orig. in Matt., tom.
xiii, 2). 16. In the Hebrew gospel,
the Lord says to His disciples, Vever be


44]


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








joyful except when ye shall look on your
brother in love (Hieron. in E'phes., v. 3).
17. After the Resurrection Christ said
to Peter and the apostles, Take hold,
handle Me, and see that I am not an
incorporeal spirit (Ignat., ad Smyrn. 3).
18. Christ said, Good must needs come,
but blessed is he through whom it comes
(Clem., Hom., xii. 29). 19. It was
not through unwillingness to impart
His blessings that the Lord announced
in some gospel or other, My mystery 1s
for Me and for the sons of My house.
We remember our Lord and Master,
how He said to us, Keep My mysteries
for Me and for the sons of My house
(Clem. Alex., Strom., v. 10-64). 20. L
will select to myself these things: very
very excellent are those whom My Father
who is in heaven has given to Me
(Eusebius, Theophania, iv. 13) 21.
The Lord taught of those days (of His
future kingdom on earth) and said,


The days will come in which vines shall
spring up, each having ten thousand
stocks, and on each stock ten thousand
branches, and on each branch ten thousand
shoots, and on each shoot ten thousand
bunches, and on each bunch ten thousand
grapes, and each grape when pressed
shall give fiwe-and-twenty measures of
wine. And when any saint shall have
seized one bunch another shall cry, I am
a better bunch; take me; through me
bless the Lord. . . . And when Judas
the traitor believed not and asked,
How then shall such productions
proceed from the Lord? The Lord
said, They shall see who shall come to
these times (Papias; compare Irenzus,
v. 5, 33, 53). Concerning some of
these it is practically certain that they
were not uttered by Christ; it is
extremely doubtful if any one of them
was except the first, which has been
recorded by Luke.


CHAPTER XXI.


Bounp FoR JERUSALEM.—THE TERMINATION OF THE THIRD MIssionARY
JOURNEY.


§ 1. Seven Days at Tyre ; or, Impending Danger announced (vers. 1-6).
§ 2. With Philip at Cesarea; or, Renewed Foreannouncements of Evil


(vers. 7-14).
§ 3. With James and the Elders at Jerusalem; or, Mistaken Counsel (vers.
15-25).


§ 4. Arrested in the Temple; or, Long Looked for, Come at Last (vers. 26-40).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. And it came to pass that after we had gotten from them and had launched.—
Better, as well as literally, And when tt came to pass that we had weighed anchor, having
departed from them. The “we” certainly included Luke and, most probably, Trophimus
(xxi. 29) and Aristarchus (xxvii. 2); the others (xx. 4) presumably proceeded no farther.
Timothy may even have returned with the elders from Miletus to Ephesus (1 Tim. i. 3).
With a straight course shows the wind to have been favourable. Compare xvi. 11. Coos
shoulc Se Cos,an island on the south-west coast of Asia Minor, and forty miles from Miletus
a distance which could have been performed in six hours. Rhodes.—Another island lying
upon the south of Asia Minor, on the coast of Caria. Patara.—A seaport of Lycia, near the
left bank of the Xanthus, celebrated for its oracle of Apollo. ‘

Ver. 2. Finding a ship sailing over.—Lit., having found a vessel crossing over. The reason
for thus changing vessels may have been either that the one they left was not proceeding
further, or was not fit for venturing far from the coast, or that the one they boarded was
ae leaving when they landed at Patara, so that by availing themselves of it they lost no
ime.


442


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxt.








*

Ver. 3. Discovered Cyprus.—Better, sighted Cyprus. Lit., having had it brought up to sight.
or made visible. A nautical expression, the opposite of which is to lose sight of land,
dmoxpirrew yiv. We left (or, leaving) it on the left hand.—This shows they sailed to the
southward of the island. Syria in those days included Pheenicia (ver. 2), of which Tyre (see
xii. 20) was the capital. For there, ete.—Lit., for thither (i.¢., having come thither), the
ship was unlading her burden.

Ver. 4. And finding disciples should be and having fownd out (by searching, because they
were strangers) te disciples who lived there, since the gospel had been preached in Pheenicia
at an early period (xi. 19), and the Saviour had performed some of His miracles in the neigh-
bourhood of Tyre and Sidon (Matt. xv. 21; Mark vii. 24). Seven days (compare xx. 6).—
The time occupied in unloading the ship; during which time Paul would, without doubt,
preach the gospel and consult for the welfare of the Syrian Church. Go up, dvaBaivew, as in
ver. 12.—The best text reads set foot upon, émBalvev.

Ver. 5. And when we should be and when it came to pass that we had accomplished those,
or the days named in ver, 4. The days were not spent in refitting the ship (Meyer), but in
xefreshing the disciples. Wives and children.—Only mention of wives and children in the
Acts.

Ver. 7. And when he had finished our course from Tyre might be read but we, having
Jinished our voyage, came down from Tyre (Alford). From Tyre, a moderate day’s journey by
land and a few hour's by sea. Ptolemais.—The ancient Accho (Judges i. 31), the modern
Akka of the Arabians, and Acre or St. Jean d’Acre of Europeans. With arrival at this port
the sea voyage from Neapolis to Syria ended.

Ver. 8. Cesarea.—The third visit (see ix. 30, xviii. 22). That the distance from Akka to
Czesarea, about forty miles, was performed on foot appears (Holtzmann and others) incom-
patible with the haste which would not suffer Paul to land at Ephesus (xx. 16); but the land
route may have been rendered necessary because of inability to find a ship without waiting.
Philip the Evangelist.—See on viii. 40. Of the seven.—See on vi. 5.

Ver. 9. And the same man.—Better now this man.

Ver. 10. Agabus.—In all probability the person already known (xi. 28). Whether he haa
heard of Paul’s arrival and come to Czsarea on that account (Baumgarten) must be left
undecided. It is worth observing that Philip’s daughters were not selected as the medium
through which Paul was warned.

Ver. 11. Compare the symbolical actions of Old Testament prophets (1 Kings xxii. 11;
Isa. xx. 2; Jer. xiii. 1; Ezek. iv.-1, etc.).

Ver. 12. They of that place were the Christians there.

Ver. 13. What mean ye !—Better, what do ye, weeping and breaking my heart? Compare
Mark xi, 5.

Ver. 15. We took up our carriages, or things to be carried (see Judges xviii. 21).—
drocxevacdmevor. The reading of the Received text should be translated, having packed away
our baggage—i.e., the superfluous part of it (Olshausen); or having discharged our baggage—
.¢., unpacked the matters necessary for our journey to Jerusalem. But the best reading,
émickevacdmevor, signifies, having packed up our baggage, and so made ourselves ready for the
journey to Jerusalem (Hackett, Alford, Holtzmann, and others).

Ver, 16, An old, better, an early disciple.—Ze., one who had long been a disciple, having
been probably converted on the day of Pentecost. Whether the Cesarean brethren brought
Mnason with them to Jerusalem (Calvin, Beza, Plumptre), or brought Paul to Mnason at
Jerusalem (Bengel, Olshausen, Meyer, De Wette, Holtzmann) is uncertain. Both translations
are admissible. Mnason was of Cyprus, and therefore a countryman of Barnabas (iv. 36).

Ver. 17. The brethren were not the Church or the apostles (Kuinoel), but private Christians,
such as Mnason and others (Wendt, Holtzmann, Hackett, and others).

Ver. 18. James.—See on xii. 17, xv. 13. The apostles, not mentioned, may by this time
have been dispersed from Jerusalem, while some may have been dead. The Jerusalem
Church was manifestly presided over by James and the elders.

Ver. 19. Particularly, what things, or one by one, each of the things which—Compare
xv. 4,12. That nothing is here said about the delivering up of the collections for the poor
saints at Jerusalem has been explained by supposing that the “‘ we’’ sources were no more
at the author’s command, but may be satisfactorily accounted for by assuming that Luke
did not consider this necessary to be stated. It is perfectly arbitrary to assert that—in
order, shall it be said, to guarantee the apostle’s good faith ?—information should have
been given about the final disposition of those contributions which the apostle had been
collecting, and with which he hoped to appease the irritated minds of his Jewish brethren
(Holtzmann). '

Ver. 20. They glorified the Lord-—Rather, God (as in Gal. i. 24), on Paul’s account, and
not as if they themselves did not share in the general suspicion or anxiety (Holtzmann), but
more likely as if they were somewhat troubled about the inferences that were being publicly
drawn from Paul’s Gentile mission—called his attention to the many thousands, or myriads,


443


cHap. xxl, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








of Jewish Christians, not in the world (Overbeck), but in Jerusalem and Judea (Wendt,
Zockler), who were all (not “some” as in xv. 1, 5) zealous, not of, but for the law, as Paul
himself had formerly been (Gal. i. 14). :

Ver. 21. That thou teachest all to forsake Moses.—Lit., that thow teachest apostasy from
Muses. The allegation contained an element of truth in so far as it was undoubtedly Paul’s
aim to persuade his countrymen to embrace the gospel, and in so far as their reception of
the gospel would in due course emancipate them from the bondage of the law; but it was
not Paul’s object or business to inculcate on Jewish Christians the discontinuance of either
circumcision or the ritual of Moses. (See further in “ Homiletical Analysis.”’)

Ver. 22. The multitude (or a crowd, rA70s, without the article) must needs come together.
—The best MSS, omit this clause along with yap, for, and read, they will certainly hear that
thou art come.

Ver. 23. We have four men,—The clause shows how closely the Jerusalem Church adhered
to the ritual of Moses. That the vow, taken by the men, was that of the Nazarite is suggested
by the reference to shaving the head.

Ver. 24, Purify thyself with them and bear charges with, rather, for them.—James, who
gave this advice, was himself a Nazarite—“ Drank no wine nor strong drink, neither did he
eat flesh. No razor ever touched his head; he did not anoint himself with oil; he did not
use the bath. . . . He would enter into the temple alone, and there be found kneeling on his
knees and asking forgiveness for the people; so that his knees grew hard like a camel’s knees,
because he was ever upon them worshipping God and asking forgiveness for the people”
(Euseb, Hist., ii. 23). The term for a Nazarite vow, though not prescribed by the law, was
usually thirty days; but Jewish practice had rendered it possible for one who could not
undertake a vow for so long a time to join in with another in the last days of his Nazaritic
period on condition of bearing all the temple charges for offerings for himself and that other.
The Jews considered it a specially meritorious act to assist a poor Nazarite in this manner,
Agrippa I., on obtaining the sovereignty of Palestine, paid the expense of numerous indigent
Nazarites who were waiting to be released from their vows (Jos., Amt., XIX. vi. 1). As Paul
was a poor man, it is supposed he paid, or proposed to pay, the charges for the Nazarites out
of the Gentile contributions which he brought for the poor saints in Jerusalem. Ramsay
challenges the statement that Paul was a poor man, and suggests that the charges here
specified, as well as the cost of his subsequent trial, were borne out of his own patrimonial
.estate, or hereditary property (St. Paul the Traveller, etc., pp. 310 ff). All may know should
be all shall know.

Ver. 25. The best MSS. omit the clause that they observe no such thing. This reference
to the apostolic decrees confirms the credibility of the account in chap. xv.

Ver. 26. Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself, might read took the men
the next day, and having purified himself, not by performing the ordinary ablutions required
before entering the temple (Howson), but by entering with them upon the same course of
dedication. To signify (better, declaring) the accomplishment of the days of purification —
f,e., either that the days were fulfilled and the time come for the four men to be released
from their vows (Wieseler,.Conybeare and Howson), or, better, announcing his intention to
fulfil along with them the (seven) days which by the law must precede the termination of the
vow (Alford, Hackett, Plumptre, Spence, Holtzmann and others).

Ver, 27, Seven days was the ordinary period for the most solemn purifications (Exod.
xxix, 37; Lev. xii. 2, xiii. 6; Numb. xii. 14, xix. 14). Of these seven days Paul observed
only two, or at least four, as appears from xxiv. 11 (see “Critical Remarks”), which shows
the interval between Paul’s arrival in Jerusalem and his speech before Felix was only twelve
days. When his arrest took place the seven days were “almost ended ”—4.¢., they were not
completed when he was apprehended. In the temple meant most likely in the court of the —
women, afterwards called this holy place (ver. 28), into which no foreigner was permitted to
enter under pain of death. ‘“ This court was four square, and had a wall about it peculiar to
itself.” There was also a stone partition all round, three cubits high, whose construction
was very elegant,,and upon which stood pillars at equal distances from one another, declaring
the law of purity, some in Greek and some in Roman letters, that ‘No foreigner should go
within that sanctuary” (Jos., Wars, V. v. 2, VI. ii. 4). The correctness of this statement,
which was long disputed, has been recently confirmed by Monsieur Clermont Ganneau’s
discovery of one of those prohibitory notices, with an inscription in Greek, of which the
following is a translation : No foreigner to proceed within the partition wall and enclosure
around the sanctuary ; whoever is caught in the same will on that account be liable to incur
death” (Recent Discoveries on the Temple Hill, p. 134).

Ver. 30. They took, or laid hold on Paul.—Baur and Holtzmann regard it as improbable
that these Jews, among whom doubtless were many zealots for the Messiah’s faith and for
the law, should have seized Paul when engaged in the performance of a pious work of the
law, and accordingly reject this story as unhistorical. But why should fanatical Jews always
have acted in logically and religiously consistent fashion, when enlightened and sober-minded _


444


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. OHAP. XXI.





t
Christians do not? The doors were most probably the gates which led into the women’s
court.

Ver. 31. The chief captain of the band.—7Zhe chiliarch, or military tribune of the cohort,
whose name was Claudius Lysias (xxiii. 26), resided in the Castle of Antonia, a gigantic
fortress on a rock or hill, about eighty-five feet high, at the north-west angle of the temple
area, which communicated with its northern and western porticoes, “and had flights of stairs
descending into both, by which the garrison could at any time enter the court of the temple
and prevent tumults” (Robinson, Biblical Researches, 1., p. 482. Compare Josephus, Wars,
V. v. 8).

Ver. 33. Two chains.—J.e., bound by a chain to a soldier on each side (compare xii. 6).

Ver, 34. Into the castle.—More correctly, into the camp or barracks attached to the tower.

Ver. 36. Away with him.—Compare xxii. 22; Luke xxiii. 18; John xix. 15.

Ver. 37. Canst thou speak Greek ?—Lit., dost thou know Greek? ‘E\d\nnori ywookes.
Compare Grece nescire in Cicero (Pro, Flac., 4) and rov’s Zupiorl éricraudvovs in Xenophon
(Cyrop., VII. v. 31).

Ver. 38. That (or, the) Egyptian.—_Josephus ( Wars, II., xiii. 5) mentions an Egyptian, a
false prophet, who, having deluded thirty thousand men, led them round about from the
Wilderness to the Mount of Olives with the view of breaking into Jerusalem from that place,
and states that Felix, having fallen upon them, either destroyed or captured alive the greater
portion of his followers, and dispersed the rest, while he himself escaped with a small number.
In another account (Anzt., XX. viii. 6) the Jewish historian says that this “eyptian went to
Jerusalem and advised the common people to go along with him to the Mount of Olives,
which they did in vast crowds, he promising to show them the walls of Jerusalem fall down
at his command ; and that Felix sallied out against them with a great company of horsemen
and footmen, slew four hundred, and made two hundred prisoners, but did not capture the
Egyptian, who escaped. Tholuck (Glaubwiirdigheit, p. 169) has shown how the variations
in Josephus’s story may be harmonised; but even if they could not, they would only prove
that Josephus, while substantially confirming Luke’s account, was not so accurate a historian
as Paul’s friend.

Ver. 39. Of no mean city.—Josephus (Ant., I. vi. 1) calls Tarsus the most important city
in all Cilicia, ‘Many of the coins of Tarsus bear the title of Autonomous and Metropolis”
(Hackett).

Ver. 40, That Lysias should have given Paul licence or /eave to address the people need
Occasion no surprise. Paul had satisfied Lysias that he was no wild revolutionary, but a
peaceful Cilician ; and besides, Lysias may have seen in Paul’s countenance from the first
what convinced him his prisoner was no ordinary man. The Hebrew tongua, or dialect, was
the Syro-Chaldaic or Aramean, as in John y. 2, xix. 13, the mother tongue of the Jews in
Judea at that time.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—6.


Seven days at Tyre; or, Impending Danger announced.

I. The voyage from Miletus to Tyre—1. From Miletus to Patara. (1) The
company of voyagers. Paul and his companions, now reduced to three,
Trophimus, Aristarchus, and Luke, the others Sosipater, Secundus, Gaius,
Timotheus, and Tychicus, having either remained behind at Miletus, or gone to
their several homes, or departed to various fields of labour. ‘“ So part we in this
world of care to meet again in dear Jerusalem.” (2) The sorrowful farewell
spoken on the sea-beach, with hot tears and tender embraces, and with the
feeling present in every heart that never again would they all look each other in
the face on earth. A presentiment which all companies may feel on breaking
up. (3) The speedy voyage. The first night the vessel anchored at Cos, famous
for its wines and fabrics, for its temple of Alsculapius, or school of medicine, and
for its two distinguished natives, Hippocrates the physician, and Apelles the
painter. The ship had made a run of six or seven hours from Miletus, which
shows it must have sailed from the latter port about noon. The next day,
having rounded Cape Crio, it headed eastward, a distance of fifty miles, and lay
to for the second night in Rhodes, then celebrated as being “the most beautiful
spot in this perhaps the fairest portion of the world,” a current proverb saying
that “the sun shone every dayin Rhodes.” From the Greek period it had been
renowned for its Temple of the Sun and for its Colossus, though when Paul’s ship


445


cyap. xxi HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





visited the harbour the latter was in ruins, having been overthrown by an earth-
quake. The day following, the barque landed at Patara, a coast‘town of Lycia,
and a place of some importance and splendour, possessing a convenient harbour
(now an inland marsh) and a celebrated temple and oracle of Apollo, which
almost rivalled that of Delphi (Herod., I. 182, III. 4). 2. From Patara to
Tyre. Scarcely had the vessel anchored in the harbour of Patara when Paul
and his companions found another ship, a merchantman, bound for Pheenicia, in
the act of setting sail, and having taken out passages in it once more confronted
the dangers of the deep. Whether the ship they left was not proceeding -
farther, or they were unwilling to wait for it, need not be curiously inquired
after. It admirably served their purpose to embark on the one they found
weighing anchor, and hurry to their destination. Passing by the island of
Cyprus (iv. 36) on the left hand—i.e., keeping to its south, the Phenician
merchantman steered her course for Tyre to which she was bound with a cargo.
(On the commercial importance of Tyre in Old Testament times, see Ezek. xxvii.)
As the distance between Patara and Tyre was 340 geographical miles, several
days would most likely be consumed in this part of the voyage.

II. The seven days’ stay in Tyre.—1. The unlading of the ship. The com-
mercial greatness of Tyre. Never was a more precious cargo discharged at her
wharves than when Paul and his companions disembarked, carrying with them
the unsearchable riches of salvation to proclaim to its inhabitants. 2. The search
Jor the disciples. Paul probably knew that already the gospel had been preached
and the nucleus of a Church formed there. That the Christians were.«not
numerous in Tyre may be inferred from the circumstance that they required to
be searched out. Paul’s inquiry after them arose no doubt partly from a desire
of Christian fellowship in a heathen city, and partly from a wish to impart unto
them some benefit by preaching among them (compare Rom. i. 11). 3. The
warning of Paul. Given by the disciples, who, in speaking as they did, acted as
the organs and mouthpiece of the Holy Ghost, who never did, and does not yet
restrict His influences or communications to official persons, but imparts them to
whomsoever He will (John iii. 8; 1 Cor. xii. 11). The tenor of their warning
was that Paul should not set foot in Jerusalem, obviously because of the danger
they saw impending.

If we ask, Why did the Spirit through these men warn Paul? It could
not be that the Spirit did not wish Paul to visit Jerusalem, because it must
already have been in the Spirit’s plan that Paul should go to Jerusalem, be
apprehended there, and carried thence to Rome. The only answer possible
seems to be that in this way the Spirit desired to confirm the impression already
made upon Paul’s heart, that ‘bonds and afflictions ” were waiting him (xx. 23),
and to test if not the sincerity, at least the strength and tenacity of his faith.

III. The pathetic farewell to Tyre.—1. The affectionate convoy. The whole
body of the disciples with their wives and children, unwilling to be parted from
the apostle and his companions, repeated the scene which had a few days
before been witnessed in Miletus, and accompanied them on their way till they
reached the outskirts of the city. A scene like this attests the strength of that
spiritual affection which a true minister of Christ can inspire in the bosoms of
his hearers. 2. The prayer meeting on the beach, Recalling the similar interview
with the Ephesian elders (xx. 36), and the fast of Ezra and his fellow-travellers
on the Ahava (Ezra viii. 21). How much more appropriate for Christians to
part at a prayer meeting than at a social banquet, with supplications and tears
and solemn commendations of each other to God than with songs and laughter,
wine and wassail. 3. The final separation. Bidding each other good-bye, they
went their several ways, Paul and his companions to their ship, the Christians of
Tyre to their homes. So must all earthly unions and communions be broken up


446


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP, XXI.





and interrupted till the heavenly union and communion arrive which will never


end.


Learn.—l. How God guides His people on their journeys, whether these be


by sea or land.
cities.
those He leads.

sphere and work.


2. How Christ’s disciples draw to one another, even in strange
3. How the Spirit of Christ tries and tests the faith and patience of
4, How providence assigns to each man his own particular


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-7. Helps and Hindrances.
I. Helps for Paul's journey.—


1. Favourable winds—a straight course


(ver. 1). 2. Opportune events—the
crossing ship (ver. 2). 3. Christian
companions—“‘ we came” (ver. 1),
“we sailed,” “we landed” (ver. 3).


4. Religious fellowship with the Tyrian
disciples (ver. 4).

Il. Hindrances to Paul’s journey.—
1. The prophecies of approaching evil.
(ver. 4). 2. The tearful farewells upon
the beach (vers. 5, 6). 3. The separa-
tion from Christian friends which
ensued.


Ver. 4. Seven days in Tyre. “This
peculiar period of time mentioned at
Troas (xx. 6), and again at Puteoli
(xxviii. 14), seems to tell us that St.
Paul arranged to stay at each of these
points where there was a Christian
Church—Troas, Puteoli, and Tyre—for
the purpose of attending one solemn
meeting of the brethren on the Lord’s
day, and partaking, once at least,
with them all of the Lord’s Supper.—
Spence.


Ver. 5. Husbands, Wives, and Chil-
dren.

T. All belong to the conception of an
ideal home.—All, therefore, should be
bound together by ties of love. All
should be mutually helpful by lovingly
fulfilling the duties which each owes to
the other two, and which all owe to
God, to the Church, to the world.


II. All have a rightful place within |


the Christian Church.—All belong to
its communion. The Church member-
ship of wives and children no less than
of husbands and fathers is distinctly
recognised in New Testament Scrip-
tures (ii. 39 ; 1 Cor, vii. 14).


III. All should take part together
in exercises of Christian worship.—
Whether in public assemblies or in
private gatherings of the disciples, all


should, like Cornelius’s household
(x. 33), be present. The modern
practice of establishing separate


Churches for children cannot be too
severely condemned.


Children. Are—

' T. The heritage of the Lord, and
should be thankfully received from,
and diligently trained for Him.

II. The ornament of home, and
should be sincerely admired and ten-
derly cherished.

III. The hope of the Church, and
should be carefully instructed and
nourished up in the faith.

IV. The promise of the world, and
should therefore be with much solici-
tude prepared for their future places
in it.

Vers. 1-5. The Power of Love to Jesus
Christ.

I. It brings the unacquainted near
ver. 4).

II. It forewarns of possible danger
(ver. 5).

III. It gladly cultivates fellowship
(ver. 5).

IV. It humbles itself before God in
mutual prayer (ver. 5), (Lisco, im
Lange).


Ver. 6. Christian Farewells,

I. Often take place under sorrowful
circumstances.

II. Should always be accompanied
with prayers as well as tears.

III. Ought not to hinder the prose-
cution of necessary duties.

IV. Will eventually give place to
joyous reunions,


447


cHap.xx1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


en


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.


Vers, 7-14. With Philip at Cesarea; or, Renewed Fore-announcements of evil.

I. The journey from Tyre to Cesarea.—l. The Voyage from Tyre to Ptolemas.
Commenced after the seven day’s sojourn in Tyre and the affecting farewell upon
the beach ; it continued probably not more than a few hours, as Ptolemais was
distant from Tyre not more than a moderate day’s journey by land. 2. The halt
at Ptolemais. Not to examine into either the antiquities or the splendours of
the town, though in respect of both it was then worthy of attention. Given to
Asher at the conquest (Judges i. 31, 32), Acco, the original name of Ptolemais,
had never been completely cleared of the Canaanites, but remained in possession
of the Pheenicians, till taken by Shalmaneszer of Assyria. In B.c. 333 it passed
into the hands of Alexander the Great, and from his, when his dominions were
divided among his generals, into those of Ptolemy in B.c. 320, who, having greatly
enlarged and beautified it, called it Ptolemais. Ultimately it fell beneath the
yoke of the Romans, and received further embellishment at the hands of Herod.
‘At the time of Paul’s visit it had been raised to the rank of a Roman colony and
must have been a splendid city (see Picturesque Palestine, iii. 87-89). Yet none
of these things attracted the apostle. What tempted him to linger a day within
its borders was a desire to meet with the Christian disciples who were to be found
here also as at Tyre. 3. The walk from Ptolemais to Caesarea. The distance
extended to nearly forty miles ; while the route lay along the coast and round
the head of Carmel. Why the travellers footed this instead of sailing cannot
with certainty be said. The apostle may have deemed it better to hurry on over-
land than wait for the sailing of his ship (if it was going further) or (if it were
not) for the finding of another. 4. The arrival at Philip's house. This Philip
was the Jerusalem deacon (vi. 5), who, following the example of his brilliant .
colleague Stephen, became an eloquent preacher of the gospel in Samaria (viii. 5),
and after being used by the Spirit for the conversion of the Eunuch (viii. 26), was
last heard of as publishing the good news in all the cities on the coast north-
wards from Azotus (viii. 40), till he came to Caesarea, where he finally settled,
and for nearly twenty-five years fulfilled the office of an evangelist. When Paul
in A.D. 58, paid his third visit to the town, Philip had four grown up and un-
married daughters endowed with the prophetic spirit (ii, 17)—7.e., who gave
inspired utterances and expositions of Christian truth, and also foretold future
events. Whether they joined (Spence) or did not join (Hackett) Agabus in pre-
dicting Paul’s approaching captivity is unrecorded; but Luke represents Paul
and his companions as having been so pleased with their reception and entertain-
ment in Philip’s family circle that they ‘‘tarried there many days,” perhaps
longer than they at first intended. Luke himself must have here for the first
time met Philip, who would no doubt supply him with much of the information
about himself and others which appears in the earlier chapters of the Acts,

II. The warning renewed in Philip’s house.—1l. The person of the speaker.
A certain prophet from Judea, named Agabus, most likely the same who fourteen
years before in Antioch had predicted the coming of a famine (xi. 28), though
otherwise unknown, God often sends important communications through obscure
messengers. 2. The symbolic action. Having found his way into Philip’s house,
he laid hold of Paul’s girdle—i.e., the sash wherewith in Oriental countries the
flowing robes were tied round the waist, and with it bound in succession first his
own hands and then his own feet—after the manner of the Old Testament seers
(see “Critical Remarks”). 3. The prophetic utterance. ‘Thus saith the Holy
Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and
shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.” Agabus distinctly claimed to


448


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cttap. xXt.


ae


+
speak with divine authority, and Paul accepted his announcement as such. Be-
sides solemnly confirming what Paul had previously heard at Tyre, the language
ot Agabus explained the exact nature of the peril which now threatened the
apostle. Under some grave charge not revealed he would be delivered over by
his countrymen into the hands of the Roman Government. 4. The friendly
appeal. When Paul’s companions and the inmates of Philip’s house, with pro-
bably other Christians came to hear of Agabus’s prediction, they entreated
their beloved teacher not to proceed to Jerusalem. Agabus, it will be observed,
did not join in this entreaty, though the Tyrian disciples did (ver. 4)—which
shows that most likely these last overstepped the limits of what the Spirit had
-evealed to them (see “ Critical Remarks”). The parallel between Christ and Paul,
who were both dissuaded—the former by Peter (Matt. xvi. 22), the latter by his
friends—from going to Jerusalem to suffer, is too apparent to escape notice.
5. The heroic response. ‘“ What are ye doing? thus weeping and breaking mine
heart,” etc. The apostle, with a fortitude which resembled that of his Master,
gave his friends to understand that he perfectly realised the situation, and
accepted it with unreserved submission, that he felt ready to face the worst at
Jerusalem for his Master’s sake, that death itself had no terrors for him, and
that their tearful entreaties would have no effect in keeping him back from the
fate which he saw impending. The course he was pursuing had been adopted
under the Spirit’s guidance, and aimed at the glory of Jesus and the furtherance
of the gospel, by publishing once more the tidings in the Metropolis at the most
numerously attended of all the feasts, and by seeking fresh recognition from the
mother Church for his Gentile mission. Hence he could not flinch; their tears
and entreaties, therefore, only rendered his separation from them the more acutely
painful. When he said they were breaking his heart, he did not mean that they
were lacerating his soul by conjuring up before him the bonds and afflictions ”
that awaited him, since he could truthfully affirm none of these things moved
him, but that it broke his heart to be obliged to witness their grief and resist
their weeping and supplication. 6. The submissive acquiescence. When his
friends perceived that he could not be persuaded they desisted, saying: “ The
will of the Lord be done!”—borrowing their expression, it has been conjectured,
from the Master’s prayer, which by this time had attained to familiar and perhaps
daily use among Christians. If there is a time to speak there is also a time to be
silent, and this was one.

Learn.—1. The variety of offices in the Christian Church—evangelists,
prophets, apostles. 2. The value of dramatic action in preaching. 3. The calm
heroism of him who walks in the way of duty. 4. The preference a good man
should give to duty over life itself. 5. The necessity laid on Christians to
acquiesce in their Master’s will.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. Philip of Cesarea.

I. Not an apostle like his namesake
of Bethsaida (John i. 44), but a deacon
like his gifted colleague Stephen (vi. 6).

II. Not a pastor of a Church like
James the brother of Our Lord (Gal.
ii. 9), but an evangelist like Timothy
(2 Tim. iv. 5).

III. Not a celibate like Paul (1 Cor.
vii. 8 (%)), but a married man like


Peter (Mark i. 30).


ag


IV. Not a wandering missionary
like Paul, but a preacher of the gospel
having a fixed centre from which to
evangelise.


Ver. 9. Virgins which did prophesy ;
or, the place of Woman in the Chris-
tian Church. The fact here stated
proves—

I. That woman has an equal stand-
ing in the Church with man.—In

AAQ


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








Christ there is neither male nor female
(Gal. iii. 28).

II. That woman equally with man
4s susceptible of receiving the highest
spiritual endowments.—Examples in
Hebrew Church—Miriam (Exod. xv.
20), Deborah (Judges iv. 4), Huldah
(2 Kings xxii. 14), Noadiah (Neh.
vi. 14), Anna (Luke ii. 36), In the
New Testament Church Philip’s daugh-
ters stand alone.

III. That though woman was not
intended to rule in the Church of Christ
(see 1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35; 1 Tim. ii. 12),
nothing hinders her from exercising
her gifts as a preacher of the truth
(see xviii. 26 ; and 1 Cor. xi. 5). Asa
possessor of the truth she is equally
with man under obligation to dissemi-
nate it ; and if God has endowed her
with the gift of sweet speech there
appears no sound reason why that gift
should not be utilised for such a holy
purpose.

IV. That the number of women
called of God and the Spirit to this
work will most likely always be few.
—This a warrantable deduction from
the exceptional character of the present
instance.

V. That woman may be equally
helpful to the cause of Christ in other
ways than by prophesying.—Like
Dorcas (ix. 39), Phebe (Rom. xvi. 1),
Mary (Rom. xvi. 6), and others.


Ver. 10. The Prophet Agabus ; or,
comfort for obscure men.

I, Obscure men are all known to
God.—Simon, the Joppa tanner, was as
well known as Peter the apostle; and
Ananias of Damascus as Saul the
emissary of the Sanhedrim.

II. Obscure men may become vessels
of Divine grace.—‘‘ Not many mighty,
not many wise, not many noble, but
God hath chosen the poor of this world
rich in faith.

III. Obscure men may be employed
on great missions.—Ahijah the
Shilonite predicted the rending of the
kingdom from Rehoboam and the ele-
vation of Jeroboam to the throne of
Israel (1 Kings xi. 29-31). Humble


450


shepherds were made the first preachers
of the Incarnation (Luke ii. 17).
Agabus announced to Paul his impend-
ing imprisonment.

IV. Obscure men may eventually
come to high renown.—The name of
Agabus is for ever associated with that
of Paul; the names of the humblest be-
lievers will for ever be connected with
that of Christ.





Vers. 12, 13. The great Modern
Counterpart of Paul—Martin Luther.
‘* When he entered a town the people
flocked together to see the wonderful
man who was so brave and who dared
make a stand against the Pope and all
the world that held him to be a God
in opposition to Christ. Some gave
him poor comfort, telling him that,
because there were so many cardinals
and bishops at Worms at the Diet, he
would speedily be burned to powder, as
Huss had been at Constance, But
Luther answered such men as follows:
“ And if they should build a fire be-
tween Wittenberg and Worms that
would reach to heaven, in the Lord’s
name I would appear and step into
Behemoth’s mouth, between his great
teeth, and confess Christ and let Him do
His pleasure.” (Frederick Myconius:
quoted by Hagenbach: History of the
Reformation, i. 133). . . . “Spalatin
also, the court preacher of the Elector
of Saxony, and the intimate friend of
Luther, advised him by a post messen-
ger, that he must not go immediately
to Worms. It was then that Luther
uttered his ever memorable speech :
“ And if there were as many devils at -
Worms as there are tiles upon the
roofs, I would go thither” (Hagenbach,
Ihid., pp. 133, 134),


Ver. 13. Paul's Sacrifices in the Cause
of Christ. 1. Of ease. Recount his
labours. Contrast them with ours.
2. Of friendship. A warm-hearted
man who delighted to love and to be
be loved. Sacrificed his affections at
the shrine of duty. We must not
allow the influence either of our rela-
tives or of our friends to interfere with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP, XXI.


_——_— wh SSSSSSSSSSSS—SsesesessssSSSSSss


our supreme devotion to the cause
of Christ. 3. Of liberty. Value of
liberty. Paul was capable of appre-
ciating it, and did appreciate it highly.
Was willing to forfeit it, and did for-
feit it. His imprisonment was over-
ruled for sood. It is scarcely possible
that any of us should be, in our own
country at least, literally a prisoner
for Christ We may be exposed to
social and political disadvantages. We
ought to be willing to bear them.
4, Of life. The highest proof of devo-
tion to any cause. Paul gaveit. The
fact was in his case a confirmation of
the truth of the religion he professed.
It was, at all events, a proof of his own
sincerity. A willingness to die for the
cause of Christ is the best preparation
for all minor trials.—G. Brooks.


Ver. 14. “The Will of the Lord be
done |!”

I. A prayer put into the Christian’s
mouth by Christ (Matt. vi. 10).

II. A precept for the Christian,
illustrated by Christ (Matt. xxvi. 42).

III. A pattern of Christ that should
be followed by His servants.

Or thus :-—-

I. A vow of becoming obedience.

II. A confession of believing sub-
mission.

III. A declaration of holy courage
(Leonhard and Spiegel, from Lange).


Christian Resignation.

I. Enjoined and illustrated by Christ.

II. Exemplified and recommended by
Paul and his friends.

III. Approved and rewarded by
God.


Ver. 11. Lessons from Paul’s Girdle.

I. Apostolic fidelity, — Christian
ministers, like Paul, are bound to be
faithful to their Lord.

II. Apostolic trial.—Christian minis-
ters, if faithful, may expect, like Paul,
to experience the hatred of the world.

Ill. Apostolic zeal. — Christian
ministers, like Paul, should always be
ready for whatever suffering or duty
lies before them (from Gerok).


The True Bonds of a Christian.

I. Not the bonds of his own flesh
and blood, which he has torn asunder
by the power of the Spirit.

IJ. Not the bonds of human force
and enmity, which cannot injure him
contrary to the will of God.

III. Not the bonds of brotherly love
and friendship, for whosoever loveth
brethren or sisters more than the Lord
is not worthy of Him.

IV. But only the bonds of love to
his Lord, to whom he is bound in grate-
ful love and childlike fidelity, even unto
death (Gerok, in Lange).


Vers. 13, 14. The Heroism of Paul ;
A study for the followers of Christ.

I. The splendour of his heroism.—
Exhibited in—1. The calm courage he
displayed in the prospect of death.— <I
am ready not to be bound only, but to
die also at Jerusalem.” This utterance
was not made—(1l) In ignorance of
what suffering and death was. Paul
and misfortune had been companions
for many years. For twenty years he
had been an object of unsleeping perse-
cution, had experienced every sort of
calamity, and had more than once been
in the grips of death (2 Cor. xi. 23).
(2) In secret expectation that both
might be escaped. Paul had no such
hope or expectation. Already it had
been too clearly signified to him that
“bonds and imprisonment awaited
him.” Agabus’s words, too, left no loop-
hole for escape. (3) In a feeling of
despair, because he saw that evasion
was impossible. On the contrary,
humanly speaking, Paul perceived that
the only thing necessary in order to
escape was to keep away from Jerusa-
lem, renounce his mission, cast off
Christianity, and go back to the fold he
had left. The Jews would receive him
with open arms. (4) In a spirit of
braggadocio. Like Peter, to gain for
himself a reputation for valour, with
no real intention of ever fulfilling his
words. Paul maintained the same in-
trepidity before Festus (xxv. 11), and
in writing to the Philippians from
Ceesarea (Phil. ii. 17), Later he ex-


45]


GHAP. XXI.





hibited the same spirit when sending an
epistle to Timothy from Rome (2 Tim.
iv. 6). 2. The triumphant victory over
the prospect of death which he obtained.
Not only was he calm and unmoved in
the contemplation of his arrest and
execution, but as it were death was so
overcome that it could not hinder him
from thinking about the interests of
others. One would naturally have
expected that with the prospect of
bonds and imprisonment before him,
although externally unperturbed, he
would be inwardly sad and occupied
with his own misfortunes. But he was
not. The grief of his friends even
could not thrust him in upon himself.
How like his master who, when in the
agonies of death, prayed for His mur-
derers, pardoned the robber and cared
for His mother! How like Stephen,
who, with his latest breath, interceded
for his assassins! And since then men
have sometimes been found over whose
heroic spirits death had no power.

II. The secret of his heroism.
1. Love to the Lord Jesus Christ.
Between Paul and Jesus Christ existed
such a bond of personal love and devo-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


———


tion as has probably never since existed.
Paul’s individuality was almost swal-
lowed up in Christ. ‘Not I, but
Christ liveth in me!” “To meto live
is Christ!” Paul had such a concep-
tion of Christ’s love to him—‘ He
loved me and gave Himself for me ”—
that it kindled in him a responsive
flame of affection that wellnigh con-
sumed him. ‘“ The love of Christ con-
straineth us!” And there is no
consideration or force that will trans-
form a man into a hero sooner than
this. 2. Love for the souls of men.
When Paul said “ for the name of the
Lord Jesus ” he practically meant ‘for
the gospel’s sake,” which again signi-
fied, ‘‘for the souls of men.” He
wanted to go to Jerusalem to preach to
his countrymen at Pentecost, and was
willing to face bonds, imprisonment,
and death for so sacred a cause. This
the next strongest force to the love
of Christ. Paul was willing to die
for the gospel, not because it was the
highest philosophy, or divinest theo-
logy, but because it was the power of
God unto salvation to every one who
believed.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 15—25.


With James and the Elders at Jerusalem ; or, Mistaken Counsels.

TI. Paul's journey to the capital—1. The point of departure. Ozsarea; the
abode of Philip the evangelist (ver. 8), the city of Cornelius (x. 1), the scene of
Herod’s death (xii. 19-23) and of Paul’s subsequent imprisonment (xxiii. 31-35),
The apostle little dreamt, on leaving Cesarea, that before many days had passed
he would return to it a prisoner, though, had he foreseen such, the knowledge would
hardly have discomposed him (ver. 13). Paul one of those heroic spirits that
rise superior to external circumstances, and when confronted by extremest
danger “forget they ever heard the name of death” (Shakespeare). 2. The
time of departure. After the interview with Agabus. The pathetic scene with
the disciples (vers. 12-14), and in particular the courageous declaration of Paul,
not to mention other reasons, clearly rendered it impossible for him to remain
longer at Cwsarea. Had he done so, even the disciples might have begun to
think, if not to say, when they recalled his spirited utterance—“ These be brave
words, O Paul! but where is thy performance?” And Paul was not the man
to suffer any one to charge him with either timidity or inconsistency. 3. The
manner of departure. With “carriages” or things to be carried—i.e., baggage
taken up—this including both articles necessary for the journey and the gifts
Paul was bearing to the poor saints in Jerusalem. Paul’s anticipations of
sorrow for himself had no power to make him forget the contributions he had
pore for the needs of others. Paul was ever a rare example of self-forget-

ulness. :


ABZ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxt.

ae ee

“II. Paul's travelling companions.—1. Those who had accompanied him from
Asia.. Whether all the seven mentioned in xx. 4 (Besser), or only Trophimus,
Aristarchus, and Luke is debatable, though the latter opinion is the more
probable. 2. Certain disciples from Cesarea. Most likely Gentile converts,
though they may have been Jewish Christians travelling to Jerusalem to attend
the Feast of Pentecost. Wherever Paul went his noble personality, rendered
more magnetic by the grace of God that was in him, drew around him circles
of friends, and grappled them to his bosom as with hooks of steel. The time
had not yet arrived when all men would forsake him (2 Tim. iv. 16) as they had
formerly forsaken his Master (Matt. xxvi. 56). 3. Mmnason, an old or “ early”
dasciple—i.e., one who had long been a Christian, having been (it may be supposed)
one of the first converts, gathered into the Christian fold on the day of Pentecost.
A native of Cyprus like Barnabas, he may also have been one of those “mer
of Cyprus” who came to Antioch and were among the first to preach the gospel
to the Gentiles (xi. 20). Whether he lived at Cyprus but possessed a house as
well in Jerusalem, or usually resided in Jerusalem but had been visiting at
Czsarea and was now returning home, or had not been to Caesarea at all, but
was still in Jerusalem, and Paul (according to another translation) was being
conducted to him, are points concerning which no authoritative decision can be
given. The one clear fact is that Paul and his companions obtained a lodging
in Mnason’s house, presumably because in the state of public feeling among
Jewish Christians concerning Paul’s Gentile mission, it might have been difficult,
if not dangerous, to seek accommodation for him with one of these.

IIT. Paul's arrival in the city.—1. The date. That he reached Jerusalem in
time for the Feast of Pentecost is apparent. His departure from Philippi took
place after the days of unleavened bread, since then he had been occupied in
travelling as under :—
days. From Tyre to Ptolemais (xxi. 7) 1 days,
From ”*tolemais to Czesarea (xxi. 8) 2 ,,

6


Where he halted (xxi. 10, say) . fe


From Cesarea to Jerusalem. . . 2 ,,
—a


mA LOWE ET eS i th Wa om iy we


From Philippi to Troas (xx. 6) .
SWihereine abode. 0501 ve ke se
From Troas to Miletus (xx. 13-15).
Where he stayed (say) . me ae
From Miletus to Patara (xxi. 1).
From Patara to Tyre (say)
Where he remained (xxi. 4) .


If to this be added six for the days of unleavened bread (xx. 6), the total of fifty
will be obtained, which is the interval between Passover and Pentecost. 2. His
reception. ‘The brethren—i.e., the private Christians (among them Mnason and
his friends) to whom his coming was made known welcomed him and his com-
panions gladly—Mnasxon to his house and all of them to their hearts. Sym-
pathising fervently with Paul’s missionary enterprise they rejoiced to see him
home again with tidings from the regions beyond.

IV. Paul's interview with the Church leaders.—1. Fraternal greetings. As
on a former occasion (xviii. 22), Paul saluted or embraced the recognised heads
of the Christian community, who had convened to accord him welcome. ‘These
were James the brother of Our Lord—not James the younger (Hackett)—who,
ten or eleven years later, suffered martyrdom as a believer in Jesus of Nazareth,
by being hurled from the pinnacle of the temple and despatched by stoning
(Euseb., H. #., ii. 23) ; and the elders or spiritual rulers, overseers, presbyters of
the various congregations in Jerusalem. That none of the apostles are mentioned
as having been present suggests that none of them at that time resided in the
Holy City. Some may have set forth on missionary tours, while others may
have “departed to be with Christ, which is far better.” 2. Glowing recitals.
Salutations over, the apostle, as he had done on returning from his first
Inissionary tour (xiv. 27), declared particularly or rehearsed one by one the things

453


NPwwrP No


cHap.xx1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








which God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry—-noting specially
his hearing of Apollos (xviii. 24), meeting with John’s disciples (xix. 1), and
successful preaching (xix. 20) in Ephesus; his journey to Macedonia and
Achaia (xx. 1, 2); with the various incidents that occurred on the homeward
route, in Troas (xx. 9), at Miletus (xx. 17), in Tyre (ver. 4), and at Caesarea
(ver. 8). More might be done to deepen the home Church’s interest in the
missionary enterprise by returned missionaries, were they to lay before their
Christian brethren, in fitting language, the story of what God is at present
doing among the heathen. 3. Fervent thanksgivings. When the assembled
elders had listened to the thrilling narrative, they glorified God for having raised
up such a veteran missionary within the Church, and for having performed,
through his instrumentality, such wonders of grace among the Gentiles (compare
iv. 21, xi. 18). Henceforth they could entertain no doubt or suspicion, more of
the earnestness of the man or of the Divine authority of his mission ; and
whatever friction may have previously existed between the apostle and the
Jerusalem leaders, at this moment it had disappeared. The anti-Gentile spirit,
if it slumbered in the Church of the Metropolis, which is doubtful, was not
shared in by itsrulers. 4. Mistaken counsels. (1) The circumstances out of which
these arose were two; the multitudes (myriads or tens of thousands) of Jewish
Christians from all parts of the world, who were then present in the Holy City,
and the misconception under which they laboured of Paul’s work, which they
imagined to be a crusade against circumcision and the customs of Moses, when
it was no such thing. Certainly Paul taught the Gentiles that cireum-
cision and the customs of Moses were not required for a sinner’s justification so
that the Gentiles had no need to embrace these with a view to salvation. To
the Jews among the Gentiles—z.e., to the Jewish Christians he explained that
even for them circumcision and the customs of Moses formed no ground of
acceptance before God; but he never insisted on the discontinuance, by Jewish
Christians, of either circumcision or the customs. Doubtless Jewish Christians,
who came to understand the complete religious worthlessness of circumcision,
and the customs as mere external performances, would gradually lay these aside ;
and so the notion might (and probably did) diffuse itself that Paul directly
aimed at this result by means of his gospel. It was of course an error fitted to
be hurtful. (2) The motive which dictated the advice given by James and the
elders was unquestionably good. They desired, if possible, to disabuse the
public mind of the unjust suspicions it entertained of Paul’s Hebrew orthodoxy,
and to remove every stumbling block out of the way of his ministerial usefulness
among his countrymen. On this principle Paul himself was always prepared to
act (1 Cor. ix. 20). (3) The advice itself ran that Paul should associate himself
with four poor Christian Jews who had taken on themselves Nazarite vows,
which required them to let their hair grow, to abstain from intoxicating liquor,
and generally to lead ascetic lives for a period usually of thirty days, from which
vows they could not be released without the presentation in the temple of
certain specified offerings (Numb. vi. 1-21). It was suggested that Paul should,
according to a custom then prevailing, join himself to these four men during the
last seven days of their vow, should along with them abstain from wine, and
let his hair grow ; and that at the end of these days he and they should shave
their heads, while he paid for the necessary offerings to clear himself and them—
again after the manner of pious Jews of a wealthier sort, who were accustomed
thus to assist their poorer brethren. James and the elders believed that by so
doing Paul would demonstrate to his excited countrymen that there was no
truth in the information they had received, and that he, Paul, was as good and
orderly a Jew as any one among themselves. To the suggestion of this course
they may have felt prompted by remembering that Paul had once at least before


454


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS, citar. xxt.


at”Cenchrea undertaken a similar vow (xviii. 18). (4) The consideration by
which James and the elders hoped to urge this course upon the apostle was that
they had gone a long way in making concessions to the Gentiles, having wri(ten
and concluded or given judgment, that they, the Gentiles, should observe no such
thing as circumcision and the customs of Moses, but only that they should keep
themselves from things offered to idols and from blood, from things strangled,
and from fornication. (5) Nevertheless the advice was a mistake. What it
recommended, if carried out, as it was, might not have been sinful in itself or
unlawful for Paul from his point of view (1 Cor. vi. 12, x. 23), but it was
certainly of doubtful policy as tending to confirm Jewish Christians in the idea
that Paul did regard the law as in some fashion indispensable for salvation,
while in point of fact he did not, and practically worthless, since it neither
effected what they hoped for, nor averted what they feared, neither allayed the
groundless suspicions against Paul, nor prevented an outbreak of hostility against
him (ver. 28).

Lessons.—1l. The lawfulness of Christian prudence—exemplified in lodying
Paul with Mnason. 2. The duty of Christian brotherly kindness—illustrated in
Paul’s reception by the Christians of Jerusalem and the leaders of the Church
there.


3. The doubtfulness even of Christian compromises—as seen in the


course recommended by James and followed by Paul.
HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. An Old Disciple. — Ex-
emplified in Mnason of Cyprus.

I. A striking proof of Divine faith-
fulness.—In preserving Mnason to be a
Christian of long standing.

II. A satisfying evidence of the
reality and power of religion.—Had
Mnason not found it so, he had not
adhered to it so long.

III. A precious storehouse of Chris-
tian experience.—One who has long
been a disciple must have learnt much
of the secret of the Lord.

IV. A possible instrument of valu-
able service.—To the Church and the
world. As there are tasks that can
better be performed by young believers,
so there are offices that can be more
efficiently filled by aged disciples.

V. A deserving object of Christian
honour and esteem.—If the hoary head
is entitled to respect and veneration,
much more is it so when found in the
way of righteousness.

VI. A Christian pilgrim drawing
near the better land.—Heaven may be
near the young believer, it never can
be far off from the old disciple.





Vers. 17-20. A Foreign Missionary’s
Return.
I. The welcome he received.—Joyful.


II. The salutation he brought.—
Peace.

III. Thestory he told.—The triumphs
of the cross.

IV. The enthusiasm he enkindled—
They glorified God.


Vers.
Brethren.

I. Legitimate.—1. When they can
be made without violating conscience—
7.e., when they refer to things indifferent.
2. When they help to remove stumbling-
blocks out of the weak brother’s way.
3. When they assist in promoting
peace.

II. Ilegitimate.—1. When, though
right in themselves, they tend to mis-
lead the weak brother by causing him to
think his position only right. 2. When
adopted more from a desire of peace
than with a view to promote what is
right. 3. When they are calculated
to offend as many as they please.


20-24. Concessions to Weak


Vers. 21-24. The Worlds Misrepre-
sentations of the Followers of Christ.
I. Ave frequently wide-spread.
II. Mostly have nothing in them.
IIT. Always are difficult to remove.
IV. Seldom get corrected by com-
promise.


455


CHAP. XXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Ver. 26. Doubtful Actions ; or, the in-
consistencies of great and good men.

I. State the case referred to.—Paul’s
arrival in Jerusalem; welcome from
the brethren ; meeting with the elders
and James. James’s proposal and the
reason of it. Danger apprehended from
probable suspicions of Jewish Christians.
Paul’s adoption of the course recom-
mended, and joining of himself with
the four men who had a vow.

IT. Was this action wrong ?—Con-
sider—1. How it may have looked to
James. (1) Unless James had deemed
the course recommended legitimate it
may be assumed he would not have
made the proposal. (2) James's
motives were unquestionably right—to
ensure Paul’s safety by disarming the
hostility of the Jews; to gain a hear-
ing from his co-religionists for Paul’s
gospel; to set the apostle right with
the Jewish Christians. (3) Yet the
course recommended may have been
wrong, though the course itself may
have appeared right and the motives
prompting it may have been good.
2. How it may have looked to Paul.
(1) Of great importance to allay the
wide-spread suspicion that was abroad
concerning him, and to gaia a hearing
for the gospel. (2) No small matter
to disabuse the minds of his weaker
brethren of their misconceptions con-
cerning himself and his mission.
(3) Not against his principles to take
a vow, since he had done so at Cenchrea
(xviii. 18). (4) In harmony with his
conduct in cireumcising Timothy (xvi.
3). (5) Not inconsistent with his re-
fusal to perform the same rite on Titus
(Gal. ii. 3). (6) Not the same as Peter’s
eating with the Gentiles at Antioch
and then withdrawing (Gal. ii. 11, 12).
(7) It was only a carrying out of Paul’s
principle of becoming all things to all
men to gain some (1 Cor. ix. 20, etc.).
3. How it may look to some still.
(1) Of doubtful morality. Not that


to recommend or adopt such a course
of action was wrong; but that being
liable to misconstruction it should
neither have been recommended nor
adopted without serious consideration.
Neither Paul nor James believed that
observance of the moral law was indis-
pensable for salvation ; but what about
the multitude of Jews? Would they
not reason, that if Paul observed the
customs they must be absolutely bind-
ing on the conscience? (2) Of doubt-
ful expediency. It was meant to save
Paul, but did not; intended to gain
the Jews, but did not; designed to
recommend Christianity; but is it
certain it did not rather confirm the
Jews, both Hebrew and Christian, in
the notion of the permanent obligation
of the law of Moses ?

Ill. Lessons from the story.—
1. Compromises are seldom successful.
2. Good men may give bad advice and
take false steps. 3. The short road to
victory is ever steadfast adherence to
principle.


Note.—“ Surely these records of the
‘ Acts,’ with their unflinching truth,
speak with a strange mighty power to
us after all theseages. We feel, while
we read of the awful fall and miserable
death of one of the Twelve (i. 16-20) ;
of the sin and punishment of two of
the most notable believers of the first
age (v. 1-11); of the jealous murmur-
ing and discontent of the poor saints
(vi. 1); of the failure in courage of
Mark and the bitter quarrel of two of
the most prominent Christian leaders
(xv. 38-40); and here of this doubtful
compromise of Paul and James that
we have before us a real picture,
painted from life, of the Church of the
first days, by one who never shrinks to
paint the errors, the faults, and the
grievous mistakes of even the most
distinguished of the first believers.”—
Spence.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 26—40.
Arrested in the Temple; or, Long Looked for, Come at Last.


I. The Apostle’s arrest.—1l. Where it occurred.


In the temple—i.e., the


temple court, into which Paul had entered, and in one of the cloisters of which


456


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxt





he *most likely stayed during the period of his purification. Perhaps at the
moment he was in the gourt of the women (see below). 2. When it took place.
On the last of the seven days (say some) when the necessary offerings were
being presented for himself and the four Nazarites, but better as the seven days
were running on and nearing completion, so that the offerings were not presented.
3. By whom i was instigated. By certain Jews from Asia who had been
acquainted with his missionary activity in Asia Minor, and more especially in
Ephesus, who had observed him in the city accompanied by Trophimus, an
Ephesian, and who now lighted upon him in the temple court. Throughout the
whole of his career the Jews (unbelieving) had been his persistent, unsleeping,
and remorseless antagonists. The method they adopted in this instance to raise
a tumult against him was effective. (1) They laid hands on him, as if he had
been an evil doer, a criminal who they purposed to hand over to the tender
mercies of the law. (2) They raised a shout against him in the temple court,
which inflamed the crowd there present, and spreading abroad throughout the
city, threw it into confusion, much as Ephesus had been thrown into a turmoil
by the cry of Demetrius (xix. 29), and attracted an excited mob around the
temple gates. (3) They pointed him out as the man—the notorious fellow
—who went about everywhere teaching all (men and women) against the
people—.e., of Israel—an appeal to their patriotism; against the law—z.e., of
Moses—an appeal to their orthodoxy ; and against this place—i.e., the temple,
the holy dwelling-place of Jehovah—an appeal to their religion, (4) They
accused him, though falsely, of sacrilege—z.e., of having violated the sanctity of
the holy place by bringing (as they erroneously supposed) Trophimus, the
Ephesian, into not the court of the Gentiles, but the court of the women, into
which none but Jews could pass under penalty of death (see “ Critical Remarks ”).
4. How it was effected. (1) Tumultuously. The crowd rushed into the temple
and seized the apostle’s person. (2) Violently. They dragged him forcibly
outside the sacred precincts in order that these might not be stained with his
blood (compare 2 Chron. xxiii. 14), which they clearly intended to shed. More
than likely also this was the reason why the temple gates were so expeditiously shut
behind the retreating mob, in case it should return and carry out its murderous
project in the holy place.

II. The Apostle’s rescue.—1. Opportune. The mode selected for the carrying
out of their deadly intention was the slow one of beating (ver. 32), which allowed
time for the information to spread and be carried to Claudius Lysias (xxiii. 26),
the chief captain of the band, or military tribune (chiliarch) of \ » cohort, in the
Tower of Antonia near by, whose business it was to quell all riots which might
occur (and these were frequent) in connection with the Jewish festivals (see
Jos., Ant., XX. v. 3; and Wars, V. v. 8). The moment, therefore, Lysias under:
stood the situation, he ran down upon the crowd with a company of soldiers and
centurions, the sight of which at once checked their blood-thirsty fury and caused
them to leave off beating the apostle. Magistrates were appointed to be terrors
to evil-doers (Rom. xiii. 4), and crowds, it is well known, have a salutary fear of
the ruler’s sword. 2. Zncomplete. Rescued from the hands of the Jews and
from the jaws of death, he was yet not set at liberty. The chiliarch commanded
him (wrongfully, as he afterwards learnt, xxii. 25), to be bound as a prisoner,
with two chains, and fetched into the castle. The reason for this procedure was
the impossibility of learning anything correctly from the infuriated rabble about
either who the apostle was or what he had done. Those who composed that
rabble could only follow after the retreating soldiers as they bore off their
prisoner, and cry, “ Away with him,” as their fathers had thirty years before
shouted in front of Pilate’s preetorium (John xix. 15). Yea, so violent did they
become, that Paul might have been snatched from the soldier’s hands and lynched


457


cHap. xxt. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








on the spot, had not the soldiers, to whom he was bound, lifted him into their
arms or upon their shoulders and borne him up the castle stairs.

III. The Apostle’s request.—1. The preliminary conversation. When the top
of the stairs had been reached, just before passing into the castle, the apostle,
addressing the chief captain in Greek, solicited permission to “say something ”
to him. Surprised at hearing Greek on the lips of (as he supposed) a foreign
Jew whom he did not expect to find a person of culture, he first asked the
apostle if he knew Greek, and on receiving a reply in the affirmative, inquired
further if he (the apostle) was not then (as the captain had concluded before he
heard the apostle speak Greek) that Egyptian impostor—spoken of by Josephus
Ant., XX. vii. 6; Wars, II. xiii. 5; see “ Critical Remarks ”)—who shortly before
had stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness four thousand men
that were murderers, literally, the four thousand men of the Sicarii or Assassins.
To this, of course, Paul responded, that he was not that renowned brigand chief,
but a Jew of Tarsus in Cilicia, and a citizen of no mean city. Honourable
men are never afraid to give account of themselves and their doings. 2. The
solicited permission. 'To address the people—which showed Paul had not parted
with his courage, and was still as ready to fight with wild beasts as he had
been at Ephesus (xix. 30; 1 Cor. xv. 32). ‘The request was a bold one,” write
Conybeare and Howson, “and we are almost surprised that Lysias should have
granted it; but there seems to have been something in St. Paul’s aspect and
manner which from the first gained an influence over the mind of the Roman
officer.” In another sense, the request was a comparatively harmless one, and
on its being granted Paul at once moved to the stair front, and looking into the
faces of the demoniac crowd, beckoned to them with his chained hand, signalling
that he wished to speak. ‘ What nobler spectacle,” exclaims Chrysostom,
“than that of Paul at this moment! There he stands, bound with two chains,
ready to make his defence unto the péople. The Roman commander sits by, to
enforce order by his presence. An enraged populace look up to him from below.
Yet, in the midst of so many dangers, how self-possessed is he, how tranquil !”
(quoted by Hackett). As if startled by the heroism of the man, the angry crowd
forget to shout. A great silence ensues which deepens into an intenser stillness
as the accents of their old Hebrew tongue fall upon their ear.

Learn.—1. How unexpectedly evil may befall one. Paul, doubtless, never
dreamt of being apprehended in the temple. 2. How difficult it is to quench
the passion of hate in unrenewed hearts. The Jews dogged Paul’s steps like
sleuth-hounds, 3. How easily a misconception may arise. Paul’s enemies had
seen him and Trophimus in the city, and at once jumped to the conclusion that
Paul had fetched his Greek friend into the Holy Place. 4. How quickly a lie
can spread. In a few moments the slander was in possession of the town.
5. How nearly one may come to being killed and yet be rescued. A few moments
longer before Lysias arrived and Paul might have been a dead man. 6. How
strangely a good man may be talked of behind his back. The governor clearly
had heard it said that Paul was a sort of bandit chief. 7. How bravely a
Christian can comfort himself in face of peril. Not many men could have faced
the mob as Paul did from the castle stairs,


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 26. Paul among the Nazarites. things that promote the kingdom of
I. Not as a slave of human ordi- God (1 Cor. vi. 12).
nances, but in the might of evangelical II. Not asa dissembler before the
liberty, which has power over all people, but in the ministry of brotherly
458


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


lové, which bears the infirmities of the
weak (Rom. xv. 1).

III. Not as a fugitive from the
cross, but in the power of apostolic
obedience, which knows to deny itself
from love to the Lord (Luke ix. 23).


Ver. 27. Unrealised Aims ; or, man
proposes but God disposes.

I. Many plans that promise well
turn out ill—The recommendation of
James and the elders, and the com-
pliance of Paul were intended to ensure
Paul’s safety, but they actually led to
his arrest.

II. When a plan turns out badly it
sannot be safely argued that the plan
was not. good.__—We agree with the
view which thinks James’s counsel, and
Paul’s practice were not, in this in-
stance the best—we cannot pronounce
them sinful; but even had they been
the wisest they might have failed.

II. The success of a plan does not
necessarily demonstrate that the plan
was good.—Nothing more common
than for the counsels of the wicked to
prosper on earth and in time, though

they will eventually be overthrown.


Vers. 27-38. The Troubles of a Good
Man. Paul.

I. Doubly slandered.—1. Charged
with apostasy in religion (ver. 28).
2. Blamed for committing sacrilege
(ver. 28).

II. Nearly murdered.—1. Violently
dragged from the court of the women
(ver. 30). 2. Mercilessly beaten by
the angry mob (ver. 32).

III. Innocently bound.—1. Like a
dangerous criminal (ver. 33), 2. Though
no one could tell for what (ver. 34).

IV. Ignorantly suspected.—1. Of
being an Egyptian when he was a
Jew. 2. Of being a leader of assassins
when he was only a peaceful citizen.
3. Of having stirred up sedition when
in truth he was a preacher of peace
(vers. 38, 39).


Ver. 38. “ Art not thou that Egyptian?”
“ A remarkable proof of the erroneous


CHAP. XXI.


and absurd thoughts which the blind
world entertains of the children and
servants of God. They regard us as
idiots, madmen, seducers, enemies of
mankind, and under this form they
hate us. Thus was Christ also num-
bered among transgressors ” (Gerok in
Lange).


“Art not thou that Egyptian?” or,
misconceptions entertained by the world
concerning the followers of Christ, who
are often slandered as

I. Disturbers of social order.—Paul
was accused of being a brigand chief.
Had often been reviled as a revolution-
ary. On this ground the early Chris-
tians were persecuted under the Roman
emperors. Usual to accuse them as
evil doers (see 1 Peter ii. 12), In the
days of the Stuart ascendency in our
own country Nonconformists were
treated as enemies of the common-
wealth, because they worshipped God
according to their own consciences.
To-day Christians are looked upon by
many, if not as open malefactors, at
least as impracticable persons, who,
by crying out against social evils, such
as drink, gambling, licentiousness,
trouble society.

II. Self-interested deceivers.—
Lysias obviously thought Paul was one
of this class. Christianity has often
been represented as a huge imposture,
a gigantic system of deception, invented
by priests for their self-interest. This
accusation, which was common last
century, is not unknown in this.
Believers are often maligned as persons
who have adopted a profession of
religion simply as a cloak for their


covetousness. No doubt such abuses
have existed and such individuals have
been found in the Church; _ but


Christianity is no invention of de-
ceivers,

III. Hypocritical pretenders.—
Giving themselves out to be “ saints ”
when they are as wicked as other
people. No doubt of some professing
Christians this is true; but it is
ignorant calumny to represent all as
such. Still Christians should study to


459


¢


cpap. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
en ee
approve their sincerity by a holy walk world pronounces Christians visionaries,
and conversation. fools, fanatics, idiots, dreamers, and

IV. Impracticable visionaries. such like when they talk of, 1. Apply-
Doubtless the captain considered Paul ing the principles of Christianity to
such when he fancied the apostle was ordinary life; 2. Bringing the whole
that Egyptian who had been aiming at world round to the acceptance of
upsetting the supremacy of Rome by Christianity; and, 3. Living for the
means of a handful of Sicarii. So the other world rather than for this.








CHAPTER XXII.
Pavw’s DEFENCE FROM THE CasTtLE Stairs oF ANTONIA: First APOLOGY.


§ 1. A Retrospective Survey of his Past Career; or, what he Was and Did,


prior to Conversion (vers. 1-5).
§ 2. The Story of his Conversion to Christianity ; or, before and in Damascus


(vers. 6-16).
§ 3. The Adoption of his Gentile Mission; or, his Interview with Christ in the


Temple at Jerusalem (vers. 17-21).
§ 4, The Effect of his Oration on the Audience; or, Paul’s Narrow Escape from


Scourging (vers. 22-30).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Men, brethren and fathers.—Or, brethren and fathers, the use of “men” in English
being unnecessary. Compare the commencement of Stephen’s address to the Sanhedrim
(vii. 2). Conybeare and Howson (ii. 276) “account for this peculiar mode of address ” by
supposing “that mixed with the crowd were men of venerable age and dignity, perhaps
members of the Sanhedrim, ancient scribes and doctors of the law, who were stirring up the
people against the heretic.” More likely this was the usual way of addressing an assembly
which included scribes and elders of the people (Spence). Hear my defence.—The con-
struction is not a double genitive of the thing and the person—hear me and hear my defence,
but a genitive of the thing; “my” being dependent, not on “hear,” but on “defence.” The
defence consists of three parts.

Ver. 2. In the Hebrew tongue or language.—See on xxi. 40.

Ver. 3, which begins the first part (ver. 1-5), takes up the acknowledgment as to his own
person which has just been made to Lysias (xxi. 39). The best texts omit verily. Brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel.—On Gamaliel. See v. 34. “The scholars sat upon the ground or
upon benches, the teachers upon stools (Matt. xxiii. 2)” (Holtzmann). According to this

, punctuation, which is commonly adopted (Calvin, Meyer, Alford, Wendt, Zockler, Holtzmann,
Westcott and Hort), Paul must have removed from Tarsus to Jerusalem when a youth
(compare xxvi. 4); according to a different punctuation followed by other exegetes (Griesbach,
Lachmann, De Wette, Bethge, Hackett, Conybeare and Howson), the words should be
rendered, at the feet of Gamaliel taught—dvarebpaypévos, having regard (it is said) more to
physical growth, while reracdevyévos refers rather to mental culture or professional training.
But the way in which the sentences are built, the participle preceding its qualifying clause,
appears to speak for the former translation as the more probable. Hausrath considers the
story of Paul’s studying under Gamaliel in Jerusalem as apocryphal (Der Apostel Paulus,
pp. 34, 35). The perfect should be the strict manner of the law of the fathers.—The word
dxplBera, which occurs only here (compare xxvi. 5), was the customary eatchword for Pharisaic
legalism (see Wisd. xii, 1; Jos., Ant., IX. x. 2; War's, II. viii. 14; Life, 38). For Paul’s
legal strictness see his statements elsewhere (Gal, i. 14: Phil. iii. 5). Zealous towards God,


460


* HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xx.


Oe


Better, for God: like zealous for the Law (xxi. 20). As ye all are this day,“ A conciliatory
comparison ” (Alford). ‘‘ Must not that have constrained the Jews to the admission: ‘This
man understands us, but we understand him not’ ” (Besser).

Ver. 4. This way.—See on ix. 2: “ He would willingly have struck down the believers in
Messiah with a stroke” (Holtzmann). Unto death.—Or, as far as death. Not the aim
re (Meyer), but the actual result (Hackett), of his persecution (compare ver, 20,
xvi. 10).

Ver, 5. The high priest of the time (ix. 1), Caiaphas, seems to have been still alive
when Paul spoke. He, along with the elders, composed the Sanhedrim (Luke xxii. 66).
Unto the brethren.—Not against the Christians (Bornemann), but to the Jews in Damascus
(Holtzmann, Zéckler, and others); specially to the Jewish rulers in the synagogues (ix. 2).
Them which were there (éeise) meant those Jewish believers who, having fled thither (to
Damascus) in consequence of the persecution (viii. 1), had settled there. To be punished.—
For apostatising from the law of their fathers.

Ver. 6 begins the second part of the defence (vers. 6-16). Was come nigh should be was
drawing near, The narration is the same as in ix. 2-17 and xxvi. 13-18, with a few points
of difference. One of these is the note of time—about noon—“ through which the miracle is
more realistically expressed, and the matter of fact placed beyond suspicion of being an
evening delusion” (Holtzmann). Another is the adjective great (ixavév) appended to the
noun light (¢4s), which equally excluded the idea of deception.

Ver. 7. The use of the word ground (Zda¢os) (occurring only here), meaning the “ base” or
“bottom” of a thing, for “the earth” (vv) (ix. 4) may suggest the idea that he was travelling
in a caravan or riding on horseback.

Ver. 8. Of Nazareth, or, the Nazarene, is an addition to Luke’s account (ix. 5).

Ver. 9. And were afraid (see ix. 2) is omitted by the best MSS.

Ver. 10. What shall I do, Lord —Does not occur in Luke’s narration, according to best
texts (ix. 5), or in Paul’s speech before Agrippa (xxvi. 16), Yet this need occasion no
difficulty.

Ver. 11. The cause of his blindness, not stated in the earlier report, is here set down as
the glory of that light, which was ‘“‘above the brightness of the sun” (xxvi. 13), a point
likely to be noted by Paul rather than by Luke.

Ver. 12. Ananias a devout man.—The proper reading is evA\aBjs (Lachmann, Westcott
and Hort), rather than etceB8js (Griesbach, Hackett), the former signifying “ cautious,”
“prudent,” “circumspect,” “according to the Law,” the latter “full of holy fear and
reverence.” The former occurs only in Luke’s writings and in the Hebrews; the latter is
used of Cornelius (x. 2,7). (See Cremer’s Lewicon of New Testament Greck, pp. 394, 548).
Luke calls Ananias a disciple (ix. 10).

Ver. 13. I looked up upon him.—The verb signifies not merely to look up (Meyer, Wendt),
but, as in ix. 12, 17, to recover sight (Holtzmann). The clause might be translated, Z received

- sight and looked up on or unto him.

Ver. 14. The God of our fathers.—Another conciliatory touch! That just, or, the righteous,
One.—Compare iii. 14, vii. 52; 1 Pet. iii. 18; 1 John ii. 1.

Ver. 15 declares the reason why God had revealed Himself to Paul. Compare ix. 15, and
see Gal. i.16. AJl men takes the place of “the Gentiles and kings ” in Luke’s account (ix.
15)—probably dictated by caution. A touch which a late writer, composing an imaginary
speech, would most likely have failed to insert.

Ver. 16. For the name of the Lord the oldest authorities read His name.

Ver. 17. Begins the third portion of the defence. When I was come again to Jerusalem.—
This visit to the Metropolis, which occurred at least three years after his conversion (ix. 26),
and lasted fifteen days (Gal. i. 18), is connected with the story of his conversion (overleaping
all that happened in the interval), to show why he turned to ‘the Gentiles with his gospel,
rather than to the Jews. The trance into which he fell, while praying in the temple, resembles
Peter’s in the house of the Joppa tanner (x. 10).

Ver. 18. In the trance he saw him—i.e., Christ, the righteous One (ver. 14). This vision
not the same as that referred to in 2 Cor. xii. 2. Quickly.—Perhaps accounts for the fifteen
days of Gal. i. 18. That this vision is not mentioned in the epistle need not militate against
its credibility. Thy testimony.—Better, testimony of or from thee concerning me.

Ver. 19. The reply of Paul cannot be explained after the analogy of Exod. iii. 11, but
must be understood as stating either why it was natural that the Jews should not listen to
him (Ewald), or why he should remain in Jerusalem—because the knowledge his countrymen
had of his previous notorious character would convince them of the sincerity of his conversion
(Lechler, Wendt, Bethge), and cause his words to carry greater weight (Hackett, Alford,
Plumptre), or because he wished to undo the mischief he had formerly wrought (Alford).
Another view sees in the reference to Paul’s earlier career a reason why his mission should
be carried on at a distance from the theatre of his former deeds (Holtzmann), Thy martyr
should be thy witness,


461


cHap. xxu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
go Sie


Ver. 21. I will send thee far hence to the Gentiles.—The school of Baur and Holtzmann
finds in this supernatural authorisation of Paul’s Gentile mission an artificial (but why
artificial 7) parallel to that of Peter in xi. 5-17. That both were divinely authorised presents
no difficulty to those who accept the historic verity of the narrative. _ ‘

Ver. 22. Away with such a fellow from the earth.—As in xxi. 36. Itis not fit. Better, i
was not fit that he should live.—Meaning that he had long ago forfeited his life.

Ver, 28. Cast off their clothes.—Not in preparation for stoning him, as in vii. 58 (Meyer,
Zockler), which would have been futile, seeing he was now in the custody of the Romans
(Alford), but for the same reason that they threw dust into the air—not as a prelude to
stone-throwing, but as an expression of their rage, and as an indication of what they would
willingly have done to him, had they been able (Lechler, Holtzmann).

Ver. 24. That ye might know.—Presumably the military tribune had not understood the
apostle’s speech, and, desirous of ascertaining the cause of such an ebullition of wrath
against his prisoner, commanded him to be fetched into the castle and examined by
scourging,

van OB As they.— 1.e., the soldiers entrusted with this duty. Bound.—Or, when they had
tied him up (B.V.), with thongs (Luther, Alford, Wordsworth, Plumptre). A different trans-
lation gives, when they stretched him forth and so made him ready for the thongs (De
Wette, Meyer, Lechler, Spence, Zéckler, Holtzmann), by binding him or tying him up to a
post. Is it lawful !—Two wrongs were about to be committed. (1) The apostle was about
to be scourged, being a Roman—which Roman law (Lex Porcia; see Livy, x. 9; Cicero,
Verr., v. 63) disallowed; and (2) to be punished before being condemned—which equally
Roman statute forbade (see on xvi. 37).

Ver. 26. Take heed (omitted by best authorities) what thou doest.—Or, What are you about
to do?

Ver. 27. Tell me.—The military tribune wished to know whether the centurion’s report
was correct.

Ver. 28. With a great sum had Lysias obtained Roman citizenship. Hence he is supposed
to have been a Greek. ‘Augustus was very sparing in conferring the freedom of the
city ; but the succeeding emperors were more liberal” (Adam’s Roman Antiquities, p. 38).
“In the reign of Claudius Messalina used’ to sell the freedom of the city, and at various
prices at different times” (Alford). How Paul came to be free (or a Roman) born can only
be conjectured. As Tarsus wassimply an wrbs libera and neither a Colonia nor a Municipium,
his father or some ancestor may have obtained his citizenship either as a reward for dis-
tinguished service or by purchase.

Ver, 29. The military tribune was afraid both because Paul had been bound (for scourging)
which he ought not to have been, being a Roman, and because he had been bound befure
being condemned. ‘Facinus est vinciri civem Romanum, scelus verberari, parricidum
necari” (Cicero, Ver7., v. 66).

Ver. 30. The best authorities omit from his bands. These were the fetters originally
placed upon him (xxi. 33). Down means from the castle to the chamber where the Sanhedrim
were assembled. This chamber, there is reason to believe, was not their accustomed
place of meeting, the Hall Gazith, or the hall of hewn stone, an apartment in the inner
temple, since Lysias’ soldiers would not have been allowed to enter so sacred a place, but
aroom in the city near the Tyropzan bridge to which tradition says they removed their
sittings forty years before the destruction of Jerusalem, or about twenty-six before the
events here recorded.


Note.—The preceding speech to the Jewish people has been by Baur (Paul, his Life and
Works, i. 121, E. T.), and Zeller (Die Apostelgeschichte, pp. 280, 281) pronounced an invention
of the author of Acts on the following grounds: 1. The unlikelihood of Lysias having granted
liberty to so dangerous a character as he imagined Paul to be to address the fanatic mob
that swarmed round the castle stairs. 2. The unlikelihood of the crowd having listened —
so long in silence to a man whom already they had adjudged to be worthy of death;
and, 3. The unlikelihood of the speech having been interrupted, like that of Stephen, before
the Sanhedrim, and like that of Paul before the Areopagus, at a certain point. But waiving
the obvious answers that these objections are too subjective—are, in fact, not criticism, but
mere arbitrary suppositions—it may be urged, with reference to the first, that even the worst
of criminals are allowed to speak in their own defence; that Lysias did not know what sort
of speech Paul intended to make, and may have imagined that Paul would only utter a few
words; and that Paul having commenced his oration, Lysias may have been too deeply
interested in what he heard to think of recalling his permission. As regards the second, the
silence of the multitude is satisfactorily explained by the statement that Paul addressed
them in Hebrew, and by the tenor of Paul’s speech, which throughout, until the mention of
the Gentiles was reached, contained nothing to ruffle their tempers. For the third it should
suffice to reply that, if the speech was to be interrupted at all it could not fail to be


462


A HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. Xxt1.





interrupted “at a certain point”; while a glance at the three speeches, of Stephen before
the Sanhedrim, of Paul before the Sanhedrim, and of Paul again before the Jewish people,
will show that the cause of interruption was different in each: in Stephen’s the accusation
of the Sanhedrim as the murderers of Jesus (vii. 52); in Paul’s Areopagus oration, the
mention of Jesus and the resurrection (xvii. 32); in the present speech, the emphasising of
his mission to the Gentiles (ver. 21, 22). So far from suggesting systematic invention, these
variations confirm the genuineness and historicity of all three speeches,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—5. |


Paul's Survey of His Past Career ; or, What He Was and Did before Conversion.

I. His birth—1. As fo race. He was not an Egyptian (xxi. 38), as the com-
mander of the castle supposed, neither a Greek nor a Roman, but a Jew, a true
son of Abraham (Rom. xi. 4), “of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an
Hebrew of the Hebrews” (Phil. iii. 5). Whatever other nations thought of the
Jews, the Jews had exalted opinions of themselves, as the very salt of the earth,
the flower and cream of humanity. To them pertained ‘“ the adoption, and the
glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the covenants of God
and the promises ” (Rom. ix. 4). If race is not everything in a man’s make-up,
still less is it nothing. Heredity goes back beyond immediate parentage to the
family stock, and has its roots in the original race. The Jewish race was
physically pure, intellectually high, and religiously strong. 2. As to place. A
native of Tarsus, in Cilicia (see on ix. 30), and therefore a citizen of no mean city
(xxi. 39). This circumstance explained his knowledge of Greek (xxi. 37), his
acquaintance with Greek literature (xvii. 28), and his strong sympathy with the
Gentiles, and fitted him in an eminent degree for his life vocation as a missionary
of the cross to the Gentiles. The place in which a man is born, no less than other
factors in his terrestial environment, contributes important influences, which go
to shape his career and mould his character. Most men owe more to their birth-
places than they suppose. The spot in which a man first awakes to consciousness
has the earliest and therefore the best chance of making an impression—favour-
able or unfavourable—upon his susceptible nature.

II. His education.—1. His university. Jerusalem. Though doubtless his
training commenced at home in Tarsus, he appears to have at an early period
removed to the metropolis of Judea, where (this, of course, is pure conjecture) his
sister (xxiii. 16) may have preceded him along with her husband. To this his
parents may have assented, both because of the hallowed interest which to every
pious Jew gathered round the Holy City, and because of some promise of brilliant
talent which may have: been detected in his opening youth. 2. His teacher.
Gamaliel (see on ver. 34), who belonged to the school of Hillel, and had appa-
rently great influence in the Sanhedrim (ver. 40). The Hillelites, who had been
trained by their master to be both tolerant and broad, sometimes verging towards
laxity, were supposed to be more favourably disposed towards Christianity than
the Shammaites. 3. His learning. In the Law, which he was taught to regard
with (1) religious respect as the Law of God, and therefore charged with absolute
authority ; (2) profound veneration, as the Law of the fathers—i.e., given to the
fathers of Israel (not to the sons, as modern criticism teaches !); and (3) dutiful
submission as the law of righteousness, which called for the strictest obedience
to its every jot and tittle as the only means of attaining to salvation and
eternal life.

III. His zeal.—1. Jts natwre. It was zeal for the Law, for its outward
observance, for the external performances it required, ‘‘the meats and drinks,
and divers washings,” ‘the sacrifices and offerings,” “the ordinances and
statutes,” “the rites and ceremonies,” it prescribed. In regard to all these he
was a Pharisee by descent (xxiii. 6), by training (xxvi, 5), and by conviction


463,


cHaP. xxu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a a a


(Phil. iii. 6). 2. ts object. Tosecure the Divinefavour. He was zealous for God
—i.e., his zeal for the Law rested on the conviction (1) that the Law was of Divine
origin and therefore binding on the consciences of men, and especially of Jews,
and (2) that obedience to its prescriptions was the only way of attaining to
Divine favour, 3. [ts degree. He was as intense in his devotion to the Law and
to God as they themselves were who then gnashed their teeth against him and
cried, ‘Away with him!” Indeed, as touching the righteousness of the Law, he
claimed to be, like themselves, blameless (Phil. iii. 6)—a fine touch of conciliating
speech !

rT: His persecution—1. Jés object. Directed against the Christians, the
people of “this way,” both men and women, He then did what they were doing
now. 2. Jts character. Ferocious, bloodthirsty, murderous. Not satisfied with
scattering the disciples of the Crucified from the Holy City, he caused'them to be
arrested and thrown into prison, without respect to age or sex; and as if that
were not enough, he pursued them even unto death. Verily he had then been “a
ravening wolf of the tribe of Benjamin.” 3. Jts notoriety. This thing had not
been done in a corner. The high priest of the day (probably alive when Paul
spoke) and “all the estate of the elders,” or “the whole presbytery ”—+.¢., the
entire body of the eldership, including the Sanhedrim and Senate—were
cognisant of his activity and eminence in this respect. He had then been “a
burning and a shining light,” a renowned champion of the faith, a kind of
Hebrew Sw Galahad, who could have bousted—


“My good blade carves the casques of men,
My tough lance thrusteth sure;
My strength is as the strength of ten,
Because my heart is pure.”


4, Its extent. Not content with cleansing Jerusalem, or even the Holy Land, of the
apostates, as he believed them to be, he had swooped down upon them in distant
Damascus, bearing with him missives, mandates, warrants, from the high priest
and the Sanhedrim, empowering him to arrest them in the synagogues of that
city, and fetch them, bound, to Jerusalem to be punished.

Learn—1. The accuracy of Paul’s life-story as narrated by Luke. 2. The
vividness of Paul’s recollection of his early years. 3. The courage of the apostle
in making known to his countrymen the fact of his renunciation of their ancient
faith. 4. The skill of the apostle in speaking so as to disarm the suspicions of
his enemies. 5. The mistaken and disastrous course to which one may be led
who is impelled by a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge (compare
xxvi. 9; Rom. x. 2‘


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. The Qualities Requisite
for a Christian Orator.

J. A spirit of courage.—Not of defi-
ance or arrogance, but of calm fortitude
which fears not man—neither his flat-
teries nor his frowns, neither his
threatenings nor his bribes—but rests
on God as its support in the wildest
hurricanes of human passion and in
the most alarming dangers. Such
fortitude Paul possessed when he faced
the mob from the castle stairs.


464


II. A spirit of meekness.—Not of
cringing servility or of fawning adula-
tion—neither of mock humility nor
of affected self-depreciation, but of
genuine self-forgetfulness, which over-
looks all the faults and failings of its
hearers, and makes nothing of their
want of consideration for or even
injustice towards itself. Such meek-
ness Paul exhibited when, “though he
had none but persecutors and mur-
derers before him, he yet regarded and


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXII.


a


addressed them as brethren and fathers,
on account of the covenant and pro-
mises of God.”

III. A spirit of love.—Not of gush-
ing sentimentality or of sugared
verbiage, but of true, manly, and reli-
gious affection, which sees in those it
addresses persons who are men and
brethren, of the same flesh and blood,
of the same moral and religious value
in the eyes of heaven, susceptible of
becoming partakers of the same high
blessings of salvation and eternal life
as itself.

-IV. A spirit of simplicity.—Not of
triviality or frivolity, but of holy intelli-
gibility, which seeks not for language
that will dazzle by its brilliance, but
for speech that will charm by its
' tucidity and easiness of comprehension.
Vers. 3, 4. True Reéigion. What it

is not and what it is.

I. What it is not.—1. Wot descert
Srom religious ancestry. Paul, thou; 1
the son of a Pharisee, was yet not po--
sessed of true religion. Grace does not
run in the blood. 2. Wot education by
pious teachers. Paul sat at the feet
of Gamaliel, one of the most
learned and influential rabbis of his
day ; yet Paul did not acquire religion.
Grace is not the product of culture and
training. 3, Not acquaintance with the
letter of the Scriptures. Paul, tho
roughly instructed in the law of
Moses, both moral and ceremonial,
was yet not religious. Grace is some-
thing more than mental illumination.
4. Not zeal in the performance of reli-
gious duties. Paul was so devoted to
the outward rites and ceremonies of
religion, and so absorbed in the pursuit
of what he believed to be “ righteous-
ness,” that he could without hesitation
describe his conformity to the law as
“blameless”; and yet he was destitnte
of religion, Grace is not a matter of
mere external performance. 5. Wot
activity in promoting and defending the
faith. Paul had both, and yet was

-without religion. Grace is not of
works.

II. What it is——The ex ct opposite


HH -


of all these. 1. It is conditioned by
a new or second birth—a birth from
above (John iii. 3). What Paul calls
a new creation (2 Cor. v. 17). 2. It is
promoted by being taught of the Spirit
(John xiv. 26), or taught by Jesus
Christ (Eph, iv. 21). 3. It is nourished
by a spiritual acquaintance with the
Scriptures (John vi. 63). 4. It con-
sists in an inward conformity of the
soul to the requirements of God’s law
(Rom. vii. 22). 5. It shows itself in
a sincere desire to extend the faith—
not by force of arms, but by the power
of the truth.


Vers. 3-5. The Promising but Dis-
appointing Youth of Paul.

I. The magnificent advantages he
enjoyed.—1. In his parentage. Having
been born of Jewish parents, members
of the noblest and most religious race
then on earth, 2. ln his birthplace.
In Tarsus, where he came in contact
with the civilisation and culture of the
most intellectual people of the Old
World. 3. In his education. Brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, the most
renowned teacher of the day. 4 In
his religious instincts. Instructed ac-
cording to the strict manner of the law
of his fathers, he was inwardly fired
with a zeal for God and religion which
gave promise of splendid results in after
years.

II. The miserable results he pro-
duced.—l. Jn the blind legalism of
his religion. One would almost have
expected that a youth of culture
and ability like Paul would have
soared away far above and beyond the
dead externalism of the Pharisa‘c
circle in which he had been born and
brought up. 2. In the feline cruelty
of his disposition. One would have
thought that so much education as
Paul had received would have mollified
rathor than intensified, blunted rather
than whetted, the natural savageism
of his soul. 3. Jn the low conception
of his life-mission. One might naturally
have anticipated that a brilliant youth
like that of Paul’s would have been
devoted to the purifying and refining


465


CHAP. XXII.


HOMILEVTIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





of his ancestral religion, and to the
propagation of it by means of learned
and eloquent expositions. Alas! it so
degenerated as to place its splendid
faculties at the service of the Sanhe-
drim, to be employed in the work of
a common persecutor and assassin.
To what base uses noblest souls may
come !


Vers. 4, 5. Paul the Persecutor ; or,
the Spirit of Intolerance in Religion.

I. Whence it springs.—1. Prom a
wrong conception of religion, which
cannot ,be manufactured by force, and
does not consist in mere external con-
formity to law or ritual, but must ever
arise as a free product of the soul, and
consist of true inward submission of
the heart and life to the will of God.
2. From a mistaken idea of hwman
nature, which cannot be coerced into
such submission, but must be sweetly
persuaded and lovingly wooed to yield,
to the will of God. 3. From a false
estimate of the rights of man. While
every man has a God-given right to
think for himself in religion, and to
persuade his neighbour, if he can, to
think along with him, no man is
entitled to dictate to his brother in
the sphere of conscience or punish his
brother because he exercises that
liberty of which he has been put in
possession by God. 4. From a defective
calculation of the value of persecution,
which never yet made a true convert,
though it has multiplied hypocrites as
well as created martyrs.

II. To what it leads.—1. Suppres-
sion of all the nobler instincts of
humanity. On the part of the per-
secutor, and not infrequently also on


the part of the persecuted. It lets
loose all the bad passions of the human
heart, both in those who resort to
violence and in those who resist it.
It puts the persecutor down to the
same level as the conspirator and
brigand, murderer and assassin. It
rouses within the persecuted feelings
which are the opposite of meekness,
gentleness, patience, long-suffering.
2. Perpetration of indiscriminate cruelty.
It communly shows itself, as in Paul's
case, to be absolutely devoid of one
grain of mercy, to be destitute of pity,
to be fierce and bloodthirsty, sparing
neither sex nor age, but involving all
against whom it rages in common and
undistinguished slaughter. In short,
it is the minister of hell, rather than
the messenger of heaven. 3. /gnomi-
nious defeat of its ownaims. The more
a cause is persecuted the more it multi-
plies and grows. ‘The blood of the
martyrs is the seed of the Church.” The
religion that requires a sword for its
propagation is not from above, but
from beneath. Its final failure is
foredoomed. ‘ All they that take the
sword shall perish by the sword” is
true of the institutions for which, as
well as of the persons by whom, the
sword is wielded.


Ver. 5. Mistaken Missions.

I. To persecute the cause and the
people of God.

II. To propagate true religion by
means of force.

III. To disseminate error, whether
by lawful or unlawful means.

IV. To run on any errand without
a certainty of having Heaven’s per-
mission.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 6—16.


The Story of Paul's Conversion ; or before and in Damascus.
I. Before Damascus; or, the interview with Jesus of Nazareth —1. The cir-


cumstantiality of the narration.


Different from that of Luke (ix. 1-9), the


account given by Paul himself bears the stamp of having proceeded from an eye-
witness. (1) Points of resemblance between Paul’s account and Luke’s may be
noted, such as these: the fact that Jesus of Nazareth appeared to the apostle, .
who recognised Him by His voice (ver. 8, ix. 4), and by His form (ver. 14,
ix. 7); the locality in which this interview took place—viz., nigh unto Damascis


466


7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxtt.
ee SE ee


(ver. 6, ix. 3); the manner in which this manifestation of the risen Christ
occurred—suddenly, by the flashing forth of a light from heaven, which struck
the apostle to the ground and filled his companions with terror (vers. 7, 9,
ix. 4, 7); the words addressed by Christ to Paul, with those of Paul to Christ—
“Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” “Who art Thou, Lord?” “I am
Jesus, whom thou persecutest. . . . Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be
told thee of all things which are appointed for thee to do” (vers. 7, 8, 10,
ix. 4, 5, 6); the effect of the interview upon Paul, rendering him blind and
requiring him to be led by the hands of his companions into Damascus (ver. 11,
ix. 8). (2) Points of difference between the two accounts are observable, such as
the note of time— about noon ” (ver. 6) ; the splendour of the light—“ great ”
(ver. 6); the characterisation of Jesus as ‘of Nazareth” (ver. 8) ; the statements
that while the companions of Paul saw the light they heard not the voice (ver. 9),
and that what blinded Paul was “the glory of that light” (ver. 11); with the
omission of Luke’s addendum that Paul was three days without sight, and did
neither eat nor drink (ix. 9). The differences—all of which are immaterial—are
obviously such—both in details added and those omitted—as might naturally
arise between two reports of which one was given by an eyewitness and the other
by a historian. 2. The credibility of the narration. (1) The only conceivable
grounds on which this can be challenged are: the supernatural character of the
incident related; the excitable character of the apostle, which caused him, it
may be contended, to impose upon himself, and to say he had beheld as external
objects what were only illusions of the mind; the varying accounts of the
incidents contained in the Acts; and the fact (if it is a fact) that Paul never
mentions this incident in his epistles. But the first of these reasons is irrelevant,
as it begs the question in debate. The second is only true to this extent, that
Paul, by his own confession, had visions and revelations: that Paul was subject
to illusions or delusions is not borne out by anything in his character or history.
The third may he conceded without admitting that these variations invalidate
the substance in which all the three accounts agree. The fourth can hardly be
maintained in the face of 1 Cor. ix. 1, xv. 8; Gal. i. 16, 24; 1 Tim. i. 13; but
even should Paul have preserved absolute silence in his epistles as to the
interview with Christ before Damascus, that silence would not justify an infer-
ence that no such interview had occurred. (2) The arguments which serve to
uphold the credibility of the narrative are such as these: the certainty that
Paul was converted from Pharisaism to a belief in Jesus Christ, as was attested
by the ferocity with which the Jews persecuted him to the end of his career—
which conversion must have been brought about by some adequate cause ; the
constancy with which Paul asserted that his conversion was due to having seen
the Lord Jesus Christ—which constancy is inexplicable on the hypothesis that
Paul was the victim of a diseased imagination ; the belief which was entertained
by Paul’s Christian contemporaries that Christ had appeared to him (ver. 14) ;
and the difficulty of discovering any motive for Paul’s preaching that Christ had
risen if it was not a fact that Christ had appeared to him—the more so as his
conversion to Christianity involved him in unparalleled labours and sufferings.
II. In Damascus; or, the interview with Ananias.—Here also Paul’s account
differs from that of Luke in subordinate details, while agreeing with that of
Luke in substance. 1. The omissions from the previous narrative. (1) The
residence of Paul in Damascus—with one Judas in the street called Straight
(ix. 13). (2) The occupation of Paul while in Judas’s house—praying, with the
vision granted him of Ananias coming to him and placing hands upon his closed
eyes (ix. 11, 12). (3) The designation of Ananias as a certain disciple (ix. 10),
(4) The appearance of the Lord to Ananias in a vision (ix. 10). (5) The com-
mission given to Ananias by the risen Lord (ver. 11), with the answer returned


467


CHAP. xxu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





by Ananias (ix. 13, 14), and the Lord’s response to him (ix. 15, 16). (6) The
statement that Ananias put his hands on Saul’s eyes (ix. 17). (7) The mention
of scales as having fallen from Paul’s eyes when his sight was restored (ix. 18).
Not one of these points was of special interest to the audience Paul addressed
from the castle stairs, or of any use for the purpose for which Paul addressed
them. 2. The additions to the previous narrative. (1) The character of Ananias,
as a devout man according to the Law, and well reported of by all the Jews who
dwelt in Damascus (ver. 12), This was signally calculated to conciliate Paul’s
hearers. (2) The invitation to Paul to arise and be baptised (ver. 16). The
fact that this invitation proceeded from Ananias was also fitted to disarm the
hostility of Paul’s enraged countrymen. 3. The variations in the two narratives,
These appear chiefly in the address of Ananias to Paul (vers. 13, 14, ix. 17),
In particular, the substitution of “ the God of our fathers ” as the real author of his
conversion, instead of “the Lord, even Jesus,” was a highly politic stroke in the
circumstances in which Paul then stood. So also was the supplanting of the term


“Gentiles” by that of “all men.”
agree.


Otherwise the two addresses substantially
In none of these omissions, additions, or variations, lie sufficient ground


for impeaching the veracity of Paul’s accofint.
Learn—1. That two reports of the same event may differ in details, and yet


be both correct.
Christ’s resurrection.


2. That Paul’s conversion indirectly confirms the truth of
3. That Paul regarded his Gentile mission as a vocation
specially assigned to him from the first.
to be specially useful in the Church must be ordained in heaven.”


4. That “the instruments which are


—_


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. Great Lights which Shone
around Paul.

I. Light upon the person of Jesus.
~—Henceforth Paul knew him to be the
Lord of Glory.

II. Light upon the character of the
disciples.—Henceforth Paul recognised
them as intimetely bound with and
under the protection of Jesus.

III. Light upon the wickedness of
his own past career.— Henceforth Paul
saw that in persecuting the adherents
of that way he had been persecuting
the risen Redeemer.

IV. Light upon his future work in
the world.—Henceforth Paul under-
stood he was to witness for Christ unto
all men.


Ver. 7. Christ's Question to Saul.—
“Saul, Saul! why persecutest thou
Me?”

I. What it implied—1. The con-
tinued existence of Jesus Christ. 2. The
cognisance by Christ of what was
taking place upon the earth. 3. The
right of Jesus Christ to interfere with


468


men’s actions and bring men themselves
to His bar.

II. What it suggested—l. That
Christ was one with His followers upon
earth, so that what affected them, in
the same manner affected Him. 2. That
the infliction of pains and penalties on
men for their religious opinions was.
persecution, 3. That such persecution,
as directed against Christ’s followers,
was without justification or excuse.


Ver. 9. Fighting Against God.

I. The fighting described.—How?
1. By resisting His will and persisting
in sin contrary to better knowledge
and inner conviction (Exod. v. 2).
2. By rejecting His word, and relying
upon good works or some other human
contrivance for peace of mind and rest
of soul (Acts iv. 2). 3. By refusing
His way, and by murmuring against
the dispensations of His providence
(Rom. viii. 28). Let us nevermore
strive against God in this way (Isa.
lv. 8). 4. By renouncing His work;
or, backsliding from His service (Jer.


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXII.





vill. 5). 5. By reviling His Spirit, or
sinning against the Holy Ghost. Not
only resisting His pleadings (Acts
vii. 51), but actually reviling His
works or strivings within (Matt. xii.
31, 32).

II. The folly denounced.—Why ?
Why is it folly, or why should we “not
fight against God”? 1. Because of
God’s relation to man. Man were
“ nothing at all” if God were not his
“all and in all.” Therefore: (1) As
his Creator. Can it be wise for man to
strive against his Master and Maker?
(2) As his Benfactor. Shall the force
of an army be spent against the base of
its supplies? (James i. 17). (3) As his
Redeemer.
rebel against its Redeemer? 2. Because
of man’s relation to God. (1) As a
sinner. It is rash presumption, for it
raises still higher the wall of separation
from God. (2) Asa son.
ingratitute, for the heavenly Father is
the best friend to the children of men.
(3) As a servant. It is infatuation; as
well might the clay expect to prevail
against the potter, the moth against
the mountain, or the lamp against the
sun. (4) As a subject. It is ripe de-
struction (Job ix. 4; Isa.xlv. 9, xxvii. 4).
-—J. G. Boughter.


Ver. 10. What shall I do, Lord ?—A
question for all

I. For the sinner.—What shall I do,
Lord, when thou risest up to judgment
and callest me to account for my trans-
gressions? Answer: “Only acknow-
ledge thine iniquity and return unto
Me.”

II. For the anxious.—What shall I
do, Lord, when my soul is rent and torn
by a consciousness of guilt and sin?
Answer : “ Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ and thou shalt be saved.”

III. Forthe pardoned.—W hat shall
I do, Lord, seeing Thou in Thy mercy
hast redeemed and forgiven me?
Answer: “Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy strength,
and with all thy mind.” Thou shalt
“glorify God in thy body and thy


How can a redeemed soul.


It is rank


spirit, which are His.” Thou shalt “ go
and work to-day in My vineyard.”

IV. For the afflicted. What shall I
do, Lord, when tossed about and
tempted? Answer: Thou shalt “ flee
unto Me to hide thee.”

V. For the dying.— What shall I do,
Lord, when my strength faileth ; when
my ‘“‘earthly house of this tabernacle ”
is being dissolved; when I am sum-
moned to appear before Thy judgment-
seat? Answer: “Thou shalt put thy
trust in Me.”


Ver. 11. The Blinding Glory.

I. The light.—It is not common
light, nor does it operate in a common
way. 1. Jt is light. <A light; the
light. 2. lt is a great light. It was
beyond the brightness of the sun. Noon
was to it as midnight. 3. Jt was a
sudden light. It did not slowly dawn.
It blazed suddenly, but it remained till
*God’s purpose was served. 4. Jt was a
spacious light. Not like a star or sun,
but a body or globe of light compassing
them round about, as on the transfigu-
ration hill (Acts ix. 3, xxii, 6, xxvi. 13).
5. It was a light from heaven. It was
from above, not from beneath. The
history of that light is the Christology
of Scripture. No doubt this visible,
physical light is connected with a
higher and more spiritual light. The
light which patriarchs saw, and Paul
saw, was but a symbol of something
more glorious—the light of the know-
ledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.

II. Its effects.—The narrative pre-
sents several different results in the
case of Saul. 1. Jé blinds. Paul is
struck blind. Blinded by light! The
light of heaven! 2. Jé eluminates. It
does not blind in order to destroy the
vision. It blinds in order to give
clearer eyesight. 3. /¢ prostrates. Saul
is stricken to the ground. The vision
is overwhelming. Man cannot stand
before it. 4. Jt bewilders. It was
here in the case of Saul worse than
darkness, in the bewilderment pro-
duced. He needs nowa guide. 5. /¢
guides. We do not see this here, but


469


cHap. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





in Saul’s after-history. This is his
lamp. From this outward operation on
men we learn the inward. For, doubt-
less, there were both these co-operating
in the case of Paul. The first effect of
the light of the gospel is often to blind
and to strike down. The second is to
enlighten, and to lift up, and to heal.
It is with Divine light that our dark
souls must come into contact. Tull
this takes place we are still unrenewed ;
still Sauls, not Pauls. The “ Lamb”
is the light thereof.—H. Bonar, D.D.


The Glory of That Light.

I. Its supernatural origin, A light
from heaven, above the brightness of
the sun.

II. Its essential character.—The
dwelling place of Jehovah, the material
symbol of His presence.

III. Its mysterious effects. — 1.
Eclipsing all natural lights. 2. Blind-
ing all ordinary vision. 3. Imparting
‘inward illumination.

IV. Its permanent duration.—Dis-
appearing from the sky, but never
withdrawing from the soul—shining in
and on unto eternal day.


Ver. 13. The Miracle in the House of
Judas.—Or, the restoration of Paul’s
sight, a type of the spiritual miracle of
soul-illumination which takes place in
the hour of conversion.

I. It proceeded upon one who was
antecedently blind.—This goes without
saying. So does the inward miracle of
soul-illumination. Men’s souls are
naturally darkened.

Il. It was wrought by the forth-
putting of Divine energy.—The com-
mand of Ananias was really the
command of Christ. Only a Divine
power can illuminate the darkened
souls of men.

III. It came upon him as a free gift
from Jesus Christ.—“ Brother Saul!
receive thy sight.” So is inward soul-
illumination all of grace.

IV. It was followed by instanta-
neous results.—In that hour Paul re-
ceived his sight and looked up. So when
God speaks the soul sees—not until,


470


Ver. 12, 13. Soul-Ministry—

I. Should be entrusted only to good
men. Like Ananias.

II. Can only rightly be performed by
sympathetic hearts, who address
their patients as ‘‘ brothers.”

III. Should always aim at the trans-
lation of such a one in darkness into
God’s marvellous light. So Ananias
spoke to Saul: “ Receive thy sight.”

IV. Will not fail if undertaken in
humble reliance on Christ’s grace.
Paul received his sight and looked up.


Ver. 14. The Qualifications and Work
of the Christian Minister.

J. His qualifications.—1l. A know-
ledge of God's will.—In particular so far
as it relates to the salvation of sinful
men. 2. A sight of the Righteous One.
I.e., a personal acquaintance with Jesus
Christ, in His character and saving
offices. 3. The hearing of a voice from
Christ's mouth; 7.e., the consciousness
of an inward call from Christ as well as
a distinct message put into his mouth
by Him.

II. His work.—1. Its natwre—to be
a witness for Christ. 2. Its Limitation.
“ Of what thou hast seen and heard.”
3. Its sphere. ‘ Unto all men.”


The Righteous One.

I. Descriptive of the character of
Christ.—See iii. 14, vii. 52; 1 Peter
iii. 18; 1 John ii. 1.

II. Suggestive of the work of Ohrist.
—Which was twofold. 1. To bring in
an everlasting righteousness (Dan.
ix. 24; Rom. i. 22; 1 -Cor. i, 30;
2 Cor. v. 21), 2. To make men in-
wardly righteous (Rom. viii. 4; Eph.
¥. Ose Pailin 1);

III. Prophetic of the people of
Christ.—Who shall eventually be all
righteous (Isa, 1x. 21; 1 Peter iii. 12;
1 John iii. 7; Rev. xxii. 11).


Voices From the Mouth of Christ.

I. A voice for the unbelieving
world.—‘ Why persecutest thou Me?”
(ver. 7) All unbelief is a virtual per-
secution of Christ.

Il, A voice for the awakened


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


sinner.—‘‘ Come unto Me and I will
give you rest” (Matt. xi. 28).

III. A voice for the rejoicing be-
liever.—“ Ye shall be a witness for
Me” (i. 8).


Ver. 16. The Washing Away of Sin.

I. Effected by faith.—By arising and
believing.

II. Grounded on the work of Christ.
—Calling on His name.

III. Symbolised in baptism.— Be
baptised, and wash away thy sins.”


ACS) CP SOK)








the Lord.— Points to—1. The personal
existence of Jesus Christ. 2. The
character of Jesus Christ as revealed in
the gospel. 3. The work of Jesus
Christ as expressed in His names—
Lord, Jesus, Christ.

IT. The import of calling on that
name.—Implies—1. Belief in the pcr-
sonal existence of Jesus Christ.
2. Trust in His character as a Divinely
exalted Saviour. 3. Reliance on His
redeeming work as an _all-sufficient
ground of acceptance.


IIT. The result of calling on the
Lord’s name,—Salvation. 1. Certain.
2. Full. 3. Free. 4. Final.


Calling on the Name of the Lord.
I. The significance of the name of


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17—2).


Paul’s Adoption of a Gentile Mission; or, His Interview with Christ in
Jerusalem.

I. The circumstances connected with Christ’s appearing to the apostle. 1. The
place where this occurred. (1) Not in Damascus, which lay outside the Holy
Land, but in Jerusalem, its metropolis and centre. (2) Not in some obscure
supper room while associating with the disciples, but in the temple itself, out of
which they, his hearers and he, had just come, and on which they both looked
with reverence. (3) Not in the court of the Gentiles while engaged in denounc-
ing the temple worship, in which they supposed he was now constantly occupie |,
but in the court of the women, while praying like themselves in accordance
with its accustomed ritual. All circumstances calculated to gain the favour of
his hearers, or at least disarm their hostility. 2. The time when this occurre: .
After his return to Jerusalem, which took place three years subsequent to tle
day of his leaving it for Damascus (ix. 26). This visit is that referred to in
Gal. i. 18 as having continued only fifteen days. The present narrative supplies
the reason of its speedy termination. Thus both history and epistle indirectly
confirm each other. 3. The manner in which this occurred. Paul having fallen
into a trance or ecstasy, as Peter in similar circumstances had done in Joppa
(x. 10), while thus withdrawn from the contemplation of “things seen and tem-
poral,” with his soul’s eye open to the “unseen” and the “eternal,” he beheld
again the same glorified form which he had seen before Damascus’ gate, and
recognised it as that of his exalted Lord.

II. The instruction given to the apostle by Christ, whom he beheld. 1. The
tenor of it. To depart from Jerusalem with all speed. The order, which was
clear, short, and peremptory, must withal have been surprising and painful to
Paul, who intensely loved his countrymen and desired their salvation (Rom.
ix. 1-3, x. 1), and who doubtless had heard that Christ Himself once commanded
His disciples to begin at Jerusalem (Luke xxiv. 47). 2. The reason of it.
Because his countrymen would not receive from him testimony concerning Christ.
Yhis, too, must have sounded sad in Paul’s ears-- that his countrymen would not
accept testimony concerhing Christ from any one, and certainly not from him.
It seemed like an intimation beforehand that Israel’s heart was hardened and
Israel’s doom sealed. Yet his experience in Jerusalem (ix. 29) must have begun
to prepare him for some such announcement. Only love is slow to convince that
its holy purpose to bless others will prove ineffectual.


471


Gitar. xxt. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a nnn ane ae


III. The objection offered by Paul to Christ’s instruction. The exact thought
which lay in the apostle’s mind is difficult to determine (see “ Critical Remarks ae
but, accepting what appears the more probable interpretation, we may under-
stand Paul as attempting to show cause why he should be allowed to remain in
Jerusalem. 1. The knowledge which the inhabitants of the Holy City possessed
of his previous character as a persecutor would (he believed) dispose them to
credit the sincerity of his conversion, and lead them to hear what he had to
state in justification of his tergiversation, which would secure him the opportunity
of testifying concerning the transcendent fact of Christ’s resurrection. 2. The
part he had previously taken in persecuting the disciples—as witness his conduct
in connection with the murder of Stephen—seemed (in his eyes) to establish a
claim for Jerusalem that he should remain within its precincts and end avour at
least to undo the mischief he had done.

IV. The dismissal intimated by Christ to the apostle. 1. Peremptory. De-
part! Talk no more of remaining. My counsel is fixed. Outside Jerusalem is
henceforth to be the sphere of thy labour. Whether My grace shall ever reach
Jerusalem or not, thou art not to be the channel through which it is to flow.
2. Deliberate. Christ had‘other work prepared for His servant. ‘JI will send
thee far hence unto the Gentiles.” What a reminiscence this must have called
up in Paul’s soul (ver. 15, ix. 15)! And what a vista it must have opened up
before his spirit !—of wanderings, and labours, and sufferings !

Learn.—1. That heaven is never far from praying souls. Prayer a sort of
window through which the soul looks into the unseen, and the unseen shines in
upon the soul. 2. That Christ knows who will and who will not receive God’s
testimony concerning Him. 3. That Christ’s ministers are not so good judges of
the spheres of labour best suited for them as Christ is. 4. That the evil wrought
by Christ’s people before conversion can never be entirely undone. 5. That men
in God’s sight are chargeable with the evil they consent to, no less than with that
they commit.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-21. Paul's Sketch of His own
Life.—Or how a servant of God looks
back upon the course of his own life.

I. With grateful remembrance of
human benefactors (ver. 3).

II. With penitent confession of his
own erroneous ways (vers. 4, 5).

III, With humble praise of the
Divine gracious dealings (vers. 6-16).

IV. With clear consciousness of the
life-call allotted to him (ver. 18-21.)—
Gerok.


Paul’s First Apology ; or, his speech
to his countrymen from the castle stairs.

I. What Paul says about himself.—
1. Rehearses the character of his early
years. (1) Claims to have been a good
Jew, by birth, education, personal be-
lief, and outward devotion (ver. 31;
compare Phil. iii. 5). (2) Confesses to
have been a zealous persecutor. Re-
minds them of his commission and


472


mission to Damascus (vers. 4, 5 ; com-
pare Phil. iii. 6). 2. Tells the story of
his conversion. (1) Narrating where it
happened, near Damascus; when it hap-
pened, ‘‘at midday ;” how it happened
—hby the appearance of Jesus Christ
(vers. 6,8). (2) Citing, as proof that it
happened, the experience of his fellow-
travellers (ver. 9) and the action of
Ananias (ver. 12); and (3) mentioning,
as the result of its happening, his call
to be an apostle, and his submission to
baptism (vers. 15, 16). 3. Haplains
the origin of his Gentile mission.
(1) Stating when, where, and from
whom, that mission had been received
(vers. 17, 18); (2) declaring his original
reluctance to enter upon it (vers. 19,
20); and (3) intimating that it had
been practically thrust upon him by
the hand of Heaven (ver. 21). A noble
confession : that his whole pre-Christian
life, though learned, religious, and


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  cuap. xxit.





active, had been wrong; that it had
been changed by a higher power rather
than by any effort of his own; and
that his Christian life had begun and
was being directed by Jesus Christ. A
difficult confession: for any man, but
especially for an intellectually and re-
ligiously proud Pharisee, such as Paul
was. A cowrageous confession: to be
made in face of a hostile multitude and
by a man who was at the moment
under arrest for a supposed crime. A
good confession ; such as must have
brought comfort to Paul’s own heart
and secured for him the approbation
and support of his Master.

II. What Paul testifies about Christ.
—l. His heavenly glory and power.
Paul’s hearers imagined that Jesus of
Nazareth was dead: Paul told them
He was alive. They fancied Jesus had
been overwhelmed with shame; he
assured them Jesus was crowned with
celestial glory. They conceived Jesus
had been rendered for ever powerless ;
he reminded them that Jesus was in-
vested with resistless power. They
supposed Jesus had been only a man;
he announced to them that Jesus was
God. 2. His fellowship with His perse-
cuted disciples upon the earth. How
contemptuously Paul’s hearers looked
upon the followers of that way. Paul
had formerly done the same. Now he
understood and intimated to his hearers
that Christ and His disciples stood in
closest intimacy with one another—so
much so that what was done to them He
regarded as done to Himself. 3. His
grace to poor sinners of the human race.
Even to the worst ; to himself, for ex-
ample. Christ showed thisin the days
of His flesh by pardoning such trans-
gressors as the woman of the city and
the dying robber; after His resurrec-
tion, by commanding the eleven to
begin at Jerusalem; subsequent to
His ascension by converting Paul and
employing him as an apostle. 4. His
world-wide plan of salvation. Christ
had no idea of restricting His gospel

to Palestine or the Jews. Nor is it
_ His mind to-day that the good news of
Heayen’s mercy should be published


alone in Britain or in Christendom.
His desire is that the gospel should be
preached among all nations and to
every creature under heaven.


Ver. 17. Paul in the Temple at
Jerusalem.

I. What he did.— Prayed. The
temple a house of prayer for all nations
(Isa. lvi. 7; Matt. xxi. 13; Mark xi. 1;
Luke xix. 46).

II. What he saw.—Christ. Who is
(1) always present in His own house
(Psalm exxxii. 13, 14; Matt. xviii. 20),
and (2) ever near to the praying soul
(Matt. xxviii. 20).

IIT. What he heard.—Voices from


.the risen Christ (1) warning him of’


danger (ver. 18); (2) instructing him
as to the reasons of his peril (ver. 18) ;
and (3) pointing out to him the path of
duty.


Vers. 19,20. Great Crimes Remembered.
I. For their fargiveness.
II. For self-humiliation.
ITI. For a stimulus to holy living.
IV. For attempts at their undoing.


Ver. 20. Stephen thy Martyr or
Witness.—Christian martyrs are—

I. Christ's servants, who go upon
His errands to the world.

II. Christ’s witnesses, who proclaim
His gospel to mankind.

Ill. Christ’s friends, in whom He
takes a special interest.

IV. Christ’s property, whom there-
fore He cannot afford to lose. Note:
“It is hardly likely that the sense in
which we understand the word ‘ martyr’
—viz., ‘one who dies for his religion,’
belonged as yet to the Greek term
pdptus or paptyp. It would there-
fore be more strictly accurate to render
here ‘ the blood of thy witness Stephen.’
But there is little doubt that, very
early indeed in the Christian story, the
to us well-known sense of the beauti-
ful word martyr became attached to it.
Possibly the transition from the
general sense of witness to the specific
meaning of ‘martyr’ is traceable to
its use in such passages as this and
Rev. ii. 13, xi. 3, xvii. 6.”—Spence.


473


cpap. xxu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


we
HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 22—29.


The Effect of Paul's Oration on his Audience; or his Narrow Escape from
Scourging.

I. The impotent rage of Paul’s hearers—1l. Their sudden interruption.
From the beginning of this speech they had kept on listening till he reached the
point when he proceeded to talk of his mission to the Gentiles. Then their sup-
pressed wrath could no longer be restrained; they svopped his defence by a
simultaneous yell. 2. Their fanatical outcry. “ Away with such a fellow from
the earth, for it is not fit that he should live.” What let loose their passion was
not so much the mention of the word “ Gentiles ” as the idea that he should claim
to have been sent by Divine authority on a mission to the Gentiles rather than
to the Jews. “This, to the fanatic Jewish mind, was a startling statement, and,
if true, would at once remove all reason for their jealousy of the foreigner. But
could it be true that the long-expected Messiah—the peculiar glory of the chosen
race—could, in their own proud house in Jerusalem, speak to this man from His
glory throne in heaven, and command him to leave his own city and people and
to devote himself solely to the uncircumcised Gentiles? Was not such an
assertion of itself rank blasphemy? Could King Messiah send one—once belong-
ing to their own strictest sect of the Pharisees—to these unconverted heathen to
tell them that the Messiah, the Redeemer of Israel, was equally their Messiah
and Redeemer? One who could say such things was surely “ unworthy to live”
(Spence). 3. Their passionate demonstration. Shouting with still more vehement
cries, and stripping off their garments, they threw dust into the air—not as a
preliminary to the work of stoning, since Paul now was in the hands of the
Romans, but as a means of giving vent, in Oriental fashion, to their uncontroll-
able rage. They were simply beside themselves with indignation and fury.

II. The perilous mistake of the castle captain.—1. In commanding Paul to
be bound. ‘The captain, of course, was not aware that Paul was entitled to all
the privileges of a Roman citizen, otherwise he would have hesitated to put
bonds on him, and far less to order him to be tied up for scourging. But bound
the apostle had been at the beginning of the uproar (xxi. 33), and now he was
strapped to a post like a common criminal in preparation for the vilest indignity
that can be put upon a man made in God’s image—for being whipped like a dog
(ver. 25). 2. In treating Paul like a prisoner before he had been condemned. This
also offended against the majesty of Roman law, which, however, regardless of
the lives of slaves and evil-doers, was infinitely jealous of the liberties and
honours of those who had attained the rank of citizens in the great com-
monwealth. No wonder the centurion grew alarmed when he learnt that his
prisoner was a civis Romanus, and as little that this alarm communicated itself
to the captain when he heard the exact state of affairs from his subordinate.

III. The escape of Paul from the indignity of scourging.—1l. The captain’s
conversation with Paul. Astonished at the report brought by his subordinate,
the commandant of the castle at once repaired to the apostle’s presence that by
asking he might satisfy himself as to the truth of Paul’s claim to be a Roman
citizen. Finding that Paul adhered to the assertion of his citizenship, the captain
expressed surprise that one in apparently so destitute circumstances should be
possessed of a privilege which he, the captain himself, had procured only at a
great price. He was further astonished to learn that Paul had been free born,
although nothing escaped Paul as to how this had come to pass. If some sup-
pose the captain rather easily and quickly accepted the apostle’s word, it needs
only to be remembered that Paul’s assertion contained nothing in itself impro-
bable, and was besides of such a sort—incurring so severe penalties if found to be


474


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,  cwap. xxtt,








—


false—that no one would readily venture to make it unless if were true (ses
“Critical Remarks”). 2. The captain’s order to the centurion and his guards.
Unstrap the apostle from the whipping post—which they did. “ Straightway
they departed from him.” The idea of examining him by torture they aban-
doned. That the fetters with which Paul had been first bound (xxi. 33) were
not removed.is apparent from the statement that on the morrow he was loosed
(ver. 30).

Learn.—1. The fierce hostility with which men always and everywhere resent
an invasion of their privileges. The Jews, in this respect, have not been with-
out successors, even among Christians. 2. The fantastic tricks that are some- —
times played by men “ dressed in a little brief authority.” The captain was not
the first man who overrode his commission, neither has he been thelast. 3. The
right of every man to protect himself, by all lawful means, against unnecessary
and unjust suffering. Paul’s sheltering himself behind his Roman citizenship
fell under this category. 4. The value of Christian citizenship, which can be
purchased by no sum, but must be obtained free, and which can shield from
dangers greater than those which menaced Paul. 5. The fear which all men
inwardly have, or ought to have, when they do wrong.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


about


Ver. 22. Some Thoughts
Preachers and their Hearers.

I. Preachers may get a silent hear-
ing from their audiences without
either gaining their assent or making
on them any deepimpression. Preach-
ers, above all men, should guard against
judging by appearances.

If. Preachers commonly obtain a
respectful hearing from their audi-
ences so long as they keep on prophe-
sying smooth things. The moment
they begin to touch the consciences, or
challenge the privileges, of those who
listen, they find the attitude of these
change.

III. Preachers must be prepared
for hearing themselves denounced by
their hearers, and that in no measured
terms. Their unpopularity may often
be the measure of their fidelity.

IV. Preachers may warrantably in-
fer they are doing excellent work, and
speaking true words, when they en-
counter opposition from the unbeliev-
ing, worldly, or nominally religious
among their hearers. Preachers
should beware when all men speak
well of them.


Ver. 23.
Missions.
I, As much a fact to-day as it was


Opposition to Foreign


in the time of Paul.—Both men of the
world (like the unbelieving Jews) and
members of the Christian Church (like
many Jewish Christians) are opposed
to sending preachers of the gospel “far
hence to the Gentiles.”

II. If not so demonstrative as in
Paul’s day, perhaps as decided and
difficult to overcome.—The cause of
missions to the heathen kindles in
hearts anger, and evokes from some
lips words of hostile denunciation—
exactly now as then.

IJI. As unreasonable in our day as
it was in Paul’s.—The salvation of the
gospel was intended for all nations,
and not simply for those presently
within the pale of Christendom, any
more than it was exclusively for the
Jews.

IV, As culpable in our day as it was
in Paul’s, if not more so. Consider-
ing that if Paul, being a Jew, had
acted on this principle Christianity
had never reached the shores of Europe,
and far less of Britain; and consider-
ing the clearer light now possessed by
the Church, as to the world-wide destiny
of the gospel, and of its fitness to bless
mankind.


Ver. 25. “TJs it lawful to scourge a
man who is a Roman and wuncon-


475


CHaP. XXII


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a ee ee re re ee ee


demned ?” —A threefold reminder—

I. Of the inalienable rights of
men.

Il. Of the sacred honour of citizens.

III. Of the inviolable dignity of
Christians.—Gerok.


Ver. 27. Roman and Heavenly
Citizenship.—A parallel and a contrast.

I. The parallel.—l. Both might be
acquired by aliens. 2. Both might be
obtained by inheritance. 3. Both
conferred great privileges.. 4. Both
ensured complete protection.

II. The contrast.—1. Roman citizen-
ship now a thing of the past ; heavenly
citizenship a thing of the present.
2. Roman citizenship, at the best,
temporal and earthly ; heavenly citizen-
ship celestial and eternal. 3. Roman
citizenship might be obtained for
money; heavenly citizenship can be
purchased by no price. 4. Roman
citizenship conferred social and political
privileges ; heavenly citizenship privi-
leges that are spiritual and religious.
5. Roman citizenship protected the
body ; heavenly citizenship protects the
soul.


Ver. 28. This Citizenship ; conjoined
with Phil. iii. 20, Our Citizenship ; or,
the superiority of the Christian citizen-
ship.

I. Its dignity is greater.—No need
to disparage or depreciate Roman
citizenship. In Paul’s day Roman
citizenship was undoubtedly a great
thing, an object worthy of being
aspired after by persons of highest
rank. Foreigners counted it a signal
honour. Just as to-day to be a citizen
of Great Britain is reckoned a higher
dignity than to be the subject of any
other kingdom or empire on earth.
Yet even this is nothing when com-
pared with being a citizen of heaven
whose sovereign is the King of kings,
whose vicegerent is the Lord of glory,
whose ministers are angels, whose laws
are righteousness and truth, whose
revenues are the resources of the
universe, whose mission is to bless
mankind, whose influence is always on


476


“of caste.


the side of peace and love, whose
subjects are in one sense all the nations
of the earth, in another the whole
family of the redeemed, and whose
dominion shall be one day universal.
II. Its immunities are larger.—
Writers on Roman antiquities report
that the rights and privileges of Roman
citizens were large and varied—in-
cluding liberty, family, marriage,
fatherhood, property, willing and in-
heriting, tutelage and wardship (see
Adams’ Roman Antiquities, pp. 39 j7-).
Yet the privileges of our citizenship
surpass these. 1. Sonship. Not merely
subjects or servants, but children of
the Great King (see Gal. iii. 26;
Eph. ii. 19; 1 John iii. 2). 2. Ac
ceptance. Not regarded as enemies,
but considered as friends (Eph. i 6;
Rom. viii. 1). 3. Laberty. Free use
of all our powers in the service of
God (2 Cor. iii. 17; Gal. v. 1; James
i. 25). A Roman citizen might be
sold: as a slave; not so a citizen of
heaven. 4. Protection. Roman citizen-
ship did not shield from ordinary ills ;
nor does Christian citizenship. Yet —
this defends the soul lest it should be
hurt by these (Rom. viii. 28; 1 Peter


iii. 13). 5. Property. Romans dis-
tinguished between common and
private property. So are certain


things common to Christian citizens,
as the common salvation and the
common means of grace; and other


~things private possessions, as special


gifts and graces. 6. Family. Roman
citizens (originally) could not
abandon the family to which they
belonged, a - restriction which has
perpetuated itself in the- modern idea
Corresponding to this,
Christians belong to God’s family, and
are not at liberty to leave it, though
others may pass into it. 7. Heirshap.
A Roman citizen could will and in-
herit. A citizen of heaven cannot
will, but shall inherit (Rom. viii. 17;
Rev. xxi. 7).

III. Its terms are easier.—Roman
citizenship could be secured in two
ways: by birth or by purchase.
Christian citizenship so far resembles


is HOMILETIC COMMENTARY :


THE ACTS, cHAP. XXII.





that of Rome, that it too may, and
indeed, must, be obtained in both of
these ways. 1. By birth. Only not
physical, but spiritual. No man a
child of God, a subject of grace, an
heir of heaven, because his parents
were these before him; _ heaven’s
citizens must be born again (John iii.


ae


3). 2. By purchase. Only it must,
be without money and without price.
Citizenship in heaven cannot be bought
and sold in earth’s markets, but must
be accepted by all who would make it
theirs as a free gift.

Lesson. —Walk worthy of
citizenship.


this


CHAPTER XXIII.
PAUL BEFORE THE SANHEDRIM—AN INTERRUPTED TRIAL.


§ 1. The Scene in the Council Chamber; or, Paul’s Doubtful Strategy (vers.
1-11).

§ 2. The Conspiracy of the Forty; or, Paul’s Life Endangered (vers. 12-22).

§ 3. Paul’s Midnight Ride to Cesarea ; or, Paul’s Safety Ensured (vers. 23-35).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Earnestly beholding, or looking steadfastly on, describes the eager, anxious gaze
with which the apostle was accustomed to scan those to whom he spoke—perhaps arising
from his infirmity of sight (Alford), but more from the intense emotion of his spirit (see
xiv. 9, and compare vii. 55.) Men and brethren.- Or simply brethren (see also vers. 5, 6.)
The omission of “fathers ” (xxii. 1) was probably intended to suggest that he felt himself on
an equality with the council. I have lived.— remodirevya properly signifies to discharge one’s
civil and political duties, but as used here and elsewhere (Phil. i. 27) by Paul, includes his
whole moral and religious conduct, or his behaviour in every respect. In all good conscience.
—T.e., in every respect, in every instance with a good conscience, or with a consciousness of
integrity and sincerity (compare 2 Tim. i. 3).

Ver. 2. The high priest Ananias.—Not the individual of that name mentioned earlier
(iv. 6; compare Luke iii. 2; John xviii. 13), but the son of Nebedzeus, who succeeded
Camydus, or Camithus, was nominated to the office by Herod, King of Chalcis, in a.p. 48,
and entered on his duties in the procuratorship of Tiberius Alexander (Jos., Ant., XX. v. 2).
He was deposed from his office not long before the departure of Felix (Ant., XX. viii. 8), but
still retained great power, which he used violently and lawlessly (Jbid., ix. 2). He was
eventually assassinated by the Sicarii ( Wars, II. xvii. 9), Them that stood by him were not
members of the council or spectators, but most likely the servants in attendance, as in
Christ’s trial (John xviii. 22; compare Luke xix. 24). To smite him on the mouth.—Compare
John xviii. 22; Jer. xx. 1,2. “This mode of enjoining silence is practised in the Hast at the
present day” (Hackett). “Fora Jew to order a Jew to be struck on the cheek was peculiayly
offensive. ‘He that strikes the cheek of an Israelite strikes, as it were, the cheek of the
Shekinah,’ for it is said (Prov. xx, 25), ‘He that strikes a man (@.¢., an Israelite, who alone
deserves the name) strikes the Holy One’” (Farrar).

Ver. 3, Thou whited wall!—Thou hypocrite! Mike the similar phrase, “ whited sepulchre’’
(Matt. xxiii. 27). The prophecy here uttered against Ananias—not a wish (Kuinoel)—was
fulfilled (see above).

Ver. 4. To revile God’s high priest was certainly forbidden by the law of Moses (Exod.
xxii. 28).

Ver. B I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest.—These words have been inter-
preted as meaning either: 1. That the apostle refused to acknowledge Ananias as high priest,
either because he had procured the dignity by money (Grotius) or by usurpation (Lightfoot),
and was therefore not the high priest in reality. 2. That the apostle declined to recognise as
God’s high priest one who behaved so insolently as Ananias (Calvin, Baumgarten, Stier, Meyer,
Besser, Holtzmann), in which case his language would be ironical. 3. That he spoke without
due reflection, and therefore rashly, and now meant to recall his words (Bengel, Wetstein,


477


chap. xxut. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





Olshausen, Ewald, Wordsworth, Hackett). 4. That at the moment he was not acquainted
with the person of the high priest, Ananias having been installed into office during his
absence from the city (Chrysostom, Beza, Lechler). 5. That when he spoke he did not really
know by whom the order to smite him had been given (Farrar)—which might well have
been the case if his vision was as defective as is commonly supposed (Alford, Plumptre), or
if Ananias was not presiding (Zéckler), because the Sanhedrim was sitting at the bidding of
the Roman captain (Lechler), or if, though Ananias did preside, Paul did not know he was
the high priest (who was not always required to preside: compare Schiirer’s Gesch. des Jud,
Volks, p. 156 ff), but thought him an ordinary member of the court (Lechler, Plumptre), Of
these, the first and second may be set aside as improbable, if not unworthy of the apostle.”
The third may contain an element of truth, to this extent, that the apostle ought, perhaps, to
have been sure who the person was against whom he uttered so severe a prophecy. That he
knew and spoke in anger, “ in an outburst of natural indignation ” (Conybeare and Howson),
we think unlikely in the case of one (1) who had just been claiming that he had lived before
God in all good conscience up till that day (ver. 1); (2) who had the day before exhibited
such presence of mind; (3) who possessed, along with his brother apostles, the promise of the
Holy Spirit’s help as to what he should say when brought before kings and councils ; and
(4) who afterwards, when confessing his wrong-doings before the council, made no mention
of this supposed ebullition of wrath (xxiv. 20, 21). In our judgment this last consideration
is fatal to the theory that Paul spoke unadvisedly with his lips. The fourth and fifth
explanations appear in all respects the most satisfactory. It is written.—The passage
(Exod, xxii. 28) applies to any civil magistrate as well as to the high priest.

Ver. 6. Sadducees.—See iv. 1, v. 17. Pharisees.—See v. 34. For both see ‘ Homiletical
Analysis.” Men and brethren.—Or, simply brethren. The son of a Pharisee.—According to
best codices, a son of Pharisees. Of, or touching, the hope and resurrection of the dead.—J.c.,
touching a hope (which I have), even that there shall be a resurrection of the dead (compare
xxiv, 15, 21; and see xvii.31). Baur, followed by Holtzmann, objects to the apostle’s state-
ment as untruthful, since he must have known that the matter tor which he was called in
question was not his preaching of a resurrection from the dead, but his teaching with regard
to the law, that it was not binding on Gentile Christians. But in point of fact the apostle’s
statement was substantially correct, that whatever was the ostensible ground of complaint
against him, the real cause of his apprehension was his witness concerning Christ’s resurrec-
tion—since out of that rose the altered relations of both Jews and Gentiles toward the law.
Besides, had the apostle here deliberately uttered an untruth, or been guilty of an evasion, it
is hardly likely that the recollection of this would not have troubled his conscience after-
wards when his remembrance of having set his judges at variance did (xxiv. 20, 21).

Ver. 7. A dissension between the Pharisees and Sadducees.—Here again Baur “can scarcely
imagine that a single expression undesignedly-” (Baur himself holds it was deliberately) “let
fall by the apostle could have kindled so fierce a fire” as to blind both parties to their own
interests, and Weizsiicker thinks it “far from being in the least probable that Paul should
have attempted to set the Pharisees and Sadducees against each other, or that he should in
point of fact have succeeded in doing so”; but Josephus (Life, 29) relates a similar pro-
cedure of himself when his life was threatened at Taricheze, which was followed by a similer
result, the division of his enemies, which ended in his life being spared.

Ver. 8. The Sadducees denied the doctrine of a resurrection and the existence of eluer
angel or spirit. ‘“ They have been called materialists. . . . But there is no proof that they
denied what in our day we call the invisible world. They were only opposed to new specu-
lations. They believed firmly in Mosaism, and adhered to the letter of the Scriptures. The
resurrection, they said, was not supported by a single text in the law. The Sadducees, for
the same reasons (the silence of Moses), discouraged Messianic hopes. . . . The Sadducees
were the living proof that the Old Dispensation was drawing to a close” (Stapfer, Palestine
in the Time of Christ, pp. 319, 320), The Pharisees confessed both. They “had formulated,
under the Maccabees, the doctrine of the resurrection of the body,” by which they “ did not
intend merely the survival of the soul, the immaterial part of man, or even of a spiritual
body, as St. Paul afterwards teaches, but a reunion with the very body which had been laid
down” (idid., p. 318). The Pharisees “believe that souls have an immortal vigour in them,
and that under the earth there will be rewards and punishments according as they have lived
virtuously or viciously in this life”—the vicious being “ detained in an everlasting prison,”
but the virtuous having “ power to revive and live again.’’ The Sadducees hold “that souls
die with the bodies” (Jos., Ant., XVIII. i. 3, 4),

Ver. 9. The scribes should probably be some of the seribes. But if a spirit or an angel
hath spoken to him.—Supply, What then? The allusion obviously is to Paul’s vision in the
temple (xxii. 17). The best texts omit let us not fight against God. They were probably
an interpolation from Gamaliel’s speech (v. 39). ys

Ver. 10. “The fear of the chiliarch was naturally heightened by his knowledge that he was
responsible for the life of a Roman citizen ” (Plumptre),


478


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omar. xxut


————— ee


Ver. 11. The oldest authorities omit Paul. For the phrase be of good cheer, in which the
verb is @dpoe. (Christ’s), compare Matt. ix. 2, xiv. 27, Mark vi. 50; John xvi. 33. For the
same phrase with a different verb, ed@uuetre (Paul’s), see xxvii. 22,25. The vision announced
the close of the first and the beginning of the second of Paul’s proposed journeys (xix. 21).

Ver. 12. The Jews (rather than certain of the Jews) who banded themselves together
under a curse to kill Paul were not the members of the Sanhedrim, who had forgotten their
opinions in the council (vers. 6-9), and were again united as one man against the apostle
(Holtzmann), but the Jewish populace, or at least forty of them (ver. 13), who came to the
chief priests and the elders (ver. 14)—i.e., to the Sadducean members of the council
(De Wette, Meyer), who were hostile to Paul—with the information that they had bound
themselves under a great curse to take him off. Josephus (Ant., XV. viii. 3, 4) mentions a
similar conspiracy of ten Jews, who bound themselves by a solemn oath to assassinate Herod
the Great, and relates (Ant., XII. vi. 2) the story of Matthias, the founder of the Maccabean
dynasty, who slew an apostate Jew who offered sacrifice at Modin.

Ver. 15. Ye with the council signify.—/.c., with the consent of the council or Sanhedrim.
As though ye would inquire something more perfectly.—Better, as intending to investigate
more accurately (than on the former trial) the things conecrning him—i.ec., the charges
against him. The words on the morrow are omitted by the best MSS.

Ver. 16. Whether Paul’s sister’s son resided in Jerusalem, or had accompanied him
thither, cannot be determined. Against the former supposition stands the fact that Paul
lodged with Mnason (xxi. 16), Plumptre suggests he may have been one of Paul’s Roman
kinsmen (Rom. xvi. 7, 11) who had come to Jerusalem to attend the feast, and had heard -
the plot talked of in the caravanserai where he and the other pilgrims lodged. Alford thinks
he may have been a young man domiciled in Jerusalem, as Paul himself had formerly been,
for the purpose of attending school.

Ver. 17. Bring this young man unto the chief captain.—Though Paul had a promise of
Divine protection, he did not neglect the use of ordinary means.

Ver. 18. The words Paul the prisoner show that the apostle was still chained to a soldier.

Ver. 21. A, or the—i.e., the expected promise rather than ‘‘order” (Rosenmiiller) or
“message ” (Grotius).

Ver, 23. Two.—Not one or two (Howson), but some or certain two—i.e., two or three
(Hackett) of the centurions. Compare “ some two of the disciples” (Luke vii. 19). Soldiers.—
Heavy armed, as distinguished from the “horsemen.” The spearmen, deZiodAdBa, “ right hand
graspers”—an obscure word, not yet satisfactorily explained—have been interpreted as
meaning military lictors who guarded prisoners, and were so called from taking the right
side (Kuinoel), but probably signified a lightly armed Roman cohort of slingers and javelin
throwers (Jos., Wars, II. xvii. 5; III. vii. 18; IV. i, 3), hence rightly enough named
spearmen.

Ver. 25. A letter after this manner.—Lit., having this type, as to verbal form, stamp, and
contents. Such a writing relative to a prisoner, called an elogiwm, was required by Roman law
to be sent with every prisoner forwarded to a magistrate for trial. That this was not the
actual missive of Claudius Lysias, but only a free reproduction of what the writer of the Acts
supposed it might be, has been argued (1) from the difficulty of understanding how the
writer of the Acts would get to know what Lysias wrote, and (2) from its similarity to the
introduction of Luke (i. 3), which, like it, uses the epithet “‘ most excellent,” and to the Jerv-
salem letter, which employs the same salutation, “greeting” (xv. 23). But as to (1), the
letter of Lysias may have been unsealed and shown to Paul, if not also to Luke, who most
likely accompanied him; while as to (2), it need only be supposed that Lysias, Luke, and
James, knew the art of polite letter-writing. It is a gratuitous assumption to assert that the
composer of the Acts is responsible for the inaccuracy which occurs in Lysias’ letter
(Holtzmann). ; : } P

Ver. 28. I brought him forth—better, down—into their council.—This clause is omitted by
some authorities,

Ver. 30. From the Received Text the word péd\ew should be struck out, according to the
best authorities; but even then two constructions are combined: (1) pwnvubelons ériBovds Ths
écoueyns, and (2) pynvubévros émiBovdty écecOar. The sense, however is, i¢ having been shown
to me that there would be a plot against the man. By the Jews is wanting in the oldest
codices. So is the concluding word, farewell, which was probably inserted from xv. 29.

Ver. 31. By, or during night the apostle with his escort travelled to Antipatris.

Ver. 32. On the morrow after their arrival at Antipatris. Returned to the castle——Possibly
one of the centurions (ver. 23), along with the footmen and spearmen.

Ver. 35. I will hear thee.—Perhaps fully should be added to convey the force of the
preposition. The rule of Roman law was: Qui cum elogio mittuntur ex integro audiendt sunt.
“The governor of a province was not to give implicit credit to the document with which a
prisoner was sent to him; he must institute an independent examination of the case for
himself” (Hackett).


479


oHAP, xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. \


a


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—10.


The Scene in the Council Chamber ; or, Paul's Doubtful Strategy.

I. An exalted exordium.—l. Delivered in a historic place. If in the usual
court room of the Sanhedrim, the Hall Gazith, in one of the temple chambers,
then it was probably the spot on which Stephen had stood twenty-two years
before, when Paul heard him deliver his great apology (vi. 12); on which the
apostles had stood when Gamaliel, a Pharisee, spoke up in their defence (v. 34) ;
and on which Christ had stood when Caiaphas pronounced him worthy of death
(Matt. xxvi. 57). If in some apartment in the city to which their meetings had
been transferred about twenty-six years before this (see “ Critical Remarks” on
xxii. 30), it was still the spot on which many a solemn trial had taken place.
Men in general, and speakers in particular, are always more or less affected by
the associations which cluster round the spots on which they stand. 2. Presented
to a venerable court. The highest ecclesiastical and religious tribunal of the
country, composed of priests and elders and scribes (iv. 5, 6), belonging to the
two principal parties of the day, the Pharisees and the Sadducees (see ‘“ Critical
Remarks,” and below), and presided over by the high priest of the time, Ananias,
the son of Nebedeus. 3. Spoken with intense earnestness. Realising at once
the sanctity of the place, the dignity of the court, and the solemnity of the
occasion, the apostle fixed his eyes with steadfast gaze upon his auditors and
began to pour out upon them the transcendent thoughts with which his soul was
laden. 4. Begun with dignified self-respect. Not cringing before them, as if he
either acknowledged himself a culprit or desired to fawn upon them with flattery,
but dropping the term “fathers” which he had employed on the castle stairs
(xxii. 1), and addressing them as an equal, “as a former Sanhedrist to his ancient
colleagues ”—brothers !_ The man who is conscious of his innocence has no need to _
hang his head like a bulrush, or speak with bated breath and whispered humble-
ness, or forget the native nobility of his manhood. 5. Summed up in a noble
confession. Not prompted by self-esteem or rendered possible by a self-indulgent
criticism, but dictated by an inward consciousness of its truth. A confession
that all his life long—not even excluding his persecuting days (xxvi. 9)—
he had studied, and, so far as he could speak for himself, with a considerable
measure of success, to preserve a good conscience, which could only have been
done by following its dictates, in all his relationships in life, at all times, and
under all circumstances, aiming at the service and glory of God (2 Tim. i. 3;
Heb. xiii. 18).

II. An unmannerly interruption.—1l. From whom it proceeded. From the
high priest who presided over the council, Ananias, the son of Nebedeus, who
was appointed to fill this ecclesiastical office by Herod of Chalcis and whose
tenure continued from a.p. 47-59, when he was superseded by Ismael, the son
of Phabi. Having lived after his deposition till the outbreak of the Jewish war
in A.D. 66, he was murdered as a friend of the Romans by the revolutionaries.
During the last years of his life, even after the demission of his office, he ruled
like a tyrant in Jerusalem. His haughty disposition revealed itself in his
behaviour toward: '’»"l (see Schiirer in Riehm’s Handwiérterbuch des Biblischen
Altertums, ii. 62, art. Ananias), ‘Ananias” says Besser (Bibel Stunden, III.
ii. 504), “was the third high priest whom the Spirit, poured out from the throne
by the Great High Priest, Jess Christ, cailed to repentance. But, like his
predecessor Joseph, he was a legitimate successor of Caiaphas.” 2. How it was
expressed. By commanding the officials of the Sanhedrim who were standing by
to smite Paul upon the mouth. To the arrogant prelate it seemed unendurable—
in fact, an intolerable presumption and unspeakable insolence—that one who was


480


£ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omar. xxutt.


arraigned before them as a prisoner should either call them “ brothers !” or
advance for himself the claim of innocence. The mouth that uttered such words
should be stopped. Whether the attendants obeyed or not is uncertain. If they
hesitated for a moment (Besser) the probability is that they ultimately carried
out their master’s command and inflicted on the apostle the same brutal insult
that had once been offered to his Master (John xviii. 22), and long before to the
prophet Jeremiah (xx. 1, 2). 3. What response it evoked. Unlike his Master
who, when one of the officers standing by struck him, meekly answered, “ If I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou Me?”
(John xviii. 22, 23), Paul replied with an indignant outburst—‘ God shall smite
thee, thou whited wall; and sittest thou to judge me according to the law, and
commandest me to be smitten contrary to the law.” (1) So far as Ananias was
concerned the language was both strikingly correct and richly deserved. Sitting
there as Jehovah’s representative, clothed, perhaps, in his white priestly raiment
and pretending to be a judge of offences against Heaven’s law, he was little better
than a whited wall, beautiful without, but coarse within, ‘“ daubed over with
untempered mortar ”—an expression which perhaps had been borrowed from the
similar phrase of Jesus Christ, ‘“ whited sepulchre ” (Matt. xxiii. 27 ; Luke xi. 44),
and had become current among the early Christians as a fit designation for
hypocrites, of whom Ananias was a magnificent specimen. That the phrase
did not express a malediction or imprecation must be assumed, since such would
have been altogether unbecoming on the lips of one who professed himself a
follower of Jesus, and who had claimed to have lived up till that moment in all
good conscience before God. The terrible utterance is best understood as a
prophetic denunciation (Zockler), which, according to Josephus (Wars, II. xvii. 19),
was ultimately fulfilled, the Sicarii or assassins in the revolutionary war having
entered Jerusalem and, after burning Ananias’s palace, dragged him, along with
his brother Hezekiah, from concealment and murdered both. The rebuke as to
his judging Paul contrary to the law was thoroughly deserved. (2) So far as
Paul was concerned, there was nothing wrong in either of the statements, unless
it was wrong to denounce a scoundrel like Ananias, and foretell his fate. If
anything was wrong about the utterance it was the passion (if there was such)
with which it was accompanied. ‘It was certainly some disadvantage to Paul
that (although provoked and unjustly smitten) he called the high priest ‘ whited
wall’; he was glad to excuse it by his ignorance. We may not be too bold or
too forward to speak in a good matter, lest we overshoot” (Trapp.) But is it
not rather easily assumed that Paul lost his temper and burst into a rage?
Had he done so, it seems to us Paul would have not only acknowledged his
offence when he cooled down—which some say he did (but see below, and
“ Oritical Remarks” on verse 5)—but when recalling this scene afterwards
would not have omitted to mention this unchristian outburst (if it was such)
as one of the mistakes he had committed—which, however, he did not (see xxiv. 21).
4, How it ended. Challenged by the attendants for reviling, as they called his
scathing sentence, God’s high priest, as they styled the painted and decorated
hypocrite who presided over the assembly, Paul replied that he wist not that the
person whom he addressed was the high priest. This statement is generally
interpreted as an acknowledgment on Paul’s part of having spoken. unadvisedly
with his lips. It ought, however, rather to be accepted in its plain and literal
sense, as an intimation that, from some cause or other—defective sight, or an
uncertainty as to whether the president of the court was the high priest—he did
not know the exalted dignity of the person he addressed (see “ Critical Remarks”).
Had he known that Ananias was the high priest, rather than seem to violate the
law of Moses—“Thou shalt not speak evil of a ruler of thy people ””—he would
have borne the indignity in silence. This does not appear to us as an admission


iz 481


cHap. xxut. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eS ee


that he had spoken rashly, except perhaps in so far as he ought to have made
sure who the object of his denunciation was before launching against him such a
scathing judgment and rebuke. But the judgment and the rebuke fell on the
right head, and Paul, if he erred, only showed he was still a man and not the
equal of his Divine Master (see “ Hints”).

Itl. A dexterous strategy.—1. The occasion of it. The mixed character of
the council, which consisted of Pharisees and Sadducees. (1) The Pharisees at
the time of Christ formed a compact, important, and influential party inside the
Jewish people—representing that tendency which was generally peculiar to post-
exilic Judaism, and which in them (the Pharisees) received its sharpest and at
the same time its most correct expression, viz., the tendency to transform religion
into merely external legal service. That tendency drew after it as a necessary
consequence this, that the external action rather than the moral disposition
became the decisive factor in determining the quality of an action. Hence the
Pharisees laid great stress upon oral legal tradition as supplementing the written
law. The Pharisees were the democratic, popular party in Palestine. (2) The
Sadducees, deriving their name originally, it is believed, from Zadok the high
priest in David’s and Solomon’s times, consisted principally of the members and
adherents of the high priestly family, and formed in consequence the aristocratic
party in Jerusalem, whose chief distinction lay in this—that they rejected the
Pharisaic principle of legalism and with that the oral tradition which their rivals
valued. (3) Their dogmatic differences were principally these: that the Phari-
sees believed in and the Sadducees denied, the resurrection of the body and future
punishment, the existence of angels and spirits, the doctrine of an overruling
providence, which superintended and controlled the seemingly free actions of
men (see Schiirer in Riehm’s Handworterbuch, arts. Pharisder and Sadduccéer ;
and Langhans’s Biblische Geschichte wnd Literatur, ii. 431-435). 2. The nature
of it. A sudden exclamation by Paul that he was a Pharisee and a son of |
Pharisees, and that he was that day being called in question for the hope and
resurrection of the dead (see “Critical Remarks”). Both statements were true,
although the latter may not have been so obvious to his hearers as it was to
himself. It was undoubtedly a clever stroke, and perhaps illustrated that
serpentine wisdom combined with dovelike harmlessness which Christ recom-
mended to His followers (Matt. x. 16). ‘ Religion,” says Trapp, ‘doth not call
us to a weak simplicity, but allows us as much of the serpent as of the dove.
The dove without the serpent is easily caught; the serpent without the dove
stings deadly. Their match makes themselves secure and many happy.”
3. The effect of it. It divided the circle of his enemies into two opposing camps.
Some of the scribes of the Pharisees’ party immediately protested that they
found no evil in Paul. If a spirit or an angel had spoken to him, what then ?
That was by no means impossible or incredible ; and, if it really was so, it might
be dangerous to meddle with the prisoner. Of course to the aristocratic
Sadducean party, who regarded spirits and angels as nursery legends, creatures
of the fancy, such a suggestion sounded ridiculous. The deeply seated antagonism
which parted the two sects rose to the surface and flamed out into angry
dissension. In their violent attempts, on the one hand to release, and on the
other part to detain, Paul, he was like to be torn in pieces betweenthem. 4. The
end of tt. The commandant of the castle, who had once more got to hear of
the turmoil and feared for his prisoner’s safety, despatched a company of soldiers
to the council chamber to rescue the apostle and fetch him into the fortress.
5. The rightness of it. ‘That the apostle’s bold stroke terminated in his release
may seem to many to be justification enough of the course adopted; but on
subsequent reflection Paul himself was not perfectly sure about it (xxiv. 21).
At least, without expressly granting that he had done wrong, he owned him-

482


> HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. Xxutt.








self ready to admit that his action might wear the appearance of wrong.
Possibly he was not himself certain that he had not erred from that straight
path of conscientious: duty he had up till that moment endeavoured to tread.
His exclamation was perhaps secretly dictated less by an effort to vindicate
himself or advance his Master’s cause, than by an endeavour to set his judges at
loggerheads. If so, he would himself pronounce it wrong. What a sensitive
conscience the apostle must have had!

IV. A sweet consolation—1. Jts opportune arrival. The night following
that exciting scene in the council, which again had ensued on a day of equal
agitation in the temple and on the castle stairs. At a time when the apostle’s
soul and body both were exhausted by the terrible conflict through which he had
passed, and when perhaps through natural reaction he might have been disposed
to subside into deep depression. But man’s extremity is ever God’s opportunity
(compare xxvii. 24). 2. Jts heavenly origin. It came direct from the Lord—
2.¢., the risen and exalted Christ, who instead of sending consolation to His
wearied servant’ by a messenger, either human (2 Kings iv. 42), or angelic
(1 Kings xix. 5), came Himself, stood by that servant, discovering His presence
and speaking to that servant with His own lips. This circumstance showed
both the importance of the occasion and the need of Paul. 3. Jts cheering
burden. It was practically an assurance that neither would his life be taken
nor his career ended by this outrageous assault upon his person. The purpose he
had formed would be fulfilled. As he had testified for his Master in Jerusalem,
he would live to do the like in Rome (see ‘‘ Hints” on ver. 11).

Learn—1. That a good conscience is a strong support in time of trouble.
2. That good consciences are not always fully enlightened. 3. That mistakes,
when discovered, should be frankly acknowledged. 4. That good men should
study not to let their good be evil spoken of. 5. That wicked men who hate
each other often combine against the good. 6. That materialism is an old
heresy. 7. That a good man may defend himself by all honest means.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. A Good Conscience.

I. From what it proceeds.—1. True
faith in Christ, which obtains the for-
giveness of sins. 2. The assurance of
Divine grace and eternal life. 3. The
renewal of the Holy Ghost to a new
life and conduct. 4. The faithful per-
formance of our calling.

II. To what it contributes—1. The
possession of inward peace before God.
2. The establishment of the heart in
the hour of danger. 3. The strengthen-
ing of the soul for the performance of
duty.

Note.—Those who attribute to
Christianity a gloomy condemnation
of, and a certain injustice towards, the
natural man, and that which is good
in him, or even those real devotees
who, going beyond the truth, think
badly of and inveigh against themselves
snd their former life, may learn here


~


from Paul’s example that a regenerate
man may rejoice before God and man
even in his former relatively good con-
science when in a position of error and
sin, if his present conscience in Christ
bears him witness that he has not
belonged to the class of gross
hypocrites. —Stzer.


Ver. 225 -The
Acts.

J. Ananias of Jerusalem, the in-
sincere disciple (v. 1) ; or, the detection
and doom of false professors. <A
warning to Church members.

II. Ananias of Damascus, the true
disciple (ix. 10, xxi: 12); or, the
ministry and reward of a humble
Christian. An encouragement to
Christian workers.

III. Ananias also of Jerusalem,
the Sadducean high priest; or, the


483


Three Ananiases im


CHAP. XXIII.





criminality and judgment of those who,
acting as God’s vicegerents, neverthe-
less misrepresent Him. An admonition
to Christian ministers.


Ananias and Paul. A parallel and
a contrast.

I. Resemblances. — Both were—
1. Men. Probably both were (certainly
one was) possessed of intellect and
education. 2. Jews. Members of the
Hebrew nation and of the covenanted
people. 3. Representatives. The one
of Jehovah, whose priest he was; the
other of Jesus, whose apostle he
claimed to be.

II. Differences.—In their—1. Offices.
The one a high priest, the other an
apostle, as above stated. 2. Characters.
The one a hypocrite, the other sincere.


3. Beliefs. The one a Sadducee, the
other a Pharisee. 4. Positions. The
one judge, the other prisoner. 5. Con-


duct. The one violent, the other
resentful.
III. Lessons.—1.


The differences


between men are commonly more than .


their resemblances. 2. The best men
do not always occupy the highest social
positions in life. 3. The providence
that makes prisoners of moral princes
like Paul, and judges of mean reptiles
like Ananias, though not wrong, is
nevertheless mysterious. 4. Well-nigh
intolerable are—

“‘ The insolence of office, and the spurns


That patient merit of the unworthy takes,”
Shakespeare.


Ver. 3. God’s Judgment on Whited
Walls.

J. A striking characterisation of
hypocritical professors.— Whited walls.
“‘ Holy offices, spiritual titles, priestly
dignities, are nothing else than white
lime, by which the internal impurity
of a carnal heart is covered.”

II. A solemn prediction of Divine
judgment on such professors.—‘ God
shall smite” them! If not by tem-
poral calamities, by eternal punish-
ments. Inthe great day of the Lord the
secrets of all hearts shall be exposed.

III. A significant instance of moral


484


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


fa


retribution What will eventually
happen in the case of hypocritical
professors will also be the fate of other
sinners. Their iniquity will be recom-
pensed. Their wickedness will return
upon their own pate.


Ver. 5. Sins of Ignorance—

J. Are not permissible.—No excuse
for a violation of the law of God to
plead that it was done in ignorance.

II. May be disastrous in their con-
sequences.—To the individual who
commits them, and to those who are
affected by them.

III. Should always be frankly con-
fessed when discovered by him who
has committed them, as was the case
with Paul.

IV. May be forgiven.—As was the
inadvertent mistake of the apostle.


Ver. 6. The Hope (of Israel) and the
Resurrection of the Dead.

I. The hope of Israel involved the
resurrection of the dead.—See Psalm
xvi. 9, xvii. 15, xlix. 15; Isa. xxv. 8)
xxvi. 19; Ezek. xxxvii. 12; Dani
xii. 2; Hosea xiii. 14. ;

Il. The hope of Israel was guaran-
teed by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.—This proved that a resurrec-
tion of the dead was possible, and
would become actual in the case of
the followers of Christ. See iv. 2;
John xi, 25, xiv. 19; Rom. viii. 10;
1 Cor, xv. 23.

III. The hope of Israel and the
resurrection of the dead form the
burden of the gospel message.—
“Christ in you, the hope of glory”
(Col. i. 28).

IV. The hope of Israel and the
resurrection of the dead will reach
their culmination at the last day.—
See John v. 25, 28, vi. 39, 44, 54,
xi. 23, 24; 2 Cor. v. 14; Phil. iii, 91.


Vers. 1-6 with John xviii. 19-24,
Jesus and Paul before the Sanhedrim ;
or, the Master and the disciple before
unrighteous judges.

I. Wherein the Master and the
disciple resembled each other,—1, The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


t


same unmerited disgrace was inflicted
on both. 2. Both maintained their
Divinely bestowed dignity.

II. Wherein the Master was above
the disciple—1l. The holy self-con-
sciousness of Jesus was more than the
good conscience of Paul. 2. The calm
answer of Jesus was more heavenly
than Paul's human vehemence.—Gerok.


Spots in the Sun; or, some things
about Paul’s character that call for
explanation.

I. Magnificent self-conceit, or
spiritual pride.‘ TI have lived in all
good conscience before God until this
day.” Does not this seem a pretty
high claim for even a Paul to advance?
Does it not come tolerably near the
violation of one of his own precepts
(Rom. xii. 3)% Justifies it not Paul’s
statement that he was a Pharisee?
What was it, if not a manifestation of
that self-righteousness so vehemently
condemned in them? Well—l. Paul
could not have meant to assert that he
had lived a sinless or blameless life
(see Rom. iii. 9, 10), either before his
conversion (see 1 Tim. i. 13) or after it
(Phil. iii, 12). 2. Paul was certainly
not conscious at the time that he was
doing wrong in making such an
allegation, as afterwards he was not in
the least degree troubled about it
(xxiv. 20). 3. Paul could only have
signified that he had, throughout his
entire career, endeavoured to follow
the dictates of his conscience, as he
afterwards explained to Timothy
(2 Tim. i. 3). Possibly in so saying
Paul may have been mistaken; but
a mistake cannot be catalogued as
a sin.

II. Unchristian anger, or lack of
meekness.—‘‘ God shall smite thee,
thou whited wall!” Was this like obey-
ing his Master’s words—‘“ Whosoever
smiteth thee on the right cheek, turn
to him the other also” (Matt. v. 39).
And what about his own precepts ?—
“Be ye angry and sin not: let not the
sun go down upon your wrath” (Eph.
iv. 26); “ Dearly beloved, avenge not
yourselves, but give place unto wrath ”


CHAP. XXIII.


(Rom, xii. 19). To these interrogations
it may be answered—1. That anger is
not always sinful, and, if ever there
was an instance in which it was
justifiable, it surely was when Ananias,
God’s vicegerent, commanded Paui to
be unjustly smitten. 2. That even
Christ did not abstain from complaint
when unjustly smitten by Annas
(see John xviii. 23), 3. That as Paul
was acting under the Spirit’s guidance
when he stood before the Sanhedrim
(Luke xii. 12), we cannot doubt that
his language about the high priest
was justified, and was intended by the
Holy Ghost as a Divine judgment,
which, ten years later, was fulfilled. 4.
That as the Lord, when He appeared to


‘Paul that night, did not find fault with


His servant, so neither should we.

III. Deliberate untruth or unworthy
equivocation.—“ I wist not that it was
the high priest.” How could Paul
say so when he knew that he was
standing before the Sanhedrim? In
addition to the last two observations
under the preceding charge, which
apply to this with equal force, the
various explanations offered in the
“ Critical Remarks” and “ Homiletical
Analysis” may be consulted.

IV. Worldly policy, or cunning
craft.—“ I am a Pharisee . . . touching
the hope and resurrection of the dead
Iam called in question.” How, it is
asked, could Paul describe himself as a
Pharisee when he knew that he had
utterly and permanently broken with
them; and how could he, as a good
man, resort to the device and trick of
a vulgar demagogue? Well, it is
noticeable that this is the only point
about Paul’s conduct that did cause
him uneasiness. Yet (1) it was per-
fectly true that he was a Pharisee in
so far as he held with them the doctrine
of a resurrection; and (2) if he did
throw an apple of discord among his
enemies it is not quite clear that this
was sinful.


Ver. 7. Divide and Conquer; or,
Paul's Happy Stroke !—Surely no
defence of Paul for adopting this course


485


CHAP. XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





is required, but all admiration is due
to his skill and presence of mind. Nor
need we hesitate to regard such skill
as the fulfilment of the promise, that
in such an hour the Spirit of wisdom
should suggest words to the accused
which the accuser should not be able to
gainsay. All prospect of a fair trial
was hopeless; he well knew, from fact
and present experience, that personal
odium would bias his judges, and vio-
lence prevail over justice; he, therefore
(Neander) uses, in the cause of truth,
the maxim so often perverted to the
cause of falsehood—Divide et impera.
—Alford.


Ver. 8. The Creed of the Sadducee.

I. A hopeless and melancholy creed.
—1l. No resurrection. Then (1) Christ
is not raised and Christ’s people will
not be raised hereafter. If Christ
still exists, andif Christ’s people do not
cease to be at death, in both cases
existence is apart from the body.
(2) We are yet in our sins, and Christ’s
death has not been an atonement for
the sins of men. (3) The Christian
gospel is a fiction, the Christian’s hope
a delusion, and the Christian himself
of all men most miserable (1 Cor. xv.
13-19). 2. No angel. Then (1) man
is the highest created being in the
universe, which may say much for
man, but does not speak highly for
the universe, considering what man
has in practice shown himself to be.
(2) Scripture, both old and new, which
talks of principalities and powers in
the heavenly places and even represents
them as having at times appeared to
men, must be set down as largely
mythical, a conclusion which may not
disturb rationalising critics, but which
will unqugstionably disconcert sincere
Christians. 3. Vo spirit. Then (1)
man is not a composite being, consisting
of soul and body, but a simple organism,
consisting of body only; and the
materialists of to-day and yesterday
are right. (2) There can be no im-
mortality for man, since nothing
remains after the earthly house of this
tabernacle has been dissolved. (3) It


486


is doubtful if there can be any Holy
Ghost or any God distinct from His
works, in which case the dogma of
pantheism must be accepted as correct,
a result which philosophers might hail
as the highest expression of wisdom,
but which ordinary reasoners would
not be able to distinguish from
atheism.

II. An unproved and unproveable
creed—1. Unproved. No dialectician,
whether scientist or philosopher, has
ever demonstrated that man is the
most exalted being in the universe,
that he consists only of material
particles, and that when he dies he
can never again return to life. Argu-
ments to that effect have been
frequently advanced, but it is doubtful
it they have convinced more than a
few. At the bar of impartial reason
the verdict sounds that the Sadducean
thesis has not been established. 2.
Unproveable. Except on the hypothesis
that there is no personal God, and
before one could convert that hypothesis
into a truth he must have roamed the
universe and demonstrated by personal
examination that no such being as
God anywhere existed—in other words,
must himself be God.

III. A refuted and exploded creed.
—1. By the consciousness of man, which
attests that his “ I” is something totally
distinct from his material body, that
angels are at least conceivable beings,
and that the doctrine of a resurrection
is in perfect accord with the deepest
instincts of his nature. 2. By the
testimony of Scripture, which announces
the fact of a resurrection (1 Cor. xv. 52),
certifies the existence of angels (Luke
xv. 10; Gal. 1. 19) and pre-supposes
the reality of man’s spiritual nature
(Job xxxii. 8; Rom. viii. 10). 3. By
the resurrection of Jesus Christ, which
places the doctrine of a future resur-
rection beyond dispute, and in so doing
guarantees the existence of man’s
spirit as a separate entity from his
body. If it does not certainly prove
that there are angels, it at least shows,
by what occurred in connection with
the rising of Christ, that there a


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


i


intelligences in God’s world superior to
man.

Note.—The inconsistency of the
Sadducees, in denying the existence of
angels and spirits and yet adhering to
the Pentateuch, which contains so
many narratives of angelophanies,
and practising the temple ritual, which
certainly proceeded on the assumption
that for man there was a future life,
has been thus explained: The great
body of the higher priestly class were
mere Sadducees and were carried along
. by one of the great waves of thought
which were then passing over the
ancient world, and were Epicureans
and materialists without knowing it,
just as the Pharisees were, even to the
eye of a writer like Josephus (Life, iii.),
the counterpart of the Stoics.—
Plumpire.


Ver. 11. Pauls Midnight Visitor.—
“ And the night following the Lord
stood by him.” What did this signify ?

I. Christ’s fidelity towards His
servant.—When Christ called the
persecutor Saul to be an apostle, He
did not send him forth alone and
unprotected, but put him under the
same promise as had been given to
the eleven: “Lo! I am with you
alway!” The present appearance of
Christ to Paul in the castle prison
showed that Christ intended to keep
His word.

II. Christ’s sympathy with His
servant.—Even had Christ not ex-
pressed His sympathy in words, His
presence could not have failed to
indicate it. Perhaps also Paul re-
membered the words which Christ
formerly spoke to him upon the way
to Damascus—“ Saul! Saul! why per-
secutest thou Me?” If he did, he
must have felt solaced by the reflection
that as Christ had sympathised with
His persecuted followers when they
were cast into prison by him, Saul, so
now did his Lord sympathise with him,
Paul, in his bodily sufferings and
mental anxieties.

III. Christ's approbation of His
servant.—Remarkable that no word of


included that in His plan also.


CHAP. XXIII.


fault-finding or rebuke falls from the
lips of Christ. Rather, the absence of
any such word signified approbation.
What a comfort to Paul! who always
affirmed it was a small matter for him to
be judged of his fellow-men so long as
he secured a favourable judgment from
his Master (1 Cor. iv. 3). So should
Christians labour to be accepted of
Him (2 Cor. v. 9).

IV. Christ's protection of His
servant,—‘ Thou must bear witness
also at Rome!” Then Paul could not
be left for ever in the hands of his
enemies. Already Paul had conceived
the idea of visiting Rome (xix, 21).
Now he learns that his Master had
Hence-
forward Paul knew that he would lead
a charmed life until his work was
done. So may the Christian reason.

V. Christ's use for His servant.—
Paul was not to be cast off, but
promoted to higher service. ‘Thou
must bear witness for Me at Rome
also.” All Paul’s past experiences had
only been training him for his last
place of ministry—Rome. So Christ
leads His people and educates them
for higher and nobler service. Often
true on earth; certainly true of all
earth’s discipline, which is a preparation
for nobler service in heaven.

Tllustrations. — Saints im Prison.
1, Paul. Not the first time this that
the apostle had been imprisoned, ‘“ In
prisons more abundant ” (2 Cor. xi. 23)
formed one important item in his life-
record. A memorable instance oc-
cured in Philippi (xvi. 23). Nor was
this the first experience Paul had of
being visited during night by Christ in
a season of dejection. On an earlier
occasion in Corinth (xviii. 9) Christ
had appeared to him with words of
cheer. 2. Master Philpot. This emi-
nent martyr under Mary wrote to his
friends that his loathsome and
horrible prison was to him as pleasant
as the walk in the garden of the King’s
Bench, because, though in the judgment
of the world he was in hell, he never-
theless felt in the same the consolation
of heaven. 3. Samuel Rutherford.


487


cHap. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Dating his letters from Christ’s palace
in Aberdeen, within which he was
detained as in a prison, this holy man
thus wrote to a friend: “The Lord is
with me; I care not what man can do.
I burden no man. I want nothing.
No king is better provided than I am:
sweet, sweet and easy is the cross of
my Lord. ... My well beloved is
kinder and more warm than ordinary,
and cometh and visiteth my soul. My
chains are over-gilded with gold. 4.
Madame Guyon. This illustrious lady,
imprisoned in the castle of Vincennes
in 1695, not only sang but wrote songs
of praise to her God. “It sometimes
seemed to me,” she wrote, “as if I
were a little bird whom the Lord had
placed in a cage; and that I had
nothing now to do but sing. The joy
of my heart gave a brightness to the
objects around me. The stones of my
prison looked, in my eyes, like rubies.
I esteemed them more than all the
gaudy brilliancies of a vain world.”


The Midnight Vision in the Castle ;
or the Master speaking words of cheer
to His servant. These words assured
him of three things :—

I. Of a safe issue out of his present
troubles.—So they upheld and com-
forted him in the uncertainty of his
life from the Jews.

II. Of an accomplishment of his
intention of visiting Rome.—So they
upheld and comforted him in his un-
certainty as to liberation from prison
at Ceesarea,

III. Of the certainty that, however
he might be sent thither, he should
preach the gospel and bear testimony
at Rome.—So he was upheld and
comforted in the uncertainty of his
surviving the storm in the Mediter-


ranean, and in that of his fate on
arriving at Rome. So may one crumb
of Divine grace and help be multiplicd


to feed. five thousand wants and
anxieties.—<A /ford.

Comfort for Christ's Suffering
Servants.


I. Christ’s presence with them.—As
Christ appeared to Paul in the castle,
so is He ever beside His faithful
servants in the hour of their tribulation.
“Tf God be for us, who can be against
us?” ‘If He undertake our protection,
we may set those that seek our ruin
at defiance ” (Henry).

II. Christ’s words to them.— Be
of good cheer.” Christ desires His
people to be happy under all circum-
stances. Because (1) He is ever with
them. ‘God is near thee; therefore
cheer thee, sad soul!” (2) All things
work together for good to them that
love Him. ‘Who, then, is he that
will harm you, if ye be followers of
that which is good ?”

ITI. Christ's plans for them.—1. That
they should serve as His witnesses,
wherever they might be. 2. That —
their lives should not terminate till
their work was finished. 3. That their
own purposes for Him, if for His glory,
should be fulfilled.


Vers. 1-11. The Best Advocates of a
Servant of God before the Judgment.
Seat of an Unrighteous World.

I. The comfort of a good conscience
in his breast.

II. The curse of an evil thing in
the ranks of the enemy.

III. The sympathy of the honest
and unprejudiced in the world.

IV. The gracious testimony of a
righteous judge in heaven.—Gerok.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 12—22.
The Conspiracy of the (more than) Forty ; or, Pauls Life Endangered.


I. The plotters.—1. Their persons.


Jews ; not members of the council, but


zealots among the outside crowd who had been disappointed at the seeming


failure of proceedings against Paul.


2. Their nwmber.


Over forty. Nothing


symbolic in the number, which might have been any other. The conspirators
having been so many were a formidable band as to strength, but a weak conclave


488


e HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omap. xx.





as to secrecy. When two have possession of a secret it becomes liable to escape
into publicity ; how much more when it is shared in by nearly half a hundred ?
3. Their aim. To kill Paul—which probably they considered could not be
compassed in any other way than by secret assassination, since the Sanhedrim had
lost the power of inflicting capital punishment, and to all appearance Rome
had thrown her shield over the apostle’s person. 4. Their outh. . Not to eat or
drink anything until they had accomplished their purpose. To this course they
had bound themselves by a solemn imprecation before God. A rash experiment
it might have turned out for them had not a loophole been provided for escaping
from their vow, in case it should prove unsuccessful or impossible to be fulfilled.
But, according to the Talmud, one who had taken on himself a rash vow might
be released from it on application to the wise men of the time. ‘ He that hath
a vow not to eat,” said the Jewish doctors, “woe to him if he eat, and woe to
him if he eat not; if he eat he sinneth against his vow; if he eat not, he
sinneth against his life. What must one do in such a case? Let him approach
the wise ones, and they will release him from his vow, as it is written, ‘The
tongue of the wise is health’ (Prov. xii. 18).” (From the Talmud ; quoted by
Lightfoot, Horee Hebraice et Talmudice). .

Il. The plot.—l. Jts disclosure to the chief priests and the elders. These were
manifestly the Sadducean members of the Sanhedrim, who were hostile to Paul.
The plan discovered to these, was (1) cleverly contrived by the would-be assassins.
It possessed at least one mark of sagacity—it was simple and not difficult to
understand. The chief priests and elders should call a second meeting -of the
council, propose to amicably forget their yesterday’s bickerings, lay aside their
mutual jealousies and recriminations, unite against their common foe and request
the military tribune to fetch down his prisoner a second time into their council
chamber, when they would promise with due care and becoming seriousness
to make an accurate investigation into the charges which had been preferred
against him. If they did this, the military tribune would hardly refuse their
request ; and then they, the confederates, the “ Invincibles ” of Jerusalem, would
be in readiness, as the apostle was being conducted back to their chamber, most
likely under a small escort, to fall upon him by the way and despatch him with
their knives. It appears to have been told out, as well as contrived, in cold
blood. The conspirators seemingly were not troubled with qualms of conscience,
or secret fears, but talked about their infernal project like a matter of common
business, The plan, moreover, appears to have been (2) complacently listened to
by those “ holy scoundrels” into whose ears it was poured. Not one of all these
venerable priests and elders expressed themselves as shocked at the proposal.
Had they but “shook their heads” and ‘made a pause” when those villains
told their tale, or “ turned an eye of doubt” upon their faces, “deep shame had
struck” them “dumb,” wrought in them fears, and caused them to break off their
purposed deed of blood. But no! the dark communication whispered into their
ears made secret joy within their guilty bosoms. When, having assented to the
project, they laid it before the full council, it was (3) silently accepted by
all, probably also by the Pharisees, who may have felt that they had gone
too far in throwing their shield over a prisoner so hateful as Paul. ‘“ The
miserable rulers, who scruple neither to smile’nor slay contrary to the law,
accept this bold proposal just as willingly as they embraced Judas’s offer
against Jesus” (Stier). 2. Its detection by Pauls nephew. How he came
- to be in Jerusalem, and how he obtained a knowledge of the conspiracy against
his uncle, are points that have not been reported by Luke. But he may have
lived in Jerusalem with his mother, Paul’s sister, or been a student at
some Rabbinical school in the city, as Paul himself had formerly been, or
arrived in the Metropolis from Rome as a feast pilgrim; while it is scarcely


489


cnap. xxi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


necessary to inquire how a secret got out which was first shared in by forty un-
principled ruffians like the conspirators, and then told to a circle of bloodthirsty
hypocrites like the Sanhedrists (see “‘Oritical Remarks”). Anyhow, the diabolical
project having come to his ears, he carried it to his uncle (to whom he appears
to have found easy access), who, calling to him one of the centurions, requested
that the youth might be conducted to the chief captain, for whom he had
a communication of importance. This done, the chief captain having taken him
aside, listened to the story—which possibly did not startle him, knowing, as he
must have done, the characters of both the Sanhedrists and of the lawless
zealots, with which the city at the time was full, but which he cautioned the
young man to keep to himself, along with the fact that he had discovered it to
him, the chief captain. 3. Jts defeat by the chief captain. With a promptitude
which showed he regarded the young man’s story as anteccdently probable, and
intrinsically credible, and the situation as highly critical both for his prisoner,
who might lose his life, and for himself who might be punished for neglect
of duty in allowing a prisoner under his charge to be assassinated, he issued
instant orders for the preparation of an escort of two hundred heavy armed
soldiers, with seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen (see “ Critical
Remarks ”), to start at the third hour of the night—7.e., about 9 p.m., to convey
Paul to Cesarea, which order was executed and by which Paul was rescued.
Learn—l. The depths of Satan which exist in the hearts of men—not
always excepting those who profess to be religious (Rev. ii. 24). 2. The ease
with which God can bring secret things to light, and disappoint the devices of
the crafty. 3. The safety of those whom Christ shields. 4. The duty of those
whom God has promised to protect not to neglect the use of ordinary means. 5.
The great service—to God, Christ and men—which may be rendered by a youth.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 11, 12. The Two Covenants to hear of the plot. 2. The chief


against Paul and For Him.

I. The murderous covenant of Paul’s
enemies.—Powerful. 1. By their num-
ber—forty against one. 2. By their
design—sworn to kill him. 3. By
their craft and dissimulation.

II. The gracious covenant of Paul’s
Lord.—More powerful. 1. He dis-
closes the designs of the conspirators.
2. Against powerful enemies He stirs
up yet more powerful protectors. 3.
He brings Paul uninjured out of the
den of murderers.—Gerok.


Vers. 12-23. The Foes and the Friends
of Paul.

I. The foes stirred up by Satan.—
1. The forty, and more, conspirators
sworn to kill Paul. 2. The chief
priests and elders aiders and abetters
of their murderous scheme. 3. The
high priest and the Sanhedrim who
gave it their co-operation.

II. The friends raised up by God.


—l. Paul’s sister's son, who happened
490


captain, who took measures for Paul’s
transportation to Caesarea. 3. The
soldiers—footmen, horsemen, and spear-
men—who escorted him on the way.


The Hand of Providence, as seen in
the circumstances that led to the de-
feat of the conspiracy and the rescue
of Paul.

I, The number of the conspirators.
—This made its secrecy practically
impossible.

II. The discovery of the plot al-
most immediately after it was made.—
This gave time for counterplans.

III. The presence in Jerusalem of
Paul’s sister's sonHad he not got
to hear of the conspiracy, access might
not ‘have been so easily found to the
apostle’s presence.

IV. The kindness of the chief
captain.—Otherwise he might either
not have listened to or not believed in
the young man’s story.


V. The credence given to the tale.—


7 HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXITI.


—_— oo


This led the military tribune to take in-
stant measures for the apostle’s safety,
probably before the Sanhedrim had ap-
proached him with a request for the
re-hearing of Paul’s case.

VI. The strength of the escort —
This rendered it certain that no sur-
prise attack upon the road would
succeed in doing hurt to the apostle.


How the Lord Laughed at Paul's
Enemies.—By delivering Paul—

I. From the heart of a powerful,
determined, and promising conspiracy.

II. At the moment when his des-
truction seemed imminent and inevit-
able.

III. By means of a boy, whose
promptitude of action did more for
Paul than all the plotting of the
zealots and Sanhedrists did against
him.

IV. With the aid of the instrument
they hoped to employ for his destruc-
tion—-viz., the chief captain.


Vers. 12-24. A Defeated Plot.

I. The formation of the plot.—The
depths of Satan. 1. The conspirators.
(1) The Jews, or the Jewish party, in
particular forty of them, hot-headed
zealots, “ the Orangemen of Judaism.”
(2) The chief priests and the elders,
the leaders of the party who were sup-
posed to have influence with the San-
hedrim. (3) The council, or Sanhedrim,
who, without question, acquiesced in
the diabolical project. 2. The con-
spiracy. (1) Its object: to kill Paul.
So ten zealots conspired to assassinate
Herod the Great because he had built
a theatre and held gladiatorial shows
in the Holy City. (2) Its motive.
Partly chagrin at being defeated in the
council on the previous day, but chiefly
hatred of Paul as an apostate. So
_ Matthias slew a Jew who had offered

sacrifice at Modin (See “Critical Re-
marks”). (3) Its bond. An oath
neither to eat nor drink until their
project should be realised. (4) Its
plan. To persuade the captain to
fetch down Paul to the council, so that
he might be stabbed on the road.


II. The discovery of the plot—The
folly of sin. Clever people frequently
outwit themselves. 1. The conspirators
were too many. Moral: when you
want a secret to be kept, tell it to no
one. 2. The plan was too good. The
conspirators were so captivated with
the ingenuity of their scheme that they
could not refrain from talking about it.
3. The result was too sure. So certain
were the plotters of success that they
omitted the most ordinary precautions
for safety. They paid no attention to
who was listening while they were
talking ; and so it came to pass that
Paul’s nephew came to hear of it.

Ill. The defeat of the plot—the
counsel of the Most High.—1. The
young man conveyed the information to
is uncle. A proper and courageous
thing to do. Indicated presence of
mind and promptitude of action.
2. Paul requested a centurion to take the
lad to the captain. A mark of the in-
fluence which Paul had acquired, even
over his keepers. Superiority of
character will shine forth, even in a
prison. 3. The captain heard the story,
and charged the lad to hold his tongue.
Remark upon the captain’s courtesy
and prudence. Even heathens may
exhibit some virtues. 4. Lysias ar-
ranges for Paul's transmission to
Cesarea. Thus defeating the devices
of the apostle’s foes,


Ver. 18. Paul the Prisoner.

I. In the mouth of the centurion
a colourless designation of condition.

II. In the lips of his enemies an
angry speech of degradation.

III. In the language of Paul a
boasted title of honour.—Eph. iii. 1,
ive Pile od Tit aaSe4 Paul
the prisoner; but therein happier than
any po'entate with all his chains of
gold. Said Ignatius, ‘My chain is my
honour, my links pearls.” One hour
changed Joseph’s fetters into gold
chains, his stocks into a chariot, his
gaol into a palace, Potiphar’s captive
into his master’s lord, the noise of his
gyves into abrech. So, and much more
than so, will it be with all Christ’s


£91


CHAP. XXIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








prisoners at His coming. . . . This
made Chrysostom say that he had
rather be Paul, the prisoner of Jesus
Christ, than Paul rapt up into the
third heaven” (Trapp).


This Young Man; or, What a Youth
may Be and Do.—Discovered in the
characteristics and conduct of Paul’s
sister’s son.

I. Characteristics—Five noble
qualities in any, but specially in a
youth. 1. Intelligence. Paul’s nephew
walked not through the world or the
city of Jerusalem sleeping or dreaming,
but kept his eyes and ears open, and
picked up the plot which had been
formed against his uncle. 2. Affection.
On what footing religiously he stood
with his uncle cannot be told. Perhaps,
like his uncle, he was a Christian dis-
ciple, though just as likely he was not.
Yet in the sudden peril which con-
fronted his mother’s brother, he forgot
not his blood relationship, and felt
imperilled to make a bold stroke for
his rescue. 3. Promptitude. Much
depended on the swiftness of his action.
Had he delayed in making known his
discovery, his uncle’s life might have
been lost. But the instant he became
acquainted with the gruesome plot
he took measures for its frustration.
4, Courage. Had he been timid he
would have shrunk from the difficulties
that opposed his forward movement.
But animated by a holy affection he
brought to the execution of his purpose
a lofty and undaunted fortitude. First,
he found or forced his way into ‘the
castle to see his uncle, and next he
boldly proceeded to the governor’s pre-
sence; and finally he told out his story,
seemingly without pausing to inquire,
whether it would be believed. 5. Dis-
cretion. Counselled to keep his secret
to himself and to reveal to no one the
communication he had made to the
governor, he did so, and thus both


escaped the danger to which his own
life would have been exposed, had it
got abroad that he had foiled the plans


of the conspirators, and enabled the


governor to carry out his scheme for
the safety of Paul.

II. Conduct.—1l. He frustrated a
wicked plot. Rendered futile and vain
the murderous designs which had been
formed against Paul. By being shrewd


and wide-awake, prompt and decisive, |
loving and considerate, courageous and —


fearless, prudent and cautious, he de-
feated forty villains who had plotted
together, and bound themselves under
a curse, to commit a dark deed of blood,
and delivered the Sanhedrim from
being partakers of the awful crime.
2. He saved a noble life. The noblest


life that that day existed in Jerusalem; —


the life of the greatest man that had
arisen within the Christian Church ;
the life of one who under God had
proved himself one of the grandest
benefactors of his nation and of the
world. 3. He furthered a Divine
purpose. How little men know when
they serve as instruments in God’s


hands. It was in the Divine purpose ©


and plan that Paul should preach at


‘ Rome, and consequently that he should


escape from this peril. Yet neither of
these facts were known to the youth,
who simply carried out his own
thoughts, and in so doing advanced
the Divine design. 4. He secwred for
the Church and the world a rich legacy
of religious literature. Had Paul’s lite
been taken as the result of that con-
spiracy, both the Church and the
world would have been poorer to-day
by the lack of those immortal letters
which were written from Casarea and
from Rome.
Learn—1. That young men may be
used by God for the loftiest purposes ;
and 2. That in order to be so used
they should cultivate for themselves the
noblest qualities of mind and heart.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23—35.
The Midnight Ride to Cesarea ; or, Paul's Safety Ensured.


I. The departure from Jerusalem.—-1. The time.


“The third hour of the


night ;” i.¢., about nine o’clock in the evening. The military tribune obviously


492


is HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuwapr. xxi.





lost no time. Neither had God. The conspiracy had been hatched in the early
hours of the morning. In the course of the forenoon it might be laid before the
council. In the afternoon it was public talk in the inns. In the evening by
nine o'clock, it was defeated. Well says Russell Lowell in his “ Biglow Papers ” :


“ And you’ve got to get up early
If you want to take in God.”


2. The escort. Two hundred footmen, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spear-
men. A large guard for the protection of one man. From this may be inferred
the military tribune’s sense of the danger arising from the reckless daring of the
Sicarii which infested the country. Besides, the Roman’ citizenship of Paul
rendered it necessary that no risk should be run of harm coming to him while in
the tribune’s care. ‘Or, perhaps, finding Paul to be a very extraordinary man,
the chief captain was proud to have him his prisorer and under his protection ;
and the mighty parade with which he sent him off intimates as much ” (Henry).
3. The destination. The soldiers were simply told they were to go to Cxsarea.
Even the centurion was not informed at first of the reason of this midnight
march. His instructions ran to provide beasts of burden, either horses or mules—
to carry packages he might infer, but, as Luke indicates, to set Paul on one of
them, and so convey him safe to Felix. 4. The accompanying letter. (1) Its
writer. Claudius Lysias, concerning whom nothing is known beyond what is
here recorded. (2) Its recipient. Felix (Antoninus), at that time Roman
Procurator of Judzea, to which office he had been appointed a.p. 53. A freedman
of the emperor Claudius, and brother of Pallas the favourite of Nero, he “ ex-
ercised his power as a prince with the spirit of a slave” (Tacitus, Hist., v. 9),
while Josephus (Ant., XX. viii. 5) relates that under this rule “the affairs
et the Jews grew worse and worse continnally.” Suetonius affirms that he
was the husband of three queens: (a) Drusilla, the daughter of Juba, king
of Mauritania and Selene, the daughter of Antony and Cleopatra; (b) another
Drusilla, the daughter of Herod Agrippa I., sister of Herod Agrippa II., and
wife of Azizus, King of Emesa, whom she left to marry Felix; and (c) a royal
lady, whose name is unknown. This immoral governor ruled over Judea for
seven or eight years, was recalled by Nero in the year a.p. 60 or 61, and
accused by the Cesarean Jews, but acquitted on the intercession of his brother
Pallas (Jos, Ant. XX., viii. 9). He was succeeded by Festus. Tradition
reports that along with Drusilla and their son he perished in an eruption of
Mount Vesuvius, in the days of Titus Cesar. (3) Its contents. After a courteous
salutation (ver. 26), it explained how Paul had come into his hands (ver. 27),
and why Paul was now forwarded to him (ver. 30). The apostle had been
rescued by him (Lysias) when in danger of being slain in the temple (ver. 27),
because he (Lysias) had come to know that he (Paul) was a Roman—an in-
correct statement, which Lysias makes to represent his own conduct in the most
favourable light, and which indirectly confirms the genuineness of the letter
(Meyer). The apostle had been examined before the council of his countrymen,
with the result that nothing had been found against him worthy of death or of
bonds, but only certain charges about questions of their law had been advanced
to his discredit (vers. 28, 29). The apostle’s life had become imperilled in conse-
quence of a conspiracy against him, which had come to his, the tribune’s ears,
and which was the reason why Paul had been forwarded to Czsarea, that if his
accusers had aught to urge against him they might do so before a regular
’ tribunal. ;

II, The arrival at Cesarea.—1l. The halt at Antipatris. This town, built by
Herod the Gieat, on a site called Kaphar-saba (Jos., Ant., XIII. xv. 1; XVI.
y. 2)—the modern Kefr Saba—and named Antipatris in honour of his father
_ was forty miles from Jerusalem, on the direct road to Caesarea, and might easily


1-93


cHaP. xxii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.











be reached, by a forced march of four miles an hour, by seven or nine o'clock
a.m. Here the cavalcade halted for the day, and on the morrow—+.¢., the day
after arriving at Antipatris—the horsemen and spearmen proceeded on their
journey to complete the twenty-six miles that remained between Antipatris and
Cesarea, the soldiers returning to Jerusalem, as the most dangerous part of the
road was then passed. 2. The presentation of the letter and the prisoner to Fein.
This was done on reaching Caesarea. Felix, on perusing the document, put only
one question, inquiring to what province the prisoner belonged. “ Felix was not
the principal Roman official in that part of the empire. The proconsul of Syria
bore supreme authority over Judea, Felix was proconsul, or deputy, of Judea
under that great official. . . . Felix deemed it expedient to inquire respecting the
nationality of the prisoner, as it might have been desirable to have him sent at
once to the seat of the government of some other procurator or proconsul”
(Spence). Compare Pilate’s action in sending Christ, a Galilean, to be judged by
Herod (Luke xxiii. 6, 7). 3. The decision of Felix concerning Paul. Having
learnt that Paul belonged to Cilicia, Felix determined to investigate his cause
himself. ‘‘The political motives which induced him to retain a Cilician in
Judea are to us now unknown” (Spence). When Paul’s accusers should arrive
the trial would be opened. Meanwhile the apostle was commanded to be kept
in Herod’s judgment-hall, pretorium, or palace—originally a mansion, erected
by Herod for his accommodation, but then used as an official residence by the
Roman governor. Most likely a part of this edifice was set apart for the lodging
of state prisoners, and in any case it is apparent that in Caesarea Paul was not
treated like a common criminal, but allowed a large amount of liberty, his friends
being permitted to visit him (xxiv. 23), during the two years of his.confinement
in that city.

Learn. —1. The respect which Christians, when sincere, exact, even from men
of the world. This shown by the numerous guard provided to escort Paul.
2. The disrespect to truth which is often exhibited by men of the world. This -
instanced by Lysias’ inaccuracy in his letter. 3. The possibility of finding virtue
in the hearts of those who have not been renewed by Divine grace. As in Lysias.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 25-30. Lysias’ Letter to Felix.
“This epistle, which is a good specimen
of the Roman method of writing
letters, may be considered as a model
of brevity, simplicity, and perspicuity.
The customary title of respect to a
superior, and expression of good-will,
are once only made use of ; and in this
it differs exceedingly from modern
epistles to persons of high rank and
authority, which are generally en-
cumbered with multiplied compliments
and ascriptions of honour.  Lysias,
however, was careful not to intimate
to Felix that he had bound Paul, in
order to scourge him ; and as we sup-
pose this to have been an exact copy
of the letter, it appears he was willing
Felix should conclude that his inter-
position in Paul’s favour arose from a


494


previous knowledge that he was a
Roman citizen, though it is evident
this was not the case. In other
respects, the account was fair and
candid ; and we cannot wonder that a
heathen should state his conduct in
that light which was most favourable
to his own reputation and advance-
ment, and not likely to injure any
man” (Scott). “This letter shows us
that Claudius Lysias has granted pro-
tection to the Roman citizen without
being attracted by the witness of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The respect of a
Roman, which he demands of the Jews,
he wilfully emphasises, by so repre-
senting the matter as if he had rescued
Paul from the Jews, after having
learnt of his Roman _ citizenship.
Through this crafty report he expected


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXIII.





to receive from his excellency Felix the
governor the more praise, while we
see that Lysias was a man of not more
than heathen virtue. The more
powerfully also through this showed
the hand of the Lord, which can
deliver from the wisdom of the mighty
and can make all things, even the
ambition of a heathen officer, work for
the good of poor Christians ” (Besser).


Ver. 31. The Apostle’s Ride to Anti-
patris—A modern counterpart of this
has been found in Luther’s conveyance
to Wartburg by his friends after the
Diet of Worms. ‘He was enjoined
not to preach on his way home.
Declaring, however, that the word of
God was free, he preached, despite
the injunction, at Hirschfeld and
Eisenach. As he was making a little
détour from the latter place, in order
to visit some of his relatives and
friends at Mohra, near Salzungen, he
was suddenly fallen upon, in the neigh-
bourhood of Altenstein and Walters-
hausen, by a company of horsemen,
lifted out of the waggon, and whilst
his companions, Nicholas Amsdorf and
James Luther, were suffered quietly
to go on their way, he was set upon a
horse, driven about for some hours in
the forest, and finally, at eleven o’clock
at night, brought to the castle of
Wartburg, near Hisenach, which had
formerly been the seat of the old land-
graves of Thuringia. It soon became
evident that this sudden capture,
which, in all probability, was ordered
by the elector, was intended to secure
the well-being and personal safety of
the Reformer” (Hagenbach’s History
of the Reformation, i. 138, 139).


Paul’s Midnight Escapes.

I. From Damascus.—By being let
down over the city wall in a basket
(ix. 25).

Il. From Thessalonica.—After the
uproar in that city, by being sent away
to Bercea (xvii. 10).

III. From Jerusalem.—To Antipa-
tris and Cesarea.


Pauls Last Departure from Jeru-
salem. :

I. A mournful departure of a wit-
ness for the truth, whose message of
salvation his blinded people have re-
jected.

II. The glorious, triumphant march
of an anointed servant of God, whom
the Lord leads victoriously through the
midst of enemies.

III. The solemn homeward journey
of a warrior of Christ, who goes to
meet his last fight, his last victory, his
last reward.—Gerok.


Vers. 33-35.
with Feli«.

I. Presented to the governor.—The
representative of the Lord of the
whole earth to the plenipotentiary of
Cesar, the minister of heaven to the
servant of Rome, the noblest man that
ever stood in Herod’s palace to one of
the worst that ever found in it a
home.

II. Questioned by the governor.—
As to what province he was of. Per-
haps out of mere curiosity, more likely
because he wished if possible to shirk
an unpleasant duty by handing him
over to some other official, The least
important question Felix could have
asked. °

III. Accepted with the governor —
So far, at least, as not to be condemned
by him without a hearing. Even
Felix accorded him what his country-
men so often denied him—permission
to defend himself. He should not be
pronounced a criminal without a fair
trial. Sometimes heathens may teach
their more enlightened fellows lessons
in morality and goodness.

IV. Lodged beside the governor.—
Kept in Herod’s palace. “ Another
trace of the faithful care of God for
His servant, as He granted him time
and rest to pray and strengthen him-
self in the Lord ;” but also an unccn-
scious tribute of respect and honour
paid by Felix to the illustrious prisoner
who stood before him.


Paul's First Interview


495


CHAP. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





CHAPTER XXIV.


PAvuL BEFORE Fevix—Tue First TriaAL aT CSAREA.


§ 1. The Indictment of Tertullus; or, the Vapid Eloquence of a Heathen
Lawyer (vers. 1-9). A
§ 2. The Answer of Paul; or, the Lofty Oration of a Christian Apostle


(vers. 10-23).
§ 3. The Interview with Felix and Drusilla; or, a Notable Discourse and its


Effects (vers. 24-27).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


i)

Ver. 1. After five days.—Reckoned from Paul’s departure from Jerusalem (Kuinoel, Meyer,
De Wette, Hackett, Alford, Plumptre), though some (Holtzmann, Lechler, Zockler, Olshausen,
and others) prefer to count from Paul’s arrival at Caesarea, The former agrees better with
the statement that twelve days had elapsed since his arrival in Jerusalem (ver. 11). The
elders.—-J.¢., the Sanhedrists, who were probably represented by certain of their number,
The oldest authorities read “some of the elders” which, however, has the appearance of
being a correction (Hackett, Alford, Lechler). A certain orator, rhetorician, or advocate,
acquainted with the forms of Roman law, which were not understood by the people of the
provinces, who therefore had to employ such barristers or rhetoricians (=oratores forenses
or causidici publici) to plead for them before Roman tribunals. Tertullus.—A diminutive
from Tertius. Probably a Roman. Had the trial been conducted in Latin, which cannot be
proved, Luke would most likely have noted it (compare xxii. 2). Who.—J.e., not Tertullus,
but Ananias and the elders through him. Informed the governor against Paul.—JZ.e., lodged
their complaint against him.

Ver. 2. Called forth.—Or, simply called. After the charges against him had been lodged, and
before the evidence was produced. Roman law secured that no prisoner should be condemned
without hearing and having an opportunity to answer the indictment preferred against him
(see xxv. 16). Tertullus’s indictment, which consisted of three charges—sedition, heresy, and
sacrilege, or profanation of the temple (see vers. 5, 6)—was prefaced by the most undisguised
flattery, in the hope of inducing Felix to condemn Paul. Great quietness, or much peace.—
“The administration of Felix did not present much opening for panegyric, but he had at least
taken strong measures to put down the gangs of Sicarii and brigands by whom Palestine
was infested (Jos., Ant., XX. viii. 5; Wars, Il. xiii. 2), and Tertullus shows his skill in the
emphasis which he lays on “quietness.” By a somewhat interesting coincidence, Tacitus
(Ann., xii. 54), after narrating the circumstances caused by a quarrel between Felix, backed
by the Samaritans, and Ventidius Cumanus, who had been appointed as governor of
Galilee, ends his statement by relating that Felix was supported by Quadratus, the president
of Syria “et quies provincie reddita” (Plumptre). For very worthy deeds, carop0wudrwy—
i.e., things successfully achieved, the best MSS, read d.opAwudrwv, improvements, emendations,
betterments—i.e., corrections of evil (R.V.). How much truth there was in this the state-
ment of Josephus (Ant., XX. viii. 9) shows, that after his removal from office “the principal
of the Jewish inhabitants of Caesarea went up to Rome to accuse Felix,” and that “he had
certainly been brought to punishment unless Nero had yielded to the importunate solicitation
, of his brother Pallas, who was at that time had in the greatest honour by him.” By thy
providence.—‘ Tua providentiad, providentia Cesaris, is a common inscription on the coins
of the emperors” (Spence).

Ver. 3. Always and in all places are better connected with “accept” (Hackett, Zéckler)
than with “done” (Holtzmann, Wendt, Besser), Most noble Felix, cpdrucre HAE: compare
Kpariore Ocdgure (Luke i. 8),

Awe 4. A few words refer not to the flattering preamble (Meyer), but to the subsequent
plea.

Ver. 5. A pestilent fellow.—Better, a pest, or plague; used as in English. The world
meant the Roman empire. The sect of the Nazarenes.—A contemptuous expression, for the
first time transferred from the Master to the disciples (compare ii, 22, vi. 14; John i. 46).
The name is still applied to Christians by Jews and Mohammedans. During the Indian
Mutiny of 1855 the Mohammedan rebels, it is said (Smith’s Dictionary of the Bible: art.
Nazarene), relied on a supposed ancient prophecy that the Nazarenes would be expelled
from the country after ruling for a hundred years.


496


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. xxiv.
-





Ver. 6. Who also hath gone about or assayed to profane the temp?e.—-Shows that the
original charge had been modified (see xxi. 28). Whom we took or laid hold of.—Through
the change of construction at “ whom” the preceding participial clause (ver. 5) becomes an
anakolouthon. The remaining words of this verse, with verse 7 and first part of verse 8, are
omitted in the most approved texts. It is difficult to perceive why they should either have
been inserted or left out. If genuine they show that Tertullus, instructed by the Sanhedrim,
who were exceeding bitter against Lysias, wished to turn the tables against him by suggesting
that had it not been for his interference the whole matter would have been disposed of without
troubling the governor. Would have judged according to our law.—Does not square well
with the facts as related in xxi. 31, xxvi. 21.

Ver. 7. Represents Lysias as having rescued Paul with great violence, which also scarcely
comports with truth (xxi. 32).

Ver. 8. Whom.—Has for antecedent Paul, if the intermediate clauses be rejected; but
either the accusers (as the A.V. suggests), or more probably Lysias (as the Greek text
indicates), if the clauses be retained.

Ver. 9, A better reading than assented, cuvé0evro, is assailed him at the same time, or
joined in assailing him, cvver0evr0, by asserting that the charges were true.

Ver. 10. Many ysars meant about six or seven, since Felix became procurator about A.D.
52 or 53 (Jos., Ant., XX, vii.1). Before his elevation to the procuratorship of Judea hé had
governed Samaria under his predecessor Cumanus.

Ver. 11. The charges against him might be the more easily and accurately investigated
since they were not of long standing, but of recent date. The twelve days were thus
accounted for: 1. The day of arrival in Jerusalem (xxi. 17), 2. The interview with James
(xxi. 18). 3. The assumption of the vow (xxi. 26). 4, 5, 6, 7. The keeping of the vow, which
was interrupted before its completion.. 8. The appearance of Paul before the Sanhedrim.
9. The plot of the Jews and the journey to Antipatris (xxiii. 12, 31). 10,11, 12,13. The
days at Czsarea, on the last of which the trial was proceeding. The day of the trial
would not be counted among the twelve (Hackett, Meyer, and others),

Ver, 12. Raising up the people.—Lit., making or causing a concourse of the peaple,
émriavoracts 8xyAov; though the more approved text reads émicracls 8xdov, a stopping of the
people, of course so as to form a crowd.

Ver. 13. Some texts insert to thee after prove.

Ver. 14. For heresy translate sect as in ver. 5, and for worship, serve. In, according to
(&.V.), but better “ throughout” (Hackett, Holtzmann), the law—i.e., of Moses.

Ver. 15. Which they themselves.—J.e., his accusers, who appear to have been mostly
Pharisees, so that the breach between them and the Sadducees (xxiii. 7) must have been
made up. Allow, rather, look for, expect, or entertain.

Ver. 16. Herein.— Zn this, as in John xvi. 30. Meaning either “in anticipation of such
a day ” (Hackett), or “since such is my religious position” (Holtzmann), or “in this belief ”
(Plumptre).

Ver. 17. After many years.—Viz., of absence from Jerusalem. It was now A.D. 58 or 59.
My nation really signified the believers in its midst. Alms.—Not Paul’s usual way of
referring to the collections he had taken for the poor saints at Jerusalem (see Rom. xv. 25;
1 Cor. xvi. 1-4; 2 Cor. viii. and ix); but the auditors to whom he spoke were widely different
from the readers for whom he wrote. To bring alms and offerings.—The first mention in
the Acts by Paul that he had been taking up contributions from the Gentile Churches for
the relief of the poor Christians in Jerusalem.

Ver. 18, Whereupon.—Lit., ‘in which ”—i.e., while presenting which offerings, some MSS.
giving év als (to agree with “ offerings ”) instead of év ofs. The translation in the R.V. is more
accurate. ‘“ They ”—i.e., the Jews of course, “found me ... ; but there were certain Jews
from Asia.” The abrupt manner in which this sentence breaks off was unquestionably
designed to suggest that these Jews from Asia, and not he had been the true authors of
the tumult.

Ver. 19. ‘These also should have been present in court to object or (better) to make
accusation, as they, the instigators of the riot, were the persons to testify how it arose”
(Hackett). { :

Ver. 20. In default of them these same here, or, these men themselves—i.e., the high priest
and the elders should say, not if they have found any evil doing, since ei “if” is unauthorised,
but what wrong-doing they found in me.

Ver. 21, Except it be for this one voice.—The sentence is framed as if 7! &)Xo addixnua had
preceded (Meyer, De Wette, Holtzmann).

Ver. 22. Having more perfect, or ewact knowledge of that, rather “ the” way.—This Felix
could easily have got during the six or seven years of his procuratorship. Such knowledge
as he had of Christianity enabled him to perceive that the Sanhedrists’ account of Paul was
not to be accepted without more minute investigation. Consequently he deferred them—#,e.,
put off both parties till Lysias should come down to Cexsarea.


KK 497


cHap. xxtv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Ver. 23. A, better the, centurion was the officer who had charge of Paul—not necessarily
the same who had conducted him to Caesarea. Liberty meant indulgence, such as the next
clause indicates. Imprisonment among the Romans was of three kinds: 1. Custodia
publica, or confinement in the common cells, which Paul and Silas suffered at Philippi
(xvi. 23). 2. Custodia militaris, in which the prisoner was bound or chained to the soldier
who kept him, as Paul was in Rome (Eph. vi. 20; Col. iv. 3), And 3. Custodia libera, or free
custody, such as was frequently practised with persons of high rank. Paul’s Cesarean
imprisonment was obviously of the second sort.

Ver. 24. When Felix came, or Felix having come, not to Cesarea, after a temporary absence,
but into the place of audience (Hackett), ratherthan into the prison(Holtzmann). Drusilla.
—See “ Homiletical Hints.” Asa daughter of the first and sister of second Herod Agrippa
she could hardly have been unacquainted with the main facts of the history of the new society
of Christians, “She must have known of the death of James and of the imprisonment of
Peter (xii.), and may have connected her father’s tragic end at Czsarea with the part he
had taken in persecuting the preachers of the faith of which one of the chief preachers
was now brought before her” (Plumptre).

Ver. 25. Righteousness.—Including the duties man owes to man, as well as those man
owes to God—.e., the obligations of both tables of the law. Temperance.—In its widest
sense of self-control.

Ver. 26. That money should have been given him.—Possibly he had an eye to some of the
gold referred to by Paulin ver. 17. Greed of gain in the very act of administering justice
‘was the root of evil in his weak and wicked character.

Ver. 27. After two years.—Lit., when two years were fulfilled, Felix receiwed as successor
Porcius Festus (A.D. 60 or 61), who suppressed the outrages of the bandits or robbers, and
restored tranquillity to the province, but died in the second year of his office (Jos., Wars, IL.
xiv. 1). To him Felix, with characteristic baseness, willing to show the Jews a pleasure, or
desiring to gain favour—lit., to deposit a favour with the Jews, which should not be without
return; “an investment in iniquity” (Plumptre) which did not turn out well (see on
ver. 2)—handed over Paul as a prisoner. How these two years in Cesarea were spent by
the apostle caa only be conjectured (see ‘‘ Hints” on ver. 27).


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.


Vers. 1-9. The Indictment of Tertullus: or, the Vapid Eloquence of a Heathen
Lawyer. §

I. The judge upon the bench.—1. His name. Felix. ‘One of the worst of
Roman officials” (Ramsay). See on xxiii, 24. 2. His dignity. Governor of the
province of Judea. Representative of Roman law and justice. Who should —
therefore have treated Paul with strictest equity—which he did not. 3. His
character. Immoral, tyrannical, covetous, unjust. The opposite to that ascribed
to him by Tertullus (see “‘ Homiletical Analysis” on xxiii. 23-35).

II. The prisoner at the bar.—Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles, who had just
been rescued from the violent hands of his countrymen, and who was now to be
impeached in their name on three serious charges, of every one of which he was
innocent, Had his countrymen only known they might have said, with perfect
truthfulness, ‘‘ This is the noblest Roman of them all.” Looking back upon his
great career, impartial posterity can testify—


‘“‘ His life was co and the elements
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up,
And say to all the world— This was a man!”
—SHAKESPEHARE, Julius Cesar, Act v., Sc. 5.


III. The prosecutors and their indictment.—1. The prosecutors were Ananias
the high priest (see xxiii. 2), and the elders who had come down from Jerusalem
to Cxesarea for the purpose of accusing Paul before the governor. Their state of
mind may be imagined from the circumstance that they had, five days before,
conspired with forty ruffians to assassinate the apostle, who only escaped their
toils by a specially providential deliverance. 2. The indictment they were
prepared to move against him consisted of three counts. (1) Sedition. They
alleged that the prisoner at the bar was a pestilent fellow, and a mover of


498


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omap. xxiv.





seditions among all the Jews throughout the world—an old charge, which had
been preferred against the apostle at Thessalonica (xvii. 6, 7), which had never
been established, and which was absolutely false. (2) Heresy. They accused
the prisoner at the bar of being a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes, by
which phrase they sought to pour contempt upon the followers of Christ, because
of His supposed birth at Nazareth, which, in their judgment, stamped Him
as a false Messiah. This charge the apostle did not seek to deny (ver. 14).
(3) Sacrilege. They accused him of having profaned the temple. They asserted,
not as they had done before (xxi. 28), that Paul had desecrated the holy place,
but that he had attempted to do so, by introducing within its precincts Trophimus,
the Ephesian—which the narrative shows he had not done.

IV. The advocate and his oration —1. The advocate. Tertullus by name, a
diminutive from Tertius, was a Roman lawyer or rhetorician, whose trade it was to
plead in courts of law throughout the empire. He was probably (1) a person of
considerable talent, else his services would not have been sought by the Sanhedrim,
though if he was, his genius and eloquence might easily have been employed in a
better cause than seeking the conviction of an innocent man. He was certainly
(2) a man of untruthful character, since he not only openly and unblushingly
flattered the judge, in the hope of carrying his suit, but most likely also knowingly
misrepresented the facts of the case he had in hand (if the clause about Lysias
be retained). And in any case (3) his employment by the Sanhedrim was a
melancholy proof of the unspirituality of that high court, that it called in a
heathen orator to help their bad cause by his crafty speech (Besser). This,
remarks Bengel, is the only place in the whole of sacred Scripture in which the
name of the orator is to be found. ‘The preachers of God,” adds Besser, “ are
not reciters of learned words, but witnesses of revealed things. The orator
Tertullus steps forward to help the Godless Jews in place of the absent Holy
Spirit.” 2. The oration which Tertullus pronounced consisted of three parts—
flattery, falsehood, and misrepresentation. (1) The flattery was offered as
fragrant incense to the judge, to intoxicate his senses, becloud his understanding,
pervert his judgment, and captivate his will. Felix was actually invited to
believe that in the estimation of his admiring and devoted subjects he had been
a veritable pacator provincie—yea, a kind of little god, through whose benign
providence the welfare of his dependents had been highly advanced, and whose
gracious clemency the speaker humbly entreated while intruding on his awful
majesty with a few more words. It showed Tertullus to be far from a bungler
at his trade that he contrived so smoothly to slide over “ the difficult narration
of the procurator’s misdeeds,” and to convert what was abominable cruelty into
gracious clemency ; and considering how dearly most men love to be flattered,
when “the candied tongue” is not too apparent, one wonders that Tertullus did
not meet with more success. Hither there was in Felix, after all, some fragment
of a noble manhood which taught him to despise the compliments he knew to be
as insincere as they were undeserved, or there was a loftiness of thought and
speech in Paul’s defence which completely neutralised the effect of the heathen
lawyer’s rhetoric. (2) The falsehood consisted in the repetition of the threefold
charge of sedition, heresy, and sacrilege, which had been put into his mouth by
the high priest and his unprincipled confederates. That Paul, who preached the
gospel of peace and showed to men the way of salvation, promoted civil tumults
and social revolutions, though an old charge (xvii. 7), was as ridiculous as it was
untrue (compare Rom. xiii. 1). That he was chargeable with heresy or schism
could only be maintained by those who knew themselves to be in innermost
accord with the truth, which Ananias and Tertullus were not—else, alas! for the
truth. If to be a ringleader among the Nazarenes, as the Christians were then
beginning to be styled (see Critical Remarks) was to be a heretic—which, how-


499


cuap. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





ever, Paul denied (ver. 14)—then undoubtedly their allegation was true, and
no lie. That he had attempted to desecrate the holy place by bringing
Trophimus within its precincts strayed as widely from the truth as the assertion
that he had actually committed this unholy deed. Well might Paul have
exclaimed as he listened to the glowing periods of the orator—


“© hateful error...
Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not!”
—SHAKESPEARE, Julius Cesar, Act v., Sc. 3.


(3) The misrepresentation lay in this, that Tertullus, instructed presumably by
his employers, endeavoured to lay the blame of this intrusion on the noble
Felix’s leisure on Lysias, the commandant of the Castle of Antonia, who, said
the orator, stating incorrectly what had taken place, had pounced down upon
the Sanhedrim and violently torn Paul from their hands when they were peace-
fully attempting to judge him according to their law. Whether Tertullus
believed his own story may be doubted; that Felix did not, especially after
hearing Paul’s defence, is almost certain—even though it was backed up by
the strong asseverations of the high priest and the elders that the charges
preferred against Paul, and the statements relative to Lysias, were correct.

Learn—1. The badness of the cause that cannot establish itself without the
help of worldly wisdom. 2. The weakness of the indictment that needs to be
prefaced by flattering the judge. 3. The exaggeration which characterises the
most of the world’s charges against Christians. 4. The violence which accusers
commonly exhibit when they feel that they have no case.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. One Tertullus.

I. An obscure man providentially
lifted into doubtful fame. Better for
his reputation and character it would
have been had he never emerged from
the oblivion into which he had been
born.

II. A lawyer, not without ability,
employed in a bad cause.—His legal
knowledge and forensic eloquence might
easily have been consecrated to a nobler
task than prosecuting Paul.

III. An undisguised flatterer, whose
honeyed words were seen through.—
Most men who use this contemptible
weapon expect to succeed by it. So,
doubtless, did Tertullus; but he did
not.

IV. A paid advocate, who lost his
cause.—From whatever motive, Felix,
if he swallowed the flattery, did not
condemn the apostle.


Ver. 5. The Sect of the Nazarenes ;
or the value of nicknames,—This appella-


— 600


tion, like those applied to Christ—
“ The Nazarene,” “ Friend of Publicans
and Sinners,” etc., defcate | its own end,
which was to overwhelm the early
Christians with shame and contempt.
On the contrary, it was—

I. The confirmation of a valuable
historical truth.—Viz., that Christ
was brought up at Nazareth.

II. The recognition of what to them
who uttered it must have been an
unpleasant fact.—Viz., that the cause
which Jesus of Nazareth represented
had not been extinguished by the
crucifixion, but had, since that appalling
tragedy, increased its hold upon the
minds of the community.

III. The publication of what those
against whom it was directed counted
their highest honour.—Viz., that they
were followers of the Nazarene. To
this day the name of the Nazarene
stands highest among the sons of men,
and no commendation can be more ac-
ceptable to a sincere Christian than


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ae





the suggestion that he is worthy of the
name he bears.


Ver. 2-5. Mistaken Judgments.

I. Bad men are often credited with
good deeds they never do.— Witness
Felix, whom Tertullus lauded as a
peace-maker and social reformer.

II. Good men are as often blamed


CHAP. XXIV.


for evil deeds of which they are entirely
innocent.— For instance, Paul, who was
charged by Tertullus with being “a
mover of insurrections,” “a heretic”
and “a profaner of the temple.”

III. These mistaken judgments,
though considered just at man’s tri-
bunals, are all wrong at God’s, and will
eventually be reversed.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 10—21


The Answer of Paul; or, the Lofty Oration of a Christian Apostle.

I. The unvarnished exordium.—l. A frank recognition. Paul declines to
imitate the heathen orator in burning incense before his judge. Neither does he
rush to the opposite extreme, and denounce Felix as one utterly unworthy to sit
upon the bench or pronounce a verdict upon him. Remembering his own
doctrine that “‘the powers which be are ordained of God” (Rom. xiii. 1), and
following his own precept “to speak evil of no man” (Titus iii. 2), though
doubtless aware of the personal and public character of the governor, he
passes over it in silence and contents himself with frankly acknowledging that
for many—at least six—years Felix had been a judge unto the nation and could
neither be ignorant of the forms of judicial process nor unqualified to sift the
merits of causes when these were brought before him. In this sounded neither
flattery nor depreciation, but respectful acceptance of his fellow-man at his best.
2. A cheerful assent. Paul might easily have had, and probably could have
wished, a better man than Felix to try his cause; but such as Felix was, Paul
willingly laid before him a plain and unadorned statement of his proceedings
since he arrived in Jerusalem till that moment when he stood on his defence.
Out of these proceedings his alleged offences were said to have arisen, and Felix
could understand them as well as anybody else. Paul had nothing to conceal,
and required no arts beyond those of an honest mind and a truth-loving tongue.

II. The simple refutation ——1. To the charge of sedition he had merely to
state that, so far as his accusers were concerned, they could not have much per-
sonal or direct knowledge of his revolutionary procedure, since not more than
twelve days had elapsed since he went up to Jerusalem to worship, which worship
he performed with so much quietness and order that neither they nor others
found him either in the temple, or in the synagogues, or in the city, creating a
disturbance—either disputing or stirring up a crowd. As for the allegation that
he was a pestilent fellow and a mover of insurrections among the Jews through-
out the world, that lay beyond their ability to prove, for the reason that it accorded
not with fact. That his preaching had aroused excitement among the Jews he
could not and would not deny, but that he had never breathed a syllable which
could be construed into hostility to Cesar he would with equal readiness main-
tain. 2. To the charge of heresy his answer was that he certainly adhered to the
despised sect of the Nazarenes, but that in doing so he had not departed from
the ancestral law which his countrymen observed. These might scornfully
denounce him as a heretic, but precisely like themselves he believed ‘all things ”
which were ‘according to the law” and which were written in the prophets,
‘“‘ and like them had hope toward God, that there should be and would be a resur-
rection both of the just and the unjust.” The gospel preached by him deviated
not from that true Judaism which his persecutors (the most of whom must have
been Pharisees) professed, but fulfilled its innermost spirit, while the resurrection
which formed its culminating theme constituted the very hope for which they


501


chap. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








themselves were looking. And so far from repudiating this hope, or deviating
from it, he made it his constant endeavour with regard to it to have a conscience
void of offence both toward God and toward men. 3. To the charge of sacrilege
he replied that the thought of violating the sanctity of the temple had never
entered his mind. His presence in the sacred edifice could easily be explained.
He had brought with him to Jerusalem money contributions from the friends
amongst whom he had laboured for many years, to be expended in relieving his
poor brethren in the city and in the presentation of offerings in the temple.
These offerings he was busily engaged in presenting in the temple, with no
tumult or noise, with not even a crowd around him, when certain Jews from
Asia, having entered, seized him and gave occasion to the tumult. Why were
these Asiatic Jews not present? These could have told better than he the cause
of the uproar, for they had made it ; and in any case they should have been in
court to accuse him if they had aught to lay to his charge. Nothing could have
been more noble, manly, straightforward, or convincing, than this candid and
ingenuous statement. Conduct like Paul’s needed no apology.

III. The noble confession—1. The implied assumption. That no one had
been able to establish any charge of wrong-doing against him. (1) The orator
had not been successful. He had only repeated, parrot-like, what had been put
into his mouth by his employers, the high priest and the elders. (2) The high
priest and the elders had not, becaus¢ they knew nothing about Paul’s doings
throughout the world, and had not come upon the scene in Jerusalem till after
he had been rescued by Lysias. (3) The Jews from Asia had manifestly nothing
they could prove against him, else they would not have been conveniently left
behind in Jerusalem, but would have been fetched down to Cesarea along with
Tertullus. 2. The courageous challenge. If the high priest and elders had any-
thing to urge against him with reference to that part of his conduct which came
under their inspection, he was willing they should not keep it back, but openly
advance it. Let them say what wrong-doing they found in him when he stood ~
before the council. He was not afraid to hear the worst that could be alleged
against him; if he could not honestly and honourably reply to it, he would
promptly and humbly acknowledge his offence. 3. The manly avowal. So far
from putting obstacles in their way, he would cheerfully assist them. There
was one part in his behaviour on that memorable occasion to which they might
wish to take exception. He referred to the voice which he cried among them,
“ Touching the resurrection of the dead Iam called in question before you this
day.” That voice had set his judges at variance with one another, and had
practically resulted in his release for the moment from their grasp. He did not
admit that it was only and wholly wrong for him to havesoacted, But possibly
on reflection it may have seemed so to them. To them perhaps it was not so
clear as it was to him that the real gravamen of his offence was his preaching
the doctrine of the resurrection. Then he was ready to concede that it may
have seemed to them that his voice about the resurrection had been dictated not
so much by a desire to enlighten them as by a perception (which suddenly flashed
upon him) that the mention of this word would divide their counsels. If it was
so (and he was not careful to deny this impeachment), it was wrong. A man
who was solicitous about keeping a conscience void of offence towards both God
and man would not have acted so. Beyond this, however, he was conscious of
no fault on that trial-day before the council.

IV. The disappointing result.—Felix deferred giving judgment, on the pretext
that he wished to wait for the coming down of Lysias, the chief captain, and re-
committed Paul to confinement in Herod’s palace, at the same time issuing orders
to the centurion who kept him to grant him indulgence and not forbid any of his
friends to minister unto him, This result must have been disappointing to all


502


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwtap. xxtv.


&





concerned. 1. To Tertwllus the hired advocate, who had lost his case, whose
eloquence, though sweetened with flattery, had not carried conviction to the
judge’s judgment, and whose plausible invectives had all been swept aside by the
plain, unvarnished tale of the prisoner at the bar. 2. Zo the high priest and
' the elders, whose designs against the apostle had been thwarted, in, to them, a most
unexpected manner, first by Claudius Lysias and then by Felix, both of whom,
though the high priest and the elders knew it not, were in the hands of a
higher than themselves, even of Him who holdeth men’s hearts in the hollow of
His hand and turneth them whithersoever He will. 3. Zo Paul, who probably
expected to be set at liberty, though he was only granted a mitigation of his
imprisonment—which was something, no doubt, to be thankful for, though vastly
less than what he was entitled to. To be sure, Paul had learnt in whatsoever
state he was to be content (Phil. iv. 11), yet must he have been more than
human if he felt no pang of regret that his trial had not resulted more favour-
ably for himself. 4. To Felix. Had Paul himself, or his friends, proposed to
purchase his freedom by means of a bribe, there can be little doubt that Paul
would have won the day and obtained a verdict in his favour. As much as this
may almost be inferred from Felix’s well-known covetous disposition (ver. 26).
That no such proposition was made by the apostle may well be imagined was a
grief of heart to the money-loving procurator.

Learn.—1. That truth is always the Christian’s best defence. Paul’s simple
story proved more successful than Tertullus’s polished rhetoric. 2. That charges
which cannot be established are often advanced against Christians. Accusations
are not the same things as convictions. 3. That doctrines which are develop-
ments of recognised truths are not heresies. A proposition is only, then, heretical
when it contradicts accepted truth. 4. That good men may habitually act accord-
ing to conscience, and yet go astray. Conscience sometimes requires to be
enlightened, and its voice may occasionally fail to be heard. 5. That Christians
have often to put up with and be thankful for less than they deserve. Paul
ought to have been set at liberty, but only got indulgence in his captivity.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 11-17. Some Thoughts about Ill. The form.—1. Jn accordance


Divine Worship.

I. The place.—This should always
be that which God Himself has pointed
out. Under the Hebrew economy,
Jerusalem and the temple were the
chosen spots in which Jehovah elected to
be honoured (Psalm exxxii. 13, 14) ;
under the Christian economy God may
be worshipped anywhere, provided the
subjective conditions of worship are
present in the individual heart (John
iv. 23, 24).

II. The manner.—Neither noisily

nor tumultuously, but ever orderly,
quiet, and reverent. ‘Keep thy foot
when thou goest to the house of God,
and be more ready to hear than to
give the sacrifice of fools” (Eccles. v. 1):
“ Let all things be done decently and
in order ” (1 Cor. xiv. 40).


with the appointments of Scripture.
For Hebrew worship the law and the
prophets constituted the sources of
authority ; for Christian worship these
give place to the gospels and epistles.
Whatever lies outside of these is will
worship (Col. ii. 23). 2. In harmony
with the continuity of the Church.
Unless ‘where the Church has for a
time gone wrong. ‘The probability,
however, is that the individual, rather
than the Church, will err. Hence
any form of worship that essentially
deviates from that observed by past
ages of God’s people is, ipso facto, open
to suspicion.

IV. The spirit.—1. Faith. Believ-
ing in the Scriptures—i.e., in the facts
and doctrines revealed therein. As
the Hebrew worshipper believed all


503


cHAP. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTAR Y: THE ACTS.





things which were according to the
law and written in the prophets, so
must the Christian worshipper credit
all things that accord with the gospel
of Jesus Christ and that are contained
in the writings of His apostles. 2.
Hope. With the Christian as with
the Hebrew all true worship had an
outlook towards the future life, and in
particular towards a resurrection of
the dead, both of the just and of the
unjust. Blot out this hope or fear
from the minds of men and it will be
difficult to impel either good men or
bad to worship. 3. Charity. A spirit
of love and good-will towards all, but
especially towards the household of
faith, an indispensable characteristic of
acceptable worship.


Ver.
Religion.

I. Paul’s God.—1. Mot a new, but an
old God. The god of his fathers, the
god of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, of
Moses, Joshua, and Samuel, of David,
Isaiah, and Jeremiah, etc. Christianity
not a new religion, but the full develop-
ment of that which was first. revealed
in Eden. 2. Mot a false, but the true
God. Not always an advantage to have
an old god: not always wrong to have
a new god. Depends on whether the
old be the true and the new the false
god. If men’s old gods are false, they
should be abandoned. So said Elijah.
If men’s new god is true he should
be embraced. So teach Christian
missionaries. Paul’s God was old and
true. 3. Nota manufactured, but an
inherited God. Paul’s God was received
by him from his fathers. What a
tremendous advantage for a child to
receive a knowledge of the true God
from his parents! What a responsi-
bility for parents to see that they hand
on the knowledge of God to their
children! What a powerful argument
for God when parents so live as to
recommend Him to their children!
What a grip God gets upon children
to whom He is recommended in this
way! 4. Not a blindly accepted, but
a deliberately chosen God. Paul had


504


14. Pauls God and Paul's


made his father’s God his own by :per-
sonal choice. This was indispensable.
Many have no higher reason for be-
lieving in God than just that their —
parents did so before them. Every
one is responsible for making an in-
telligent and free choice of his own
God.

II. Paul's religion.—Contained three
things. 1. Faith. “Believing all
things,” etc. Paul accepted all that
was asserted in the law and the
prophets about the ancient history of
Israel. So must the Christian accept
all that is written in the gospels and
epistles about Jesus Christ and His
salvation. Religion rests on faith;
faith on revealed truth. 2. Hope.
“Having hope towards God,” ete.
Paul believed in a future. resurrection
of just and unjust. Believed it to be
taught in Scripture, and looked forward
to it as the goal of history. A terrible
thought for sinners (Heb. x. 27), but
not for believers (1 John iii. 3). 3.
Charity. Paul’s religion impelled him
to works of faith and labours of love
(ver. 17). 4. Holiness. Paul studied
to keep a conscience void of offence -
(ver. 16).


Ver. 15. The Doctrine of a Resurrec:
tion.

I. Involved in the Mosaic legisla
tion.—If not expressly stated therein,
that was because of the peculiar
character of the Hebrew economy,
which regarded the nation as a whole
rather than its component parts as
individuals. But the ideas of sin and
forgiveness which lay at the founda-
tion of that economy must have been
entirely meaningless if the individual
had no other existence than this
terrestrial and temporal one. This,
however, it may be urged, only proves
a doctrine of continued existence after
death, a doctrine of immortality with-
out involving the notion of a bodily
resurrection. But as it is certain that
this latter notion was not unknown to
the Egyptians, it is at least highly
probable that though unexpressed in
the Pentateuchal Legislation, it was


be HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXIV.





tacitly assumed to lie at its founda-
tion.

II. Proclaimed in the writings of
the prophets.—As, for instance, by
David (Psalm xvii. 15); by Isaiah
(xxvi. 19); by Ezekiel (xxxvii. 1-14);
by Daniel (xii. 2); and by the writer
of the Book of Job (xix. 26). It was
far, indeed, from being either clearly or
widely apprehended in pre-Christian
times; but that the finer and more
religious spirits of the nation appre-
hended it, at least dimly, can hardly
he questioned.

III. Taught by Christ and His
apostles.—By Christ in such state-
ments as these (Matt. xxii. 31; Luke
xiv. 14; John v. 28, xi. 23); by Peter
(iv. 2; 2 Peter i. 11); by Paul (xvii.
[Se sxviwo; hom. Vi, 5, vii, Ll; |
Cor. xv. 20, 21; 2 Cor. iv. 14; Phil.
iii, 20; Col. ii. 3; 1 Thess. iv. 15, v.
23); by John (L., iii. 2); and by the
writer to the Hebrews (vi. 2).

IV. Confirmed by the resurrection of
Christ.—Which not only demonstrated
the possibility of a resurrection, but
guaranteed at least the rising of all
His people (1 Cor. xv. 20, 21; 1 Thess.
iv. 14).


Ver. 18. Certain Jews from Asia ;
or, Men who Make Reckless Charges.

I. Such men never stop to think
whether their charges are true before
making them.—The Asiatic Jews in
auestion, having seen Paul in the city
along with Trophimus (xxi. 28, 29),
jumped to the conclusion that Paul
had taken his Greek friend into the
holy place, or women’s court, and so
desecrated Jehovah’s sanctuary. Had
they inquired—and this they probably
would have done had they not been
actuated by malice against Paul—they
would have ascertained that their con-
clusions were incorrect. Yet thousands
of persons, not excluding Christians,
unwarned by their example, have done
the same thing, hurled baseless charges
at the heads of their fellow-men, with
regardless indifference as to their
truth.

II, Such men never reflect before-


hand upoh the consequences that may
result from their reckless procedure.—
Had these Asiatic Jews foreseen the
complications that arose from their
baseless outcry, they would probably
have paused. No doubt they were
hostilely disposed towards Paul, and
intended to do him hurt; but they
probably never imagined it would in-
volve such troubles as had been set in
motion. Perhaps they designed no
more than that Paul should get a good
beating; but no sooner had they un-
leashed the hounds of persecution than
Paul came near to losing his life, and
probably would have lost it in reality,
either by open or secret assassination,
had not a watchful Providence pro-
tected him. Even so, persons who
allow their tongues to run faster than
their judgments seldom consider how
great a fire a small spark may kindle
James iii. 5).

III. Such men are seldom at hand
when wanted to undo the mischief
they have raised—The Asiatic Jews,
had they been present at Czsarea,
could easily have confirmed Paul’s
story, and shown that they, and not
he, had been the real authors of the
uproar in the temple. But, like most
of their kidney who scatter abroad
firebrands and cry, “Am not I in
sport?” they took good care to save
their own skins by keeping out of the
way and leaving the innocent man to
suffer. What cared they, the cowards?
Unfortunately, mean cowards of their
type have not disappeared from among
men.


Vers. 22, 23. Good Points in Bad
Men.—Few persons are utterly bad.
Not even Felix, who surpassed both
Tertullus and his employers, Ananias
and the elders, in—

I. Knowledge-——He knew more
exactly than they did the truth about
the Way. He had probably taken more
pains than they to ascertain the
doctrines and practices of the Naza-
renes.

II. Honesty.—They wished to push
the trial to a verdict against Paul


505


CHAP. XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a ee


without troubling either Felix or them-
selves about evidence; he declined to
proceed to an issue until the case was
more investigated. This showed that
Felix had still some rag of conscience
within his bosom.

III. Kindness.—They would have
hurried off the apostle to the stake
without compunction, or at least would
have loaded him with more and heavier
chains. Felix commanded the centurion
who kept Paul to grant him as much
indulgence—lighter chains, and visits
from friends—as was consistent with
safety. “The attribute of ‘clemency’
on which the orator had complimented
Felix was not altogether dead, but it
was shown to the accused and not to
the accusers” (Plumptre).


Ver.
Caesarea.

I. Its occasion.—The accusation
preferred against him by the Jews.

II. Itsreason.— Ostensibly that Felix
might be able, on the arrival of Lysias,
to determine more accurately the truth
of the charges preferred against the
apostle; really, that Felix might
induce either Paul or his friends to
purchase his liberty.

III. Its continuance.—Two years,
which meant two years’ endurance of
unjust oppression, and two years’ arrest
of his missionary labours—the second
a greater trial to the apostle than the
first.

IV. Its mitigations—1l. A relaxa-
tion of the customary severities in-
flicted on prisoners—such a relaxation
of his chain at meal times, for instance,
as Josephus (Ant., XVIII. vi. 10) says
was granted to Agrippa at Rome; and
2. The permission of friends to visit
him.

V. Its utilisation—That Paul
allowed this period of enforced retire-
ment from his active missionary pro-
pagandism to pass unimproved cannot
be supposed. How he employed it may
even be conjectured with some degree
of probability. 1. Zn meditation and
prayer. Communing with his own
heart (Psalm Ixxvii. 6), searching the


506


23. Pauls Imprisonment at


Scriptures (xvii. 11; John v. 39), and
pouring out his heart before the Lord
(Phil. iv. 6; 1 Thess. v. 17); thus
advancing his own personal sanctifica-
tion (Phil. iii. 12-14), and preparing
for whatever service he might after-
wards be summoned to (compare Rom.
i. 15). 2. In holding intercourse with
his friends. Who these friends were
are not named. But probably his
companions who had been with him
at the time of his arrest should
be reckoned to their number—ASilas,
Trophimus, Luke, Mnason, and others,
with not a few of the Christian dis-
ciples at Cesarea. Sympathy from,
and converse with, these would alleviate
the apostle’s bonds. 3. Jn writing
letters to the Churches. If the epistles
to the Ephesians, Colossians, and
Philemon were not, as some suppose
(Meyer, Reuss, Hausrath, Hilgenfeld
and Weiss), composed during this period
of incarceration, it is not a violent
hypothesis that he who had the care
of all the Churches on his heart (2 Cor.
xi. 28) was frequently consulted by his
spiritual children, the infant com-_
munities he had founded, or in which
he had laboured, and that he wrote to
them letters full of counsel and ad-
monition, which, though they have not
been preserved till our day, were then
received by those to whom they were
sent as messages of love from their
spiritual father and instructor. 4.
In instructing Luke about the details
of gospel and apostolic history. Which
have been set down—perhaps under
Paul’s immediate superintendence—in
the gospel of Luke and in the Acts.
“The ideas that the narrative of St.
Paul’s journeys, or at least parts of it,
had an independent existence before it
was utilised or incorporated in the
Acts,” and that this, ‘“Travel-Docu-
ment,” as it is styled, was composed
under the immediate influence of Paul
himself (Ramsay, The Church in Asia
Minor, pp. 6, 7), shed light on a part,
at least, of Paul’s occupation during
the two years of imprisonment at
Ceesarea.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxiv.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 24—2’7.


Pauls Interview with Felix and Drusilla ; or, a Great Discourse and What
Came of It.

I, The magnificent auditorium.—Herod’s palace at Cxsarea, which the great
Idumean had constructed for himself as a residence when at the height of his
glory, but which was now occupied by the Roman procurator as a mansion for
himself and a barracks for his troops. ‘A wonderful building, with bloody
recollections. ‘Many phantoms glided through the empty rooms.’ Here had
Herod uttered the death-sentence upon his sons. Here was their betrayer, the
ruthless Antipater, imprisoned. Before these gates, for five days and five nights.
had the complaining Jews lain and besought Pilate not to desecrate their temple.
Here had Herod Agrippa breathed out his hypocritical soul, and before his
windows had the crowd, howling and weeping and kneeling, lain in the dust and
prayed for the soul of the pious (!) king. So adhered numerous historical images
to this place, and from the days of Herod downward blood stuck to every stone.”
(Hausrath, Der Apostel Paulus, p. 458). In a marble hall attached to this
palace was a sermon about to be preached such as seldom is poured into the ears
of men, and least of all into those of powerful state dignitaries. No doubt the
eloquence of the preacher was stimulated by the aforesaid terrible reminiscences,
of which he was not entirely ignorant—rather of which he was fully cognisant.

II. The distinguished hearers.—1. Feliz. The Roman governor, whose
character on its worst side was also perfectly understood by Paul (see on
xxiii. 24). Its hideous cruelty and rapacity, which caused him to be pronounced
by Josephus the worst ruler that ever swayed the destinies of Judea, and even
after his deposition to be followed by his quondam subjects to Rome with bitter
complaints against his administration, were so notorious that Tertullus was
obliged to hide their loathsomeness by fulsome flattery (ver. 2). Its shamefaced
profligacy had intruded into the palace hall, and stared on the apostle with
unblushing countenance. 2. Drusilla. Felix’s wife, whose evil reputation was
hardly less than his own. The daughter of the first Herod and the sister of the
second, Drusilla—diminutive of Drusus—had been married at an early age to
Azizus, King of Emesa, who, in order to obtain her hand, had become a Jewish
proselyte and accepted circumcision ; but her fascinating beauty having inflamed
the libidinous desires of the Roman procurator, he employed the services of a
Jewish magician named Simon, to proceed to Emesa and seduce her from her
husband. In this unholy errand the magician, whom some have endeavoured to
identify with the sorcerer of Samaria (viii. 9), proved lamentably successful ; and
“the daughter of Herod Agrippa, who had much to endure at the hands of her
sister Bernice on account of her beauty” (Hausrath, Der Apostel Paulus, p. 459),
having deserted her lawful husband, became the third wife of Felix, who had
formerly been a slave, but was then the governor of Palestine.

III. The fearless preacher.—Paul, who at the request of Drusilla had been
fetched up from his place of confinement into the judgment hall. As a Jewess
she could not have been entirely ignorant of the new sect of Christians that had
arisen in the land. As a daughter of Agrippa I. she may have been desirous of
hearing one of the chief preachers of those Christians whom her father had
persecuted, and with whom, in some way, she may have connected her father’s
death. But from whatever motive summoned, Paul, when he appeared, evinced
no timidity. Having the Lord upon his right hand (Psalm xvi. 8), he presented
as valiant a front as David did to his enemies, or as Daniel did before Nebu-
chadnezzar (Dan. iv. 19-27) and Belshazzar (Dan. v. 22-28), or as afterwards
John Knox of Edinburgh did in the presence of Queen Mary of Scotland. The


507


cHar. xxiv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


————————EE——E———EE—E—E—E—eeE—EEE OS


man who had fought with wild beasts at Ephesus (1 Cor. xv. 32), who had: con-
fronted the mob from the castle stairs in Jerusalem (xxii. 1), who had bearded
the Sanhedrists in their Star-Chamber (xxiii. 1), and who had already appeared
before the representative of Roman law and majesty (ver. 10), was not likely to
quake at the sight of a beautiful adulteress.

IV. The alarming sermon.—l. The theme of it was generally “the faith in
Christ Jesus,” which would doubtless lead Paul to dilate upon the main facts and
doctrines of the gospel, and in particular upon the death and resurrection of
Christ, pointing out how in both the truth of His Messiahship was confirmed.
In this the apostle furnished a noble example to all preachers who, whatever
the rank or character of their hearers, should resolutely determine to know
nothing among them save Jesus Christ and Him crucified (1 Cor. ii. 2). The
faith in Jesus Christ is the highest need of the human soul, in whatever
sort of body that soul may be enshrined. 2. The application of it brought the
noble Christian orator to closer quarters with the consciences of his hearers.
(1) He spoke to them of righteousness—that awful demand for upright and holy
living, both toward God and toward man, which the Divine law, familiar at all
events to Drusilla, demanded, which the consciences of both proclaimed to be
just, and which the faith of Jesus Christ declared to be indispensable to all who
would partake of the Messianic salvation Christ had come to introduce among
men; perhaps pointing them to the gracious provision in the gospel, by and
through Jesus Christ, for first bestowing upon men and then reproducing within
men that righteousness of the Jaw which no man could furnish of himself (Rom.
iii. 24, 25, viii. 1-4). (2) Next he reminded them of temperance or self-control,
that sacred chastity or mastery of the lower appetites and passions which
religion in general, but especially the faith that is in Christ, requires of its
devotees (Tit. ii. 11), but of which the illustrious pair before him were sadly wanting.
That the apostle had a powerful ally in the bosoms of his hearers need not be ques-
tioned. (3) And finally, he lifted up his hearers and himself to the judgment to-
come, that overwhelmingly awful tribunal before which all men—kings and
princes no less than common men, judges and prisoners alike—must one day
stand (Rev. xx. 12, 13)—a tribunal over which that Jesus of whom he spoke
should preside (Matt. xxv. 32; Acts xvii. 31; 2 Cor. v. 10), at which the secrets
of all hearts should be laid bare (Rom. ii. 16), and from which impartial awards
should be made to every man according as his works should have been (Rom.
ii. 6). 3. The effect of it. What impression this weird sermon from a weirder
preacher had on those who heard it, and for whom specially it was intended, is
only recorded in part. What Drusilla thought of it the pen of inspiration has
not revealed. Did the remembrance of her first husband recur to her? or the
revolting character of her present wickedness disturb her? Did the gleaming
fires of the impending judgment-day startle her half-dead conscience within her,
fast-bound in the cords of lustful sleep? Or, did she hear as though she heard
not? Did she steel her bosom against the soul-piercing words of the Lord’s
servant? Did she drown the still small voice that whispered within her bosom
and wooed her to better things? These are questions to which no reply can be
given. So far as Drusilla is concerned an unbroken silence will encompass her
until the trumpet of the great day shall sound. But for Felix no such doom has
been reserved. How he felt, as the weary, weather-beaten missionary of the
Cross, becoming animated as he warmed to his theme, and fixing on his listener
that intense look which was so characteristic of the apostle (xxiii. 1) ; how Felix
felt, as the unearthly words echoed through his spirit, and raised up before his
imagination ideas that were awe-inspiring in their ghostly grandeur ;—how he falt,
and what he said, has been set down in burning letters that he who runs may
read. Felix trembled at the picture which this strange man—with a solemn


508


ae HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuap. xxty,


ee





eloquence which held him spellbound—had painted on the canvas of his soul.
He could see the great white throne, with the Judge whose eyes were like a
flame of fire (Rev. i. 14); he could see the assembled multitudes, and himself
among them, undistinguished by any earthly greatness, in all the hideous naked.
ness of his guilty soul; he could hear the booming of the thunders and the
glancing of the lightnings which proclaimed the commencement of the business _
of that awful assize ; and as he realised the wickedness of his past and present
life—its utter lack of righteousness, and horrible defilement through lust—he grew
terrified with that terror which ever seizes on the guilty when their wickedness
is on the eve of detection, and said “Go thy way, for this time ; and when I have
a convenient season I will call thee unto me.”

V. The pitiful conclusion.—It ended in three sad things. 1. Delay. Felix
had some shadow of excuse for procrastination in the preceding instance, when
Paul defended himself before his bar—this, namely that he had been unexpectedly
summoned in Providence to decide between Paul and his accusers, and might
naturally plead that he wished to be better informed before delivering judgment.
In this case no such ground for putting off existed. Felix was called to decide in
a matter which affected himself alone, and for which the materials lay at hand.
For him the clear duty of the moment was to repent and humble himself before
God, to separate himself from the beautiful but wicked woman at his side, to
break off his flagitious courses in life, and turn to God in righteousness and holy
obedience. But, alas! he deferred again, as he had deferred before—he put off
giving judgment between himself and God, as he had previously delayed pro-
nouncing a verdict between Paul and his prosecutors. He would settle his own
case, aS he had promised to settle Paul’s—at a more convenient season. In
Paul’s that more convenient season would arrive when Lysias should come down;
in his own, when he should have more inclination or leisure to turn from dalliance
with the fair creature by his side and think of righteousness, temperance, and
judgment to come. Let it be noted that, as in Paul’s case no reason remains for
believing that Lysias ever came down to Czsarea, so is there good ground for hold-
ing that for Felix’s own case the convenient moment never arrived. 2. Resistance.
Felix, it appears, had frequent interviews with his prisoner, but never again
allowed his peace of mind to be disturbed, or his better nature to be aroused.
Rather, he strenuously fought his convictions down. He fell back upon the evil
demon of cupidity within his breast, called up into the field the spirit of avarice
to do battle against the spirit of repentance and righteousness that had been
temporarily awakened in him. ‘“ He hoped withal that money would be given
him of Paul.” He never proposed to Paul the question of the Philippian gaoler
—“ What must I do to be saved?” 3. Rejection. Whatever promise of good
may have been in Felix’s soul, when he trembled under Paul’s preaching, it
ultimately died away. Felix decided neither Paul’s case nor his own, but left
the brave apostle, whom he knew to be innocent, to languish in prison for two
whole years; and when at length, his own reign of iniquity coming to an end, he
was recalled by his imperial master, he still delayed doing justice to the servant
of Jesus. Thinking to ingratiate himself with his much-abused subjects, and
hoping to shut their mouths against him at the bar of Cesar—in which, however,
he was deceived—he left Paul in bonds.

Learn—1. The possibility of hearing the gospel without being saved. 2. The
danger of trifling with one’s convictions of sin. 3. The wisdom of deciding for
God and Christ at the earliest moment. 4. The probability that opportunities
for being saved, once neglected, will not return. 5. The almost certainty that he
who deliberately turns from the light will gumble on and down into deeper
darkness.


909


CHAP. XXIV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 24. The Character of Felix.
J. An unjust ruler.
II. A licentious voluptuary.
III. An inveterate procrastinator.
IV. An avaricious money-hunter.
V. A crafty promoter of his own
interests.
Vi. An unprincipled trampler on
the rights of others.


Drusilla, the Wife of Felix. — A
woman—

I. Of highly exalted hirth.—-The
daughter of kings. Noble parentage,
when good, is an incalculable blessing,
and entails great responsibilities.
Noblesse oblige.

II. Of ripe personal beauty.—Her
loveliness the ruin of both herself and
Felix. Physical grace and elegance—
a precious gift of Heaven— not always
prized as such, but often bought and
sold, like meat upon the shambles.

III. Of deeply depraved character.
—At the moment when she heard Paul
living in open sin, being the runaway
wife of one man and the adulterous
‘paramour of another.

IV. Of manifestly trifling disposi-
tion.— No reason to think. sae was in
earnest, either in sending for or listen-
ing to Paul; probably actuated by no
higher motive than to see the distin-
guished preacher (compare Luke xxiii.
8), or to gratify her curiosity about the
new faith, or to while away a few
leisure moments in her frivolous and
wicked life.

V. Of palpably seared conscience.
—Sitting beside her husband, whose
innermost soul quaked beneath the
searching words that spake of righteous-
ness, temperance, and judgment to
come, she heard unmoved. At least,
she evinced no sign that the arrow
of conviction had reached her womanly
Lreast. Fast asleep in the depths of
sin, her soul heard not the awakening
voice of truth.


Paul before Felix.—The scene intre-
duces us to four things :—


510


I. A celebrated preacher.—Paul.
After Jesus Christ, who “spake as
never man spake” (John vil. 47), no
nobler representative of the Christian
ministry has ever appeared in the
world or the Church. When he stood
before Felix, three virtues shone forth
conspicuously in him. 1. Unwearied
zeal in embracing every opportunity to
advance the cause of his Master.
Seldom have circumstances been less
favourable for the exercise of the
preacher’s gift than were his that day
in Cesarea—hardly even when con-
founding the Jews who dwelt at
Damascus (ix. 22), fighting with wild
beasts at Ephesus (xix. 31; 1 Cor.
xv. 32), or addressing his countrymen
from the castle stairs in Jerusalem
(xxii. 1); and yet, no sooner was he
invited than he began to pour forth
the wondrous story of his crucified and
risen Lord. 2. Unflinching courage in
shaping his discourse to suit his hearers.
Not to please, but to profit; not to
flatter, but to rebuke ; not to lull into
drowsy stupor, but to awaken from the ~
-rance of spiritual death. And yet he
flinched not an instant in his task.
Not a quaver of fear, though possibly
more than one of affection, was heard
in his oration. Like Daniel before
Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 27), he told
out his message without trepidation.
3. Irrepressible hopefulness in despairing
of noman. Paul not ignorant of the
characters of Felix and Drusilla, yet,
when invited to discourse to them
about the faith of Christ he declined
not, on the plea that such sinners were
beyond the reach of mercy or inacces-
sible to the power of grace.

II. A pattern discourse.—l. 4
sermon on the right theme—the faith
that is in Christ Jesus. This held the
place of honour in all Paul’s preaching,
whose unvarying subject was Jesus
Christ and Himcrucified. 2. Intensely
practical im its contents. With such
topics did it deal as “righteousness,
temperance, judgment to come ”—
topics too often absent from modern


+ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXIV.





ministrations. 3. D¢rectly personal.
Shaped so as to meet the characters,
rebuke the sins, and arouse the torpid
spirits, of his hearers. 4. Hminently
rational. Paul reasoned, declaimed
not, but. pressed home upon his
listeners arguments which flooded
their intellects with lght, touched
their hearts with emotion, and stirred
within their conscience the voice of
truth and right.

III. Illustrious hearers.—1. Persons
of high rank. No better or more
valuable in God’s sight than people of
obscure position. Equally with these
in need of salvation. Often more so.
2. Notorious sinners. Less heinous
offenders are still transgressors in the
sight of Heaven and such as require to
be called to repentance and faith.
3. Deplorably indifferent. So are mul-
titudes of those to whom preachers are
called to present the gospel. The
number of those who truly long for
salvation, and thirst after righteousness,
is few.

IV. Disappointing results.—1. Only
one of Paul’s hearers impressed. Only
Felix—not Drusilla; and yetshe, having
been a Jewess, ought to have possessed
a better understanding of Paul’s
message than her husband had, while,
having been as wicked as her husband,
she had as much cause for trembling
as he. So it often happens under the
ministry of the gospel. One is taken,
the other left ; one touched, the other
unmoved. 2. That one only impressed.
not improved. Felix convicted, not
converted; merely trembled, did not
turn. This also a not unusual pheno-
menon under a faithful ministry.
Souls are alarmed who do not even-
tually prove to be saved. 3. The
impressed one trifled with, but did not
embrace, the gracious opportunity which
came before him. Felix, had he fostered
the convictions awakened in his soul,
might have been recovered from his
sinful condition ; but he procrastinated,
allowed his better impulses to subside,
and was lost. So thousands permit
their day of merciful visitation to pass,
to their everlasting hurt. “The Holy





Ghost saith, To-day, if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your heart” (Heb.


LV


The Faith in Christ Jesus.—Is—

I. Heavenly in its object.—Direct-
ing its look; not to the historical, but
to the crucified and risen Christ
the Christ whom Paul preached.

II. Reasonable in its character.—
Capable of being set forth in such
terms as to command the assent of the
understanding and judgment. So Paul
presented it to Felix.

III. Holy in its demands.—Though
not requiring righteousness and tem-
perance as grounds of justification,





‘insisting upon these as indispensable to


salvation.

IV. Alarming in its operation.—
Awaking in the souls of them to whom
it is presented conviction of sin and
fear of judgment.

V. Saving in its results— When
accepted in humility and penitence,
trustfulness and obedience, it issues in
the blessing of complete redemption
from the curse and power of sin.


Vers. 24, 25. A Preacher such as
Paul (before Felix) should be—

I. Ready for every call to preach that
presents itself in providence.—Paul
interposed no objection when Felix sent
for him, declined not the invitation
proferred him to expound the principles
of the gospel, but heartily embraced
the opportunity to advance his Master’s
cause. Semper paratus shou'd be the
minister’s motto.

II. Courageous in facing every
audience on whom he looks, —This he
will be if he preserves a lowly estimate
of himself, conjoined with an exalted
idea of the Master he serves and of the
message he bears, as well as a lively
sense of that Master’s presence.

III, Evangelical in the truths he
proclaims.—The proper business of the
pulpit is neither to teach science or
philosophy, nr to disseminate the’
elements of ordinary knowledge, but to
publish the everlasting gospel.

IV. Direct in the manner of his


Jul


i)


CHAP XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


Neen ee ee eee eee ee ee eee eee ee ee aaa arenEEnEEEnTEENEEEEEETREEEESETENT


teaching.—A good sermon, besides
having a good text and good matter,
should be appropriate and personal—
not in an offensive and impertinent,
but in a heart-searching and conscience-
touching, sense. Preaching that lacks
point in front, and has no push from
behind, is not likely to result in con-
versions.


Paul, Felix, and Drusilla; or, Three
Phases of Conscience.

I. The courage of a good conscience.
—Exemplified in Paul, who reasoned of
righteousness, temperance, and judg-
ment to come, before the adulterous
pair. Compare John the Baptist before
Herod (Matt. xiv. 4).

II. The alarm of a guilty conscience.
—Tllustrated in Felix, who trembled as
the vision of a judgment-day arose upon
his mind’s horizon. Compare Herod,
the Baptist’s murderer (Matt. xiv. 2).

III. The insensibility of a hardened
conscience. — Exhibited in Drusilla, who
heard, unmoved, the heart-searching
words of Paul. Compare the behaviour
of her sister Bernice (xxvi. 30). Both
instances of that most awful psycho-
logical phenomenon—a conscience past
feeling (Eph. iv. 19).


Ver. 25. Convenient Seasons—

I. Are always present to those in
earnest about religion.—To such as are
(1) convinced of their own guilt and
sin; (2) alive to the necessity and


——
c———
‘


512


importance of salvation ; (3) aware of
the uncertainty and shortness of life.
II. Never come to those indifferent
about religion.—To those who are
(1) in love with sin and its pleasures
(Tit. iii. 3) ; (2) blinded by the god of
this world (2 Cor. iv. 4); (3) uncon-
scious of their perilous condition.


Ver. 26. The Love of Money, as Kx-
emplified in Felix.

I. Rooted, presumably, in his
corrupt and unprincipled heart.—
Mammon, the god of this world
(Matt. vi. 24).

II. Fostered by his wicked life.—
For his personal -extravagance and
licentious indulgence he needed money,
and this need kept the demon of
avarice awake.

III. Obstructive of higher impulses.
—It stifled his conscience, hardened
his heart, destroyed his soul.
prevented the entrance into his soul of
the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

IV. Productive of other sins.—In


Felix’s case it led to procrastination or |


trifling with his own highest interests ;
to the infliction of injustice on Paul, by
continued imprisonment; to the prac-
tice of hypocrisy, in pretending to
commune often with Paul about the
faith, when secretly “he hoped that
money would be given him of Paul.”
“The love of money is the root of every
kind of evil” (1 Tim. vi. 10).


tw


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  onap. xxv.


a TT


CHAPTER XXV.
PavL BEFORE Festus—A Srconp TRIAL AT CaSAREA.


§ 1. The Succession of a New Governor; or, the Revival and Defeat of an Old
Plot (vers. 1-5).

§ 2. Paul before Festus—an Appeal to the Emperor (vers. 6-12).

§ 3. Talked about by State Dignitaries ; or, Festus’s Conversation with Agrippa
about Paul (ver. 13-22).

§ 4. A Third Hearing before Agrippa and Bernice; or, Festus’s Excuse for
calling for his Prisoner (vers. 23-27).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Having come into the province, or having entered upon his province—i.e., his
procuratorship (see on xxiii. 18)-—Festus, after three days, ascended, or went up (contrast
the reverse, “went down,” in xxiv. 1), from Cesarea to Jerusalem, the metropolis of the
dominion over which he had been appointed ruler.

Ver. 2. The renewal of the complaints against Paul, which were made by the hig’ priest,
or, according to the best MSS., the chief priests and the chief, or the principal (R.V.)—lit.,
“the first” of the Jews, showed that the Sanhedrim had been greatly dissatisfied with the
result of Paul’s trial before Felix. Their present movement was probably dictated by the
hope of succeeding better with a new procurator, who, knowing their power as it had been
displayed in procuring the recall of his predecessor, might naturally be disposed to exhibit
towards them a greater degree of complaisance. The high priest at this time was Ismael,
the son of Phabi, who succeeded Ananias (Jos., Ant., XX. viii. 8).

Ver. 3. Their proposal that Festus should send for Paul to Jerusalem was, like the proposal
of the forty (xxiii. 15), designed to afford them an opportunity of cutting him off by secret
assassination on the road from Czesarea.

Ver. 5. Festus, however, whether he had heard from Felix or Lysias, or others of the
former plot, refused their request, and invited those amongst them who were able—i.e., not
physically able (Bengel), or to whom it was convenient (Grotius, Calvin) or talented, but
powertul, dvwvarol, clothed with official authority, @.e., their rulers (Meyer, Alford, Holtzmann,
Zockler) to go down with him to Cesarea, whither he was shortly to proceed, and accuse
him if there was any wickedness, better anything amiss, or out of place, in his behaviour.
The best MSS. omit rovry, this.

Ver. 6. More than ten days.—According to the most reliable authorities this should be not
more than eight or ten days.

Ver. 7. The many and grievous complaints, or charges, against Paul, which his accusers
could not prove, were no doubt the same which had been preferred against him by Tertullus
(xxiv. 5, 6).

Ver. 8. Paul’s defence shows that the accusations now put forward were the srme old
charges to which he had already answered, only perhaps in a different order—heresy,
sacrilege, sedition.

Ver. 9. Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem and there be judged 1—The proposal of Festus not
merely to shift the venue or place of trial from Casarea to Jerusalem; but to substitute an
ecclesiastical for a civil court, with himself present merely as a spectator (which seems to be
the import of before me), was perhaps dictated by two motives—a desire to please the Jews
(see on xxiv. 27), and a wish to rid himself of a troublesome responsibility, It had also an
appearance of being fair to Paul in that it offered him a trial before a court of his own
nation, with the presence of the procurator to see that no injustice was done. Only as Paul
had been handed over as a Roman citizen to a Roman tribunal, the proposed change could
not take place without the prisoner’s consent.

Ver. 10. I stand, or am standing, at Cesar’s judgment seat.— Paul knew that his doom was
sealed should his case be remitted back to Jerusalem, and hence claimed to be tried as a
Roman citizen before a Roman court. It can hardly be that Paul intended to say, “I stand
already in mind and purpose before the Emperor’s court, for God has shown me by a special
revelation that I am to preach the gospel at Rome, and my trial there is accordingly part of
the divinely ordered course of things which cannot be altered” (Wordsworth). As thou very
well knowest.—This complete insight into the worthlessness of the charges brought against
him, which Paul ascribes to Festus, may appear to conflict with Festus’s own statements in


Lu 513


cHap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





vers. 18, 19, 20, 26 (Holtzmann) ; but both assertions may easily enough have been correct.
Festus may not have perfectly comprehended the precise points in which Paul was alleged to
have violated Jewish law; but he had discernment enough to perceive that sufficient to
establish anything against his prisoner had not been advanced.

Ver. 11. I refuse not to die.—J make no entreaty against dying, | beg not myself off by
prayers. “ Not mercy, but only justice, asks Paul of Cesar” (Besser), “ We make no request
for favour; if any one can convict us of wrong, be it little or great, we refuse not the sharpest
punishment” (Athenagoras in his Apology for the Christians, addressed to Marcus Aurelius),
No man may deliver me unto them, or give me up to them as a favowr.— Not even Festus, if
he will do what is right” (Besser), I appeal unto Cesar.—“ These important words were
spoken by Paul,” says Stier, ‘‘ being certainly impelled by the suggestion of the Holy Spirit ”
(compare xxili. 11). So did the Christians in Bithynia in Pliny’s time do. “Paul felt
indeed what a curse his people had brought upon themselves by compelling him to appeal to
Ceesar ” (Besser). ;

Ver. 12. Conferred with the council.—J.e., with the Roman assessors who assisted him at
the trial. The subject of consultation manifestly was as to whether the appeal should be
admitted or refused. Appeals appear not to have been admitted in every case. Chap. xxviii.
18, 19 shows that Festus was disposed to release Paul, and probably would have done so had
not the Sanhedrists objected. Weizsicker comments upon the fact that Paul was thrice in
danger of his life (xxi. 31, xxiii. 12, xxv. 3), thrice accused by the Jews (xxiii, 28, xxiv. 1,
xxv. 2, 15), and thrice rescued by the Romans (xxiii. 30, xxiv. 22, xxv. 12), and finds in
this word “ thrice” a proof of manufactured history. This requires no refutation.

Ver. 13. After certain days, or certain days having gone by; how many is unknown.
Agrippa the king was Herod Agrippa II., the son of Agrippa I., mentioned in xii. 1-6, 19-23,
and the Jewish vassal-prince of Rome, who, on his father’s death, was’ considered too young
to succeed to the sovereignty of Judea, which accordingly was placed under procurators,
though on the death of his uncle Herod, King of Chalcis, in A.D. 48 or 50 (Hackett), he
received the sovereignty of that region from Claudius, along with the superintendence of the
temple and the nomination of the high priests. Four years later “he received the
tetrarchies of his great-uncles, Philip and Lysanius, with the title of king” (Plumptre). In
A.D. 55 some Galilean cities were added to his kingdom by Nero (Jos., Ant., XIX. ix. ae
XX. i. 3, viii. 4). He died under Trajan in a.p. 100, at the age of seventy-three. Bernice,
or Berenice—perhaps Macedonian for Pherenice—was his sister, and the sister of Drusilla.
The eldest daughter of Herod Agrippa I., she had been married while a young girl to her
uncle Herod of Chalcis, on whose death, while ostensibly living as a widow, she became, _
according to public rumour, the incestuous paramour of her brother Agrippa II. Afterwards
Polemon, the King of Cilicia, in order to obtain her hand in marriage, professed himself a
convert to. Judaism, and, as Azizus had done for Drusilla, accepted circumcision. The union,
however, was quickly dissolved. It was subsequent to this that she accompanied her brother
to Cesarea. Hventually she followed Titus to Rome as his mistress, in the hope of marriage
which he had promised ; but this was more than the Senate could tolerate, and he was forced
reluctantly to part with her (Sueton., Zitus, c.7; Tacit., Hist., ii, 81; Jos., Ant., XX. vii. 3).
To salute Festus probably meant to formally acknowledge him on entering on his procurator-
ship, as the representative of his (Agrippa’s) overlord (Cesar),

Ver. 14, Declared, better, daid Paul’s case, or the matters concerning Paul, before the king.
—Festus might naturally conclude that Agrippa, being a Jew, would understand the points in
dispute, and be able to enlighten him about them, Weizsiicker sees in the bringing of Paul
before Agrippa an exact parallel to the removing of Jesus to Herod Antipas by Pilate
(Luke xxiii. 8-12), and pronounces both unhistorical, but without reason.

Ver. 16, It is not the manner, rather custom, of the Romans (if it is of the Jews !), to
deliver any man to die, should read, to give up any man, the words to die, literally “unto
destruction,” being a gloss, which is not found in the best MSS. “The use of the same verb
(xapiferPar) as that which Paul had used in ver, 16 shows that the arrow shot at a venture
had hit the mark. Festus is eager to repel the charge” (Plumptre).

Ver. 18. Against.—Better, either concerning (R.V.), or round (Alford, Hackett), In the
former case the clause should be corrected with “ brought”; in the latter with “stood Ups

Ver. 19, Superstition.—Better, religion. Festus designedly, perhaps, using a word which
might be interpreted either in a good or bad sense as Agrippa pleased. One Jesus.—Hackett
remarks on Luke’s candour in recording this contemptuous remark.

Ver. 20. Doubted.—The verb describes something stronger than doubt or uncertainty, and
is more happily rendered “ perplexed” (R.V.). This, however, was hardly the motive why
Festus asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem to be judged (see ver. 9), Festus
doubtless wished to set the matter in the best light for himself.

Ver. 21. Augustus.—Sebastos. A title first conferred on Octavianus by the Roman Senate,
and afterwards borne by all succeeding emperors. The emperor in question was Nero, the
stepson of Claudius, who married his mother Agrippina, the wife of Ahenobarbus, and the


514 -


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxv.





daughter of Germanicus, Nero succeeded Claudius, A.D. 54, Nero’s inhuman character is
too well known to require detailed mention.

Ver. 22. I would also hear.—Meaning not that he had formerly cherished such a desire
(Calvin), but that he was then wishing such a thing had been possible as that he might hear.

Ver. 23. The chief captains were the chiliarchs or commanders of the cohorts stationed at
Cesarea—which cohorts were five in number (Jos., Wars, III. iv. 2).

Ver. 24. All the multitude of the Jews, the procurator says, had dealt with or made suit to
him because the Jewish rulers in their action had only interpreted the popular outcry against
the apostle (Hackett), or because a crowd may have gone with them to the procurator’s
residence in order to enforce their application by clamouring for the same object (Meyer).

Ver. 25 supplies a valuable attestation of the governor’s conviction that Paul had committed
nothing worthy of death—1.e., was practically innocent of the charges preferred against him.

Ver. 26. No certain thing to write.—In cases of appeal “it was necessary to transmit to
the emperor a written account of the offence charged as having been committed, and also of
all the judicial proceedings that may have taken place in relation to it. Documents of this
description were called apostoli or literze dimissorie” (Hackett). My Lord, xipios, Dominus,
was a title which neither Augustus nor Tiberius would accept because it implied tie relation
of master and slave, and because properly it belonged only to the gods (Tacit., Annals, ii. 87 ;
Suetonius, Avwg., 53), Caligula and all the emperors who followed him had no such scruples.
The use of it now by Luke, when a few years earlier it would have been inappropriate, is
another mark of historical veracity,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—5.


The Succession of a New Governor ; or, the Revival and Defeat of an Old Plot.

I. The old plot revived.—1. What the plot was. To offect Paul’s removal by
assassination. Nothing could more convincingly have attested the success of the
apostle in establishing Christianity among his countrymen than this unappeas-
able thirst of the leaders of the Jewish people for his removal. So long as he
was alive and at liberty to continue an active propaganda, it seemed to them
there could be no security against the overthrow of their national faith. They
had the sagacity to perceive that a death-struggle had commenced between the
Old Faith and the New, in which one or other must go down. Their implacable
hostility was also a gruesome revelation of the malignity of their hearts as well
as of the secret conviction they entertained that victory was inclining to the side
of “the Way.” 2. Why the plot was revived. Because of tho failure of the first
attempt to carry it out, through the midnight withdrawal of Paul to Cesarea by
Lysias’s soldiers (xxiii. 31-35), and because of the collapse of the subsequent pro-
ceedings against Paul before Felix at Cesarea (xxiv. 22, 23). The enemies of
Paul and the instigators of the present conspiracy had hoped by fair means or
foul to effect their murderous design, but thus far Providence had thwarted its
execution. For two years they had brooded over their disappointment, but had
not departed from their purpose. “ Travailing with iniquity and conceiving
mischief ” (Psalm vii. 14) all that time, they lay in readiness at the proper moment
to bring it forth anew. 3. When the plot was resuscitated. On the occasion of
Festus’s visit to Jerusalem. Festus, the new procurator, had just entered upon
his duties, and come into his province in succession to Felix, who had lately been
recalied. Festus, being a new governor, would naturally feel disposed, so Paul’s
enemies reasoned, to ingratiate himself with his Judean subjects, and all the
more that he probably knew both how troublesome these were to rule, and how
powerful they had shown themselves in being able to bring about the deposition
of his predecessor. Besides, from Festus’s inexperience they most likely antici-
pated better results, than they had obtained from Felix’s longer and wider
knowledge of themselves and their craft. Accordingly, no sooner had Festus
paid his inaugural visit to the capital, than the Sanhedrists embraced the
opportunity of reviving the old charges against their arch-enemy, the apostate
Rabbi then in captivity at Cesarea. 4. How the plot was designed to be carried
out, Under the pretext of wishing to have the apostle brought to a fresh trial,


515


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ns


OHAP. XXV.





it was arranged that a deputation from the Sanhedrim should wait upon the
governor and ask him to send for Paul from Czsarea, that the charges standing
against him might be re-examined in’ the metropolis, and, in the event of this
request being complied with, that they should have a band of hired assassins
lying in wait to despatch him while on the way. By no means a clever trick, it
was merely the old scheme of the forty Sicarii revived. It was another proof
that villains have not always at command sagacity or genius equal to their
ferocity. Neither much insight nor much foresight was required to defeat the
plot. How it prospered the next paragraph will show.

II. The old plot defeated.—1. By a simple statement. That Paul was a
prisoner at Czsarea, whither he himself, Festus, was about to depart ; which
meant that as Paul was under military custody there was no danger of him
escaping, and that as he himself (Festus) was about to proceed northwards
to Cesarea, there was no need to be at either the trouble or expense of fetching
Paul to Jerusalem. Whether Festus had got an inkling from Lysias, the com-
mandant of the castle, of the previous conspiracy against Paul by these venerable
fathers of the people, and stood upon his guard against another stratagem, can
only be conjectured ; but his answer was a death-blow to their device. 2. By a
fair proposal. nat a number of themselves, the rulers, clothed with official _
power should return with him to Czxsarea, and prefer their indictment against
the apostle there—if indeed there was anything wrong about either the man
or his conduct, which (one almost reads between the lines) he hardly believed
there was. How they relished the new governor’s proposal can only be imagined.
Clearly it was not the answer they expected to their innocent suggestion.
Unless they were either fools or blind, they must have seen that their secret
machinations were understood. Concealing their chagrin as best they could,
they retired from the governor’s presence, and began their preparations for a
second journey to Cesarea and a third attack upon Paul.

Learn.—1. How hard it is for evil thoughts and purposes to die within the ~
heart. 2. How difficult it is to kill those whom God wants to keep alive. 3. How
easy it is to see through and thwart the designs of the wicked when God is
against them.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Changes in Government.

I. Occur mostly at unexpected times.
-—Felix hardly dreamed, when desiring
to gain favour with the Jews he left
Paul bound, that within two years his
term of office would be finished.

II. Always entail new responsibili-
ties upon the new governors. — Festus,
on assuming the reins of government,
had to make himself acquainted with
his new dominions and their peoples.

III. Commonly bring new experi-
ences to the governed.—Hardly any.
rule could have been worse than that
of Felix; and Festus’s was for the
Jews a happy exchange. But some-
times the change is from good to bad
or from bad to worse.

IV. Unconsciously advance the pur-


516


poses of Heaven.—He who is higher
than the highest, whose kingdom ruleth
over all, and who holds the hearts of
kings as well as common men in His
hand, worketh out the counsel of His
own will by all the governments that
rise and fall. Festus’s accession to the
procuratorship, and coming into Judea,
was the opening of a new chapter in
the history of Paul.


Vers. 2, 3. Wickedness in high
places ; or, the horrible iniquities of
those who were, or should have been,
good men—exemplified in the conduct:
of the chief priests and principal men
of the Jews.

I. Malignity.—For two whole years
they had nursed their wrath against


t


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXV.





Paul. Thus showed they themselves
to be little else than human sleuth
hounds.

II. Deception.—They pretended to
Festus that they only wished to have
the apostle brought to a fresh trial.
Thus they attested themselves to be
double-dyed hypocrites.

Ill. Assassination. — Their secret
purpose was not to try the apostle but
to kill him. They were black-hearted
if not red-handed murderers.


ceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked.


Vers. 5, 6. The Lord reigns! let the
earth be glad and let His people rejoice.
God appears here :

I. As the providential governor of
the world.

II. As the adversary and counter-
worker of the wicked.

II. As the friend and protector of
His people.


Lesson.—The heart of man is de-


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 6—12.


Paul before Festus—an Appeal to the Emperor.

I. The court constituted. 1. Some things the same on this as on the former
occasion. (1) The judgment hall—a room or chamber in Herod’s palace (see on
xxiv. 24, “ Homiletical Analysis”). (2) The prosecutors—the Jews who had
come down from Jerusalem, and who may have been as before “ Ananias with
certain of the elders” (xxiv. 1), including “the chief priests and the principal
men of the Jews” (ver 2). (3) The prisoner—Paul, who had already so
triumphantly vindicated his innocence, and been so wonderfully protected by
God. (4) The charges—many and grievous things which could not be established
against him (ver. 7). 2. Some things different on this from what were on the
Sormer occasion. (1) The judge.—Felix had given place to Porcius Festus, about
whom little is known—though, like Felix, it would appear, he was not above
pandering to the wishes of the Jews in the hope of currying favour with them
(ver. 9). (2) The mode of procedure. On this occasion Tertullus was con-
spicuous by his absence. The prosecutors believed themselves able to dispense
with the services of a hired advocate, Roman flattery and eloquence had not
done much for them at the previous trial; perhaps clamour and vehemence
would serve them better at this. At least this was the method adopted. ‘The
Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood round about Festus, bringing
against Paul many and grievous charges.” (3) The order of the charges.
Though in substance the same, the presentation of them appears to have been
somewhat varied (see below).

II. The indictment preferred. 1. The old charges were revived. Sedition,
schism, sacrilege; treason against the state, against the faith, against the
temple ; revolt against Cesar, against Moses, against Jehovah ; revolution—
a serious civil crime ; innovation—a heinous ecclesiastical offence ; irreligion or
impiety—a deadly sin. Had Paul been guilty of these he must have been a
monster of wickedness indeed. 2. The new order in which the charges were
presented. Schism, sacrilege, sedition. Not without craft had this alteration
been made. At the first trial the high priest and the elders had hopes of
enlisting the jealousy and power of Rome against Paul, and with this end
in view they placed in the forefront of their indictment the charge of sedition.
What more likely to gain the ear of a representative of Cesar, than the
allegation that the prisoner at the bar had been “a pestilent fellow and a
mover of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world” (xxiv. 5),
saying “there is another king, one Jesus” (xvii. 7)? That card, however,
had been tried and failed. It was now, therefore, their aim, if possible, to
withdraw the prisoner from beneath the shelter of the Roman Aigis, and


517


cHap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





accordingly they shove the charge of sedition into the background, and advance
into the purview of the procurator those of schism and sacrilege. They hoped
in this way to persuade the new governor that the case was one which fell more
within their jurisdiction than his, that it belonged to an ecclesiastical and
spiritual rather than to a secular tribunal. The distinction between things
secular and sacred, courts spiritual and ecclesiastical, and courts civil and
criminal, was a sound one, but in their mouths it was being used not to secure
right and justice, but to perpetrate cruelty and wrong.

III. The defence offered. 1. On every count in the indictment, as before, Paul
pleaded not guilty. ‘Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the
temple, nor against Cesar” had he offended. He was no schismatic or heretic
in the proper sense of that expression ; what he preached was only a legitimate
development and necessary fruit of the Hebrew faith. He had not violated the
sanctity of the temple; the allegation that he had done so contradicted fact.
He was no revolutionary against Czxsar’s throne ; neither by word nor deed had
he taught men to rise against the powers that be. From first to last Paul
had been consistent in maintaining his innocence. 2. On every count im the
indictment, as before, evidence in its support was wanting. Paul would be sure to
call the attention of his judge to this, and Festus, it is clear, discerned that the
charge of sedition was a bogus affair altogether (ver. 18), while about the heresy
he was simply at sea—that belonged to another sphere than the one in which he
moved (vers. 19, 20). The sacrilege allegation he probably dropped out of
view entirely, as an unfounded assertion, or as a matter too insignificant to be
noticed. Nevertheless, baseless as the charges were, Festus wanted courage to
sweep them aside, and liberate his prisoner. Precisely as Felix failed, so did he.
Neither had the fortitude to follow conscience and do what was right.

IV. The proposition made. 1. A specious compromise. (1) To drop the
charges of sacrilege and sedition and restrict further investigations to the one
point of divergence from the laws of the Jews. This would practically be a
decision two-thirds in Paul’s favour. (2) To proceed to Jerusalem, that the
strictly religious question might be examined into by a court of his own people.
This also, while it had the appearance of being fair to Paul, would be a virtual
concession to what Festus understood to be the real wishes of the Jews. (3) To
have the trial conducted in the procurator’s presence as a guarantee that the
prisoner would have even-handed justice. 2. The secret motive. (1) The motive
stated was to gain favour with the Jews. This was probably natural, consider-
ing that he was a new governor, and that they were a troublesome people, who
had it in their power to impeach him, as they had impeached Felix his predecessor,
before Czesar—if not for real, for imaginary crimes, since, as he could see from
Paul’s case, they were by no means fastidious as to the character of the weapons
with which they struck a man down. (2) The unrecorded motives probably
were to shield Paul, if possible, and in any case to shift from himself all
responsibility for his condemnation.

V. The appeal taken. 1. Zo whom? Cesar, i.e., Nero. Paul demanded to be
tried by the emperor himself. “Theoretically the emperor was but the imperator,
or commander-in-chief of the armies of the state, appointed by the Senate, and
acting under its direction. Consuls were still elected every year, and went
through the shadowy functions of their office. Many of the provinces were
directly under the control of the Senate, and were accordingly governed by
proconsuls. But Augustus had contrived to concentrate in himself all the
powers that in the days of the Republic had checked and balanced the exercise
of individual authority. He was supreme pontiff, and as such regulated the
religion of the state ; permanent censor, and as such could give or recall the
privileges of citizenship at His pleasure, The tribunicia potestas, which had

518


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxv.
-





originally been conferred on the tribunes of the plebs so that they might protect
members of their order who appealed to them against the injustice of patrician
magistrates, was attached to his offica@ As such he became the final court of
appeal from all subordinate tribunals, and so by a subtle artifice, what had been
intended as a safeguard to freedom, became the instrument of a centralised
tyranny” (Plumptre). 2. Yor what reason? Because he was already standing
before Cesar’s judgment seat—i.e., was already pleading before a Roman
tribunal, and no one, not even a procurator, had a right to withdraw him
therefrom and hand him over to the Jews without his consent—which, of course,
Paul was unwilling to give, for the following reasons. (1) That as a panel at a
Roman tribunal he was entitled to receive from that tribunal a verdict on his
case. (°) That he was perfectly prepared to accept that verdict, whatever it
might be. Should he be found to have done wrong, and to have committed
anything worthy of death, he refused not to die ; but should, on the other hand,
his innocence be established, he was entitled to be acquitted. (3) That he was
not amenable to any Jewish tribunal, since he had not violated any Jewish law,
as Festus himself knew. (4) That Paul also understood his doom would be
sealed the moment he was handed over to the tender mercies of the Sanhedrim.
3. With what result ?. That his appeal was allowed. Having conferred privately
with his own council of Roman assessors (see “Critical Remarks”), Festus,
‘‘with something like a sneer” in his words, intimated his acceptance of Paul’s
decision. ‘ He knew, it may be, better than the apostle to what kind of judge
the latter was appealing, what long delays there would be before the cause was
heard, how little chance there was of a righteous judgment at last” (Plumptre).

Learn.—1. That false witnessing against good men and good causes is an old
and common, as well as heinous sin. 2. That the desire of gaining popular
favour often leads statesmen, judges, and private individuals to perpetrate acts
of great injustice. 3. That Christians are not debarred by their religion from
defending themselves against persecution and oppression by all lawful means.
4, That nothing inspires a nan with courage in presence of his adversaries like
a consciousness of innocence. 5. That God’s people are (or should be) ever
ready to render due satisfaction for whatever evil deeds can be proved against
them.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 6-12. A Court Scene in the
Olden Time.


Preferring the favour of the powerful
and rich wicked to the rights of the


I. Infuriate and reckless pursuers.—
1. A multitude against one. 2, Men
of power against a weak prisoner.
3. Persons regardless of truth against
an individual who tried to keep a clean
conscience.

II. A friendless but unmoved de-
fender.—Strong in—1. The conscious-
ness of his innocence. 2. The justness
of his claim—to be judged where he
was. 38. The superiority of his soul to
death.

III. A discerning but unprincipled
judge —1. Faithless to conscience.
Knowing his duty, but declining to act
uponit, 2. Showing respect of persons,


humble but poor good. 3. Trampling
on the weak. Sending Paul to Rome
instead of granting him liberty.


Ver. 8. A Model Defence.

I. Short.—Consisting of one sentence.

II. Simple.—Containing no intricate
reasoning or doubtful chicanery.

III. Direct.—Resting satisfied with
a plain denial of the charges advanced.

IV. Exhaustive.—Leaving none of
these untouched, but repudiating all
alike.

V. Effective.—If it did not procure
acquittal it at least showed the charges
to be false.


519


cHap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Vers. 8-10. Christian Fortitude.—As
exemplified in Paul.


I. Unlike the effrontery of the


hypocrite.—Paul grounds his defence


t


on solid fact and absolute truth.

Il. Different from the defiance of
the wicked.—Paul declines not to be
examined once and again, having
nothing to be ashamed of or conceal.

III. Having no resemblance to the
obstinacy of the litigious.—Paul sub-
mits to every just decision, being will-
ing even to dieif he had done anything
for which capital punishment is the
only expiation.


Ver. 10. Caesar's Judgment Seat and
Christ’s.—A contrast. In respect of—

I. The authorities by which they
have been appointed.—Cesar’s by the
kings and emperors of earth. Christ’s
by the King of kings, the Lord of
eternity, and Sovereign of the universe.

II. The judges who have been en-
trusted with their procedure.—In the
case of Czsar’s mortal, fallible, and
sinful men. in that of Christ’s, the
Divine Son, who liveth evermore, whose
eyes are as a flame of fire, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and with whom is no respect
of persons.

III. The businesses which are trans-
acted thereupon. In the case of
Cesar’s tribunal, the earthly and
temporal affairs of men, so far as they
affect men’s mundane interests; at
Christ’s the concerns of the soul and
the transactions of the life,

IV. The verdicts which are issued
therefrom.—From Cesar’s often such
as are false and oppressive; from
Christ's always such as are just and
true. The first may call for an appeal :
the second are irreversible and final.

V. The parties who appear before
them.— Some may never stand at
Ceesar’s, but all must eventually stand
at Christ’s, judgment-seat.


Ver. 11. Paul's Appeal to Cesar.
I. Evidenced a conscience void of
offence toward God and man.—Had


520





the apostle not been conscious of
innocence he would hardly have ven-
tured on this step, which was not the
last stroke for liberty on the part of a
despairing criminal, but the sober act
of a good man who knew himself to be
wronged.

II. Signalised a humble submission
to divinely ordained authority Had
the apostle not regarded Cesar’s tri-
bunal as in some respects invested with
divine authority, he would scarcely
have proposed to lay his case before it.

III. Showed a laudable desire to
avoid unnecessary martyrdom.—Had
Paul deemed it sinful to keep himself
alive as long as possible, or right to
throw away his life without an effort to
preserve it, it is doubtful if he would
have resorted to this tedious method of
obtaining justice. ;

IV. Proved an unwearied zeal for
the extension of the kingdom of God.
—Having already been assured by
God that he would preach the gospel
at Rome also, Paul probably saw in
this appeal which he took a means of
attaining to what was already a burn-
ing passion in his soul.—from Gerok in
Lange.


Difficulties connected with Paul’s
Appeal to Cesar.

I. How does. this harmonise with
Christ’s doctrine of non-resistance
(Matt. v. 39)? Answer: Paul, in
appealing to Cesar, does not propose
retaliation, but only self-preservation,
which is the first law of life, and is not
forbidden to a Christian.

IT. How does this accord with Paul’s
exhortation to Christians not to go to
law before the unrighteous but only
before the saints (1 Cor. vi. 1)?—
Answer : Paul does not propose to drag
his accusers before the law, but only to
vindicate his own character in the eyes
of the law—which is always permis-
sible to a Christian.

III. How does this square with
Paul's knowledge that Christ was with
him and had promised to protect him?
—How does his conduct compare with
that of Ezra—e.g., who, in a time of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXV.


a


difficulty and danger, refused to lean
upon a secular arm (Ezra viii. 22)?
Answer: This may have been Christ’s
way of protecting Paul.

IV. How does this comport with
Pauls doctrine that the state has


nothing whatever to do with judging
spiritual matters (1 Cor. ii. 15) ?1—
Answer : Paul does not propose to sub-
mit to Cesar the question of his religious
opinions, but only that of his civil
deportment.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 13—22.


Talked about by State Dignitaries ; or, Festus’s Conversation with Agrippa about
Paul.

I. The royal visit to the governor.—-1. The illustrious pair. (1) Their names :
Agrippa and Bernice.. II. Herod Agrippa, the royal personage here referred to
was the son of Herod Agrippa I., who had perished so suddenly (a. p. 44, 45) in
Cesarea, and the great-grandson of Herod the Great, the founder of the Idumean
princes, “ vassals of Rome who played so distinguished a part in the story of
Israel during the last fifty years of the existence of the Jews as a separate
nationality ” (Spence). Bernice was his sister and the sister of Drusilla, the
wife of Felix (xxiv. 24). Like Drusilla, Bernice was a woman of great beauty,
whose story reads ‘like a terrible romance or a page from the chronicles of the
Borgias” (Plumptre). Agrippa and she were both illustrious for their rank, if
for nothing else, though history reports them to have been not undistinguished
for intellectual ability as well. (2) Their characters. Rather infamous than
illustrious, living at the time, as was currently believed, in unholy relations with
one another (see “‘ Critical Remarks”). When high station and lofty character
go together, they lend a glory to each other, which makes both more attractive ;
when high station. is conjoined with gross wickedness, the former is degraded and
the latter rendered more heinous and despicable. 2. The object of their visit.
To exchange courtesies with the new procurator on the assumption of his office.
Whether it was dictated by genuine politeness or by self-interest which suggested
the propriety of keeping ‘‘on terms of intimacy and friendship with the powerful
Roman lieutenant commanding in the provinces of which he was nominally the
sovereign ” (Spence), may not be known; but the visit itself was proper and
becoming to be made. Men, simply as men—how much more as Christians
(1 Peter iii. 1)—owe each other civilities which, when sincerely paid, tend to
sweeten social intercourse.

II. The governor's communication to the king.—1l. Concerning Paul. No
doubt he would mention Paul’s name (see ver. 19). But the main facts reported
with respect to him were these: (1) That he had been left behind in Cexsarea as
a prisoner by Felix, the late procurator, without any statement of the reason of
his imprisonment or the nature of his offence. (2) That he had been bitterly
accused by the chief priests and the elders of the Jews, who laid before Festus, when
at Jerusalem, a criminal indictment against Him demanding his instantaneous
surrender to punishment. (3) That he had been formerly placed upon his trial,
and opportunity given to his accusers to make good their allegations against him,
with the result that no actual crime had been brought home to him, but only an
assertion of his had been proved—viz., that one Jesus, whom his opponents
affirmed to be dead, was really alive. (4) That rather than accept an offer which
had been made to him to go to Jerusalem to be judged of these matters, he had
appealed to be kept for the decision of theemperor. If—which does not appear
from the narrative—Festus recited to Agrippa Paul’s magnanimous declaration
about refusing not to die, if he had done anything worthy of death (ver. 11), one
would like to know what impression such a display of moral heroism made upon


521


oHAP. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.

i ee eee
the royal bosom! And (5) That he was now in gaol waiting till he could be
conveniently despatched to Rome. 2. Concerning himself. (1) That he had
rather snubbed the ecclesiastical dignitaries of Jerusalem, when these had
approached him, by reminding them that it was not the custom of the Romans,
if it was of the Jews, to hand over any man—“ to destruction,” though a gloss,
correctly interprets the sense of Festus’s words—until he should have had
opportunity to meet his accusers face to face and reply to the charges these
preferred agaipst them. (Festus may really have said this, though Luke does
not incorporate the observation in his preceding paragraph (vers. 4, 5); as
Festus, in rehearsing the story to Agrippa, omits to state that he had invited the
Sanhedrists to come to Cxsarea). (2) That he had nevertheless given them the
fullest opportunity to establish their case against Paul, but that they had failed
to bring out anything more tangible than this, that on the religious—hardly
“ superstitiovs,” since courtesy must have taught him better manners than so to
insult his guest (see “ Critical Remarks”)—questions above referred to, he, Paul,
took a different side from them, and maintained Jesus was alive, while they as
positively alleged He was dead. (3) That he had been altogether at a loss how
to deal with such a problem, and had proposed that it be laid before the High
Ecclesiastical Court of the nation at Jerusalem, which might discuss the question,
if not under his presidency, at all events in his presence. (4) That, as Paul had
declined this offer, and had appealed to Nero, he (Festus) was now waiting a
convenient opportunity to have him forwarded to the imperial court. It is
obvious that Festws would rather Paul had not appealed to Augustus. It was a
step the exact issue of which for himself the governor, as well as for Paul the
prisoner, no one eould foresee. It need not be doubted that the calmest bosom of
all connected with this affair was that of Paul. ;

III. The king’s reply to the governor.—l. A wish expressed. ‘I would also ~
hear the man myself.” Better, “ I also was wishing,” meaning, as some suggest,
that he had not for the first time heard of Paul, and had even before this been
secretly desirous of both looking on and listening to the great Nazarene preacher,
as Herod Axtipas had formerly been with regard to Christ (Luke xxiii. 8).
Reports of the apostle’s doings, both in Palestine and in’ Asia Minor, could
hardly fail to have reached the ear of Agrippa II. ; and, being the son of
Agrippa I. who had so fiercely persecuted the Jerusalem Christians, and who
bad so soon after miserably died at Cesarea, it was not surprising that, like
Drusilla bis sister (xxiv. .24), he should have inwardly cherished a longing to see
and hear the wonderful Jewish Rabbi who had so suddenly apostatised from the
law of his fathers, and so powerfully agitated the world ever since. 2. The wish
granted. Festus, out of courtesy towards his guest, and out of a secret hope, it
may be conjectured, that Agrippa would be able to assist him in his perplexity,
promised that next day an opportunity should be afforded him of both seeing
and hearing the distinguished man whom Felix had left in bonds, and against
whom the Sanhedrists were gnashing their teeth, but over whom, though Festus
knew it not, a watchful Providence, even more than Augustus’s soldiers, was
keeping guard.

Learn.—1. That courtesy becomes all men, but especially Christians. 2. That
Christ’s witnesses, even when in prison for their Master’s sake, do not cease to
be men talked about and wondered at. 3. That Christ’s people are not always
careful to avoid condemning others unheard. 4. That when other people’s
interests are ut stake no delay should intervene to hinder setting things to
rights. 5. That the world’s charges against Christians are, for the most part,
untrue. 6, That the unenlightened understanding has a difficulty in compre-
hending questions in religion. 7. That the grand problem of all the Christian
centuries concerns the resurrection of Jesus, 8. That Christians have sometimes


522


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXV.





a better chance of getting justice at a civil tribunal than in an ecclesiastical


court.


gospel.
occupation.


9. That wicked men have often a secret respect for ministers of the
10. That to hear the gospel out of curiosity alone is not a promising


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. Christian Salutations.

I. Are becoming on the part of
Christ’s followers towards each other
| (Rom, xvi. 16).

Ii. Are due by Christ’s followers
even to such as are unbelieving (Matt.
v. 47).

III. Are regarded by Christ as a
high proof of sincerity in religion
(Matt. v. 48).

IV. Are calculated to win the
favourable regards of those who might
otherwise be hostile to religion.


Agrippa and Bernice.
I. Possessors of a common nature.
II. Descendants of a common parent-
age.
III. Sharers of a common dignity.
IV. Partners in a common wicked-
ness, —
V. Actors in a common ceremony.
VI. Partakers of a common privi-
lege (ver. 23).
VII. Rejectors of a common salva-
tion (xxvi. 30).


Ver. 14. Paul's Case.

That of a follower of Christ.—

I. Accused of crimes he had not
committed.

II. Suffering persecution for con-
science’ sake.

III. Consigned to prison against
all law and justice.

IV. Compelled to appeal to the
world’s tribunals for protection.


Ver. 16. Wot the Custom of the
Romans! Neither should it be of
Christians.

I. To punish a man before he has
been found guilty.

II. To pronounce a man guilty
before he has been heard in his defence.

ItI. To ask him to defend himself
before he knows the evidence against
him.

IV. To refuse a man the right of


appeal from a lower court to a higher.
Yet all these violations of natural
right have been perpetrated in times
past in the name of religion.


Ver. 17. No delay! Cases in which
there should never be procrastination.

I. In doing justice to one’s fellow-
men.

II. In relieving the cry of human
distress.

III. In listening to the call of duty.

IV. In accepting the invitation of
the gospel.

V. In making known Christ’s sal-
vation to others.

VI. In fleeing from the presence of
temptation.

VII. In preparing for death and
judgment.


Ver. 18. “As I supposed” ; on, the
World's Misconceptions about Christi-
anity.

I. About its founder.—The world
supposes Him—(1) to have been “ one
Jesus ” and nothing more, whereas He
is the Son of God and one with the
Father. 2. To have been merely a
good man and wise teacher, whereas
He was the sinless One and the Truth.
3. To have died as a martyr to His
own cause, whcreas He laid down His
life as a propitiation for our sins.
4, To be dead, whereas He is alive
again for evermore.

II. About its tenets——The world
supposes—1. That so far as these are
intelligible they are only the discoveries
of the natural reason, whereas they
claim to be the revelations of eternal
wisdom. 2. That they may be better
(though, in the world’s judgment, that
is questionable), but are not really
different from the tenets of other re-
ligions, whereas they claim to supersede
those of all other religions. 3. That
they will have their day, by-and-by


023


CHAP, XXV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





become obsolete, and ultimately be for-
gotten, whereas they will endure while
the world lasts. 4. That they are no
more fitted to promote the happiness
of mankind than the teachings of
other religions, whereas they alone
have power to permanently enlighten
the understanding, purify the heart,
quicken the conscience, and redeem the
will.

III. About its preachers.—The
world supposes—1l. That they are the
victims of an intellectual delusion,
whereas they are the subjects of true
mental illumination. 2. That they
are the teachers of an idle superstition,
whereas they are the bearers to man-
kind of the highest saving knowledge.
3. That they are troublers of society
and disturbers of the peace of com-
munities, whereas they are real re-
storers of order, and promoters of social
well-being. 4. That they are inter-


ested self-seekers, whereas they are, .


when true to their vocation, disinter-
ested apostles of goodwill and grace to
men.


Ver. 19. One Jesus—Dead or Alive—
the great question of the day.

I. Dead.—In support of this may
be urged—l. That death—without
resurrection following—is the ordinary
lot of man, and that Jesus, whatever
else He was, was a bond-fide man.
The exceptions to this law recorded in
the Scriptures—such as the raisings
mentioned in the Gospels (Matt. ix. 25;
Luke vii. 15; John xi. 44)—must
meanwhile be left out of view. 2. That
since the so-called resurrection of Jesus
no one else of the human race has been
recalled to life. Here again the in-
stances of Dorcas (ix. 40) and Eutychus
(xx. 12) must be meanwhile withdrawn
from consideration. The exceptional
character of Christ’s resurrection is in
one aspect of it a difficulty in the way
of assenting to its truth. 3, That
Jesus, if He died—and of this by the
supposition no doubt exists—could not
have been restored to life without a
miraculous interference with the uniform
order of natwre, and, so far as man’s


524


ve


experience goes, the occurrence of a
supernatural is less probable than that
of a natural phenomenon. 4. That no
one is reported to have ever seen Jesus after
His alleged resurrection except those who
were interested in believing He had risen
such as Mary Magdalene, the women
who went to the sepulchre, the ten
disciples, James and the five hundred
brethren. 5. That the so-called appear-
ance of the risen One are all explainable
by natural means, without calling in
the aid of a supernatural occurrence,
such as the reanimation of a dead body.
Whatever objections may be urged
against the swoon theory or the decep-
tion hypothesis, the supposition that
all the appearances of the forty days
were of the same sort as that made
to Paul—viz., visionary—is quite
sufficient to account for the rise in the
early Church of a belief in the resur-
rection of Jesus.

II. Alive.—This alternative is based
on the following considerations:
1. That, if Christ rose not from the:
dead, then His prediction about Himself
was falsified. He distinctly claimed
that after three days He should rise
again. Of course an ordinary man’s
predictions about himself might fail
without any consequence relative te
himself being deducible beyond this,
that he must have been in error; but
with the failure of Christ’s predictions
about Himself collapses the entire
superstructure of His pretensions.
2. That if Christ rose not from the
dead, then He could not have been what
He gave Himself out to be, not only the
Messiah of Israel but the Son of God,
and therefore must have been an im-
postor—an inference which is contra-
dicted by all that is written concerning
Him in Scripture. 3. That if Christ
rose not from the dead, the origin of
the Christian Church is perfectly inex-
plicable. Rationalists may hold that
the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus
is sufficiently accounted for by the
illusion or delusion of Mary Magdalene
and of the enthusiasts whom her con-
tagious ecstasy affected ; but the per-
sistence for nineteen centuries of an





« HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


idea which was cradled in the excited
brain of a female, and the propagation
by means thereof of the Christian
Church throughout these centuries
cannot be explained without assuming
that the resurrection of Christ was a
fact. 4. That if Christ rose not from
the dead, then the apostles who staked
their lives on the truth of this assertion
were not only of all men the most de-
luded, but were besides the most trans-
cendent fanatics the world has ever seen.
That one man, or even two, should
have acted in the fashion in which the
apostles are represented as -having
done might be credible, that twelve
men, and much more, that five hun-
dred men should have done so, is
incredible. 5. That if Christ rose not
from the dead then all the experiences
of those who claim to have become con-
scious of a spiritual life derived from
the risen Christ, must be set down as
pious imaginations. We must frankly
admit ourselves not prepared for this
(see “« Hints” on i. 3).


Ver. 20. Perplexing Things about
Christianity to Worldly Men.

I. The supernatural character of
its founder.—Attested by His resur-
rection from the dead.

II. The spiritual character of its
doctrines.— Religious questions gener-


CHAP. XXV.


ally are in great part beyond the grasp
of men of the world (1 Cor. ii. 14).

III. The lofty character of its ad-
herents.—These, whether teachers or
professors, when true to its spirit,
appear actuated by motives which are
more or less incomprehensible to
ordinary minds.


Ver. 22. Agrippa’s Wish.—‘T also
could wish to hear the man” may
have been one of three sorts.

I. The wish of a supercilious curi-
osity, which seeks nothing more than
a passing entertainment. Of such
sort as are not unfrequently the
motives which lead men to attend


‘Church, hear sermons, and read good


books.

II. The wish of a worldly desire of
knowledge, which is only concerned
about interesting information. Occa-
sionally also this ambition leads men
to wait on Christian preachers, fre-
quent religious assemblies, and study
theological works.

III. The wish of a pious thirst for
salvation, which fills the need of
spiritual instruction. Happily there
are not wanting those who are actu-
ated by the noblest impulses in seeking
to hear gospel ministers and observe
Christian ordinances.—From Gerok in
Lange.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23—27.


A Third Hearing before Agrippa and Bernice; or, Festus’s Excuse for calling
forth his Prisoner.

I. The brilliant assemblage.—The persons composing it were the most illus-
trious of the day, the élite and fashion of Ozxsarea. 1. A Roman governor.
Porcius Festus, Felix’s successor, who had recently entered on his procuratorship
over Palestine (a.p. 60-62),, nd who in some degree succeeded in restoring order
to the country which had been seriously disquieted during his predecessor’s reigr
(Jos., Ant., XX. viii. 9,10). Of these Roman governors generally, not inaptly
styled “a splendid series of provincial administrators,” it has been said “ we can
find among them examples occasionally of cruelty, occasionally of rapacity, but
never of incompetence” (Waddington, Yastes des Provinces Asiatiques, p. 18 ;
quoted by Ramsay in The Church in the Roman Empire, p. 174). 2. A royal pair.
Agrippa IT., the last of the Herods (born in 27 a.p., made King of Chalcis a.p. 50,
died a.p. 100, in the third year of Trajan), accompanied by his beautiful sister
Bernice, who had once been, through marriage with Polemon, Queen of Cilicia,
Paul’s native province (see preceding “* Homily and Critical Remarks” on ver. 13).
Kingly dignity and queenly loveliness are gifts bestowed on few. When attended


525


cHap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





by moral elevation and grace, they become both worthy of admiration and power-
ful in influence. When dissociated from these, and much more when allied with
depravity, as was the case in Agrippa and Bernice, they attract towards them-
selves the scorn and contempt_of all good men and women. 3. A company of
officers. Five in number, these were the military tribunes, or commanders of the
imperial forces stationed at the garrison, who waited on and served the procura-
tor, and whose presence on this occasion was, no doubt, intended to put honour
on Festus’s distinguished guests, if not to overawe the lonely prisoner who was
about to be summoned forth before such august notabilities. If the former, it
was all the honour the sinful pair were worth receiving, and perhaps all they
could have appreciated ; if the latter, it signally failed in accomplishing the end
for which it was designed. 4. A group of magistrates. The principal men of
the city, the civic authorities of Czsarea, were probably accustomed to receive
invitations from the governor when great occasions were going forward in the
alace.

. II. The splendid auditorium.—The palace of Herod (see on xxiii. 35). 1. A
scene of magnificent displays. It was within this gorgeous chamber that the
kings and governors of past days had been wont to hold their celebrations, when,
as on the present occasion they exhibited all the pomp and paraphernalia that
were supposed to lend lustre to their royal and imperial majesties. The account
of what took place on this memorable day reads like a description given by one
who had been an eyewitness of thescene: ‘ The splendour of the procession and
the glittering appearance of the court, crowded with those royal and princely
personages and their retinue, Roman and Jewish guards, the Sanhedrim officials,
the stately garb of the high priest and his fellows, the head of the hierarchy of
Israel” (it is doubtful, howtver, if these were present), “must have been very
striking ; all honour on this occasion was evidently shown to King Agrippa IL.,
the last Jew who legally borc the royal title” (Spence). 2. A hall of bloody —
memories (see on xxill. 35). It would hardly be possible for Agrippa to forget
the tragic associations which adhered to the place in which they were then assem-
bled. The blare of trumpets might dull, but would not be able to altogether
shut out the cries of murdeged men and women that in imagination he heard
echoing through the hall. The magnificence of the scene before him would not
prevent him from seeing on its marble pavement stains of blood, which to other
eyes may have been invisibla 3. A place of gracious opportunities. Such an
opportunity had been given to Felix and Drusilla when Paul reasoned before
them of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come (xxiv. 24); and such
another was about to be afforded to the gay company then assembled within its
walls.

III. The noteworthy prisoner.—Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles, now the
prisoner of Jesus Christ (Eph. iii. 1). Remarkable for three things: 1. The evil
reputation he enjoyed at the hands of his countrymen. ‘ All the multitude of the
Jews,” both at Jerusalem and at Cesarea, cried out that he was no longer worthy
to live. Could they have obtained their desire he should instantly have been
torn to pieces, or stoned to death. And yet he was the noblest man that
Palestine had produced—whether for excellence of talent, nobility of soul, or
beneficence of life! Verily the world does not always know its great or good
men. Paul at this moment might have taken to himself for consolation the
eighth beatitude (Matt. v. 11). 2. The baseless character of the charges preferred
against him. Three times over he had been put upon his trial—before the
council (xxiii. 9, 29), before Felix (xxiv. 22), and before Festus (xxv. 18)—
and each time the verdict had been practically given in his favour. He had
committed nothing worthy of death, or of imprisonment. And yet he was
remanded to confinement! “God moves in a mysterious way, His wonders to


526


HOMILETICG COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxv.





perform.” Paul had still to preach the gospel to Agrippa, and to his country-
men at Rome; and for both reasons he was yet, in God’s providence, detained
as a prisoner, 3. The noble courage he had all through displayed. Never
quaking through fear of man, never shrinking from the severest ordeals,
never apologising for the message he delivered, never plcading with his per-
secutors for mercy, but always only for justice, never hesitating to proclaim the
glorious truths of Christ crucified and risen, of which he had been appoint<d
a witness and herald ; but always calm, heroic, self forgetful, earnest, tender, and
confident. Probably a more sublime testimony to the eflicacy of Divine grace in
supporting a faithful minister of the gospel amid weakness, weariness, pain,
spain, hardship, and oppression has never been furnished to the Church or the
world !

IV. The trumpery excuse.—After a pompous harangue the governor pretends
to give an explanation to his guests of the reason why he had commanded the
apostle to be fetched from his confinement. The excuse was—l. Ostensibly
good. Waving determined to forward Paul to Rome, it was unreasonable to send
on a prisoner for judgment without specifying the charges that had been brought
against him. No doubt; and it was illegal as well, since Roman law demanded
that such a document should accompany every case that was transmitted to the
emperor. Then he had nothing certain to write about the case and hoped that
Agrippa, being a Jew, might assist him to the better understanding of its intri-
cacies. This, too, was a proper course to follow, if it really was so that he felt at a
loss what to report tothe Emperor. 2. Barely true. Festus understood perfectly
that Paul had committed nothing worthy of death—that was one certain thing
he could have written. Festus knew that Paul’s offence was neither social nor
political, but only ecclesiastical and religious, and that as yet the policy of Rome
was not to intermeddle with such disputes—which was a second certain thing he
could have reported to Augustus, Besides, Festus knew that the real reason for
Paul’s production was to afford Agrippa and Bernice an opportunity of hearing
that remarkable man. Hence, in astrict sense, Festus’s explanation was not pre-
cisely in accordance with truth.

Learn.—l. The mystery of Divine providence, which seats an Agrippa upon
the throne and consigns a Paul to a prison, 2. The insignificance of earthly
pomp when compared with the glory of moral and religious worth, as seen in the
external decoration of Agrippa and Bernice, when set alongside of the inner
graces of Paul. 3. The truth of Jesus Christ’s predictions that His servants
should suffer persecution (Matt. x. 18; Mark xiii. 9; Luke xxi. 12), and in par-
ticular that Paul should bear His name before kings (ix. 15). 4, The infatuation
which sometimes impels communities to hate and even slay their best men. Scen
in the conduct of the Jews towards Paul. 5. The involuntary testimony that
the world is often compelled to bear as to the moral excellence of Christians—
illustrated by Festus’s declaration concerning Paul. 6. The disregard for strict
truth which is often found in great no less thanin mean men. 7. The unreason-
ableness of continuing a man in prison against whom it is difficult to find a charge
that will bear writing down.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 23. A Christian Service in a hands, had been often stained with
Strange Place. blood, had frequently echoed to the
I. The cathedral, church, or chapel. cries of despair and the shouts of bac-
The judgment hall in Herod’s palace. chanalian revelry, and had more than
This hall had been built by wicked once reverberated to the sound of Paul.


527


CHAP. XXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a ETRE


But any place will do to preach the
gospel in.

II. The congregatign.—1. Brilliant.
Consisting of the civic and military
dignitaries of Caesarea, the aristocracy
and fashion of its population. 2. Mixed.
Comprising persons of royal birth, and
persons of low degree, statesmen and
rulers with their servants and subjects.
3. Sinful. All alike needful of the
gracious blessings of the gospel. Of
different degrees of wickedness, they
were one in this, that all needed salva-
tion.

III. The preacher.—1l. A shackled
prisoner. Paul, when he stood before
that gay throng which crowded Herod’s
judgment hall, was chained by his
right hand toa Roman soldier. 2. A
spiritual freeman. In all that com-
pany Paul alone was possessed of true
liberty.

“He is the freeman whom the truth makes


free
And all are slaves besides” (Cowper).


3. A fearless prophet. Conscious of
innocence, and depending on his Lord,
Paul was not abashed before so much
material splendour and earthly glory.
4. An eloquent orator.  Sufficiently
proved by the oration he delivered
when called upon to speak in his de-
fence (xxvi.).

IV. The sermon.—The apology he
uttered, setting forth: 1. The grownd-
less character of the charges advanced
against him. Thus confirming the
conclusion at which Festus had already
arrived (ver. 25). 2. The supernatural
character of the call which had trans-
formed him into a Christian apostle.
Thus explaining that his countrymen,
in seeking his death, were practically
fighting against God. 3. The necessary
character of his mission to the Gentiles.
Thus showing that in all he did he was
acting under the impulse of a higher
will than his own (see chap. xxvi).


Ver. 24. Behold this Man! (Compare
John xix. 5: Behold the Man !)
I. An Israelite indeed, and yet
hated by his co-religionists.—They had
528





lost the inner kernel of the Old Testa-
ment religion, and were trying to live
upon the husk; they had abandoned
the spirit, and were become slaves of
the letter. He, on the other hand, had
cast aside the letter, and was living on
the spirit of it, had thrown away the
husk, and was retaining the kernel.

II. An innocent man, and yet con-
signed to prison.—In this certainly he
was not worse treated than his Master
had been, who, though He did no sin,
was yet put to death as a common
malefactor. Though the law was not
made for a righteous man but for the
unrighteous (1 Tim. i. 9), yet its penal-
ties and prisons often fall to the
righteous rather than to the wicked.

III. A friendless prisoner, and yet a
fearless confessor.—Though Paul had
friends in Cxsarea whose visits cheered
and relieved his captivity (xxiv. 23), it
is not certain that they were permitted
to stand beside him in Herod’s palace
on that memorable day. Nevertheless,
it need not be doubted that the Lord ~
stood by him (Matt. x. 19, xxviii. 20),
and that the presence of this heavenly
friend was more to him than ten
thousands of human allies and sup-
porters, enabling him to say with the
Hebrew Psalmist: “The Lord is my
light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my
life, of whom shall I be afraid?”
(Psalm xxvii. 1)


Ver. 26. No Certain Thing to Write ;
or, the Uncertainties of Infidelity.

I. Whether there be no God.—The
fool may say in his heart that there is
no God (Psalm xiv. 1). The transgressor
may wish there were no God. The
materialist may assert and imagine he
has proved there is no God. But
neither fool nor philosopher can be
sure that their conclusions are right.

II. Whether Jesus of Nazareth was
only a man.—That He was a man all—
believers and unbelievers—are agreed.
That He was only a man has been ve-
hemently and persistently affirmed by
rejectors of His divinity. But they
can never demonstrate to the satisfac-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omap. xxvt.





tion of others that such a thing as an
incarnation is impossible.

IIT. Whether there be no hereafter.
—This also has been blatantly pro-
claimed by the champions of infidelity ;
but as no one has ever returned from
the grave they cannot positively know
that there is no conscious existence
beyond.

IV. Whether there be no hell.—By
many it is confidently maintained that
eternal punishment is only an imagina-
tion of medieval theologians; but
until the great hereafter comes with
its awakening experiences, it will be
impossible with regard to this to
cherish more than a hope. N.B.—If
Christians were uncertain that the
things most surely believed among
them were realities, they would be in
no worse position than the unbelievers
are who reject them; but Christians
can say with reference to their faith in
God, Christ, Immortality, Heaven,
“We have not followed cunningly
devised fables” (2 Peter i. 16).


Ver. 27. Unreasonable Things, who-
ever does them.

I. To commit a man to gaol who has
done no wrong.

II. To punish a man on account of
his religion.

III. To oppress the single and de-
fenceless in order to please the many
and the strong.

IV. To expect to crush a good cause
or a good man by means of persecu-
tion.


Ver. 23-27. Festus’s Audience Cham-
ber at Coesarea.
I. A drawing-room of worldly glory;


_ constituted such by the splendour of


the assembled nobility (ver. 23).

II. A lecture room of holy doctrine;
constituted such by the testimony of
the Apostle (xxvi. 1-23).

Ill. A judgment hall of Divine
majesty ; constituted such by the im-
pression of the apostolic discourse,
which discloses the secrets of all hearts
(xxvi. 24-32).—Gerok in Lange.


‘OHAPTER XXVI.


Pavut BerorE Kine Acrippa II.—Tuirp Apotoey.


§ 1. Paul’s Appeal to his Past Life; or, a Vindication of his Jewish Orthodoxy


(vers. 1-8).


§ 2. Paul’s Rehearsal of an Old Story; or, the Secret of his Conversion Explained


(vers. 9-18).


§ 3, Paul’s Subsequent Career as a Christian ; or, How He Turned to the Gentile


Mission (vers. 19-23).


§ 4. Paul's two Distinguished Listeners, Festus and Agrippa; or, Two Souls
Struggling Against the Truth (vers. 24-32).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Agrippa said unto Paul.—On this occasion Agrippa, not Festus, presided over the


tribunal.


The “stretching forth” of the hand was the gesture of an orator preparing


himself to speak, and differed from the act of “ beckoning” or shaking “ with the hand”


(xii. 17, xiii. 16, xxi. 40), which was a signal demanding silence.


The act is thus described :


“ Porrigit deatram et ad instar oratorum conformat articulum, dubousque infimis conclusis
digitis ceteros eminentes porrigit” (Apuleius, Met., ii, 54, quoted by Meyer). The hand which


MM


529


cHar.xxv1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
Sr


Paul raised was chained (ver. 29). Answered for himself. Made his defence, or apology.
This was the third occasion on which Paul had vindicated himself—the first having been
when he addressed the Jews (xxii. 1), and the second when he stood before Felix (xxiv. 10).
The present speech (vers. 2-23) divides itself into three parts. In the first (vers. 2-8), the
apostle sets forth the solidarity of his own faith with that of his countrymen, in so far as
each is a religion of hope; in the second (vers. 9-18) he explains the origin of his call to the
apostolate; in the third (vers. 19-23) he shows how he was led to direct his apostolic activity
towards the Gentiles, =

Ver. 2. The best MSS. omit “the” before Jews, as in vers. 7, 21, xxv. 10. Paul would
represent the accusation as purely Jewish in its character, and indeed as proceeding from
some only, not from all, of the Jews. :

Ver. 3. Especially gives the reason why Paul counted himself fortunate, not the quality
or quantity of Agrippa’s knowledge, though ‘“ Rabbinic writers speak of Agrippa as having
excelled in a knowledge of the law” (Hackett). Thee to be expert.—The words in Greek
are anakolouthic. Instead of an accusative, a genitive might rather have been expected.
Patiently.— Paul obviously proposed a somewhat extended oration.

Ver. 4. My manner of life from my youth up.—This appears to imply that Paul had been
brought to Jerusalem at an early age (compare xxiii. 3), though he was seemingly absent
from the Metropolis during the three years of our Lord’s ministry (2 Cor. v. 16).

Ver. 5. From the beginning.—The same idea as that contained in “from my youth up.” I
lived . Pharisee.—Observe the succession of the clauses, which state (1) how long the Jews
had known Paul—from his youth up, or from the beginning ; (2) where they had known him
—in Jerusalem; and (3) what they had known about him—that he had lived a Pharisee
(vompare xxii. 3, xxiii. 6).

Ver. 6. I stand here and am judged.—Better, Z stand here, being judged. Paul’s complaint
was that he was being tried, not for heterodoxy, but for “ orthodoxy ”—for the hope, etc.

Ver. 7. Our twelvo tribes.—Paul, like James (i. 1), considered the then existing Jewish
people to be the legitimate representatives of the Twelve Tribes. Like James, he ignored
“the legend, su often repeated and revived, that the ten tribes of the northern kingdoms of
Israel, after they had been carried away by Shalmaneser, had wandered far away, and were
to be found, in disguise, in far-off regions of the world. The earliest appearance of the
fable is in thc apocryphal 2 Esdras xiii. 40-46, where they are said to have gone to ‘a
country where never mankind dwelt, that they might there keep the statutes which they
never kept in their own land.’ The apostle, on the contrary, represents the whole body
of the Twelve Tribes as alike serving God” (Plumptre). While it is certainly true that the
main body of the home-returning exiles consisted of members of the two tribes, Judah and ~
Benjamin, it is equally indubitable that amongst them were members of other tribes, as, ¢,9.,
of Ephraim and Manasseh (1 Chron. ix, 3).

Ver. 8. Why should it bc thought a thing incredible with you %—Another interpretation
gives “‘ What! is it judged incredible with you?” (Griesbach, Kuinoel, De Wette, Conybeare
and Howson). That God should raise the dead?—Lit., if God raises; el presenting the
question as one a sceptic might controvert, and éyelpec being present, because the resurrection
of Jesus was regarded by the apostle as illustrating “a permanent attribute or power on the
part of God” (Hackett). The precise force of the question has been differently explained.
Connected with the preceding verses, it has been understood as giving the inner kernel of
the promise made unto the Jewish fathers, and as replying to a look of incredulity perhaps
at the moment visible on the faces of his hearers (Holtzmann); regarded as introductory
to the ensuing paragraph, it has been interpreted as signifying either that, since no Jew
could hesitate to believe in the resurrection of the dead, what the apostle was about to
rehearse should likewise bo acceptcd as credible (Overbeck), or that the apostle’s faith in
the Messiah, of which he was about to speak, had exactly that for its presupposition which
no Jew would think of controverting—viz., that God was able to raise the dead (Wendt).
Perhaps the first connection is the better.

Ver. 9. Commences the second part of Paul’s apology. Paul would not despair of con-
verting his countrymen from doubt to belief, since he himself had undergone a similar
mental revolution, and had become a believer in, and a preacher of, the resurrection of
Jesus. I ought.—Paul acted from what he deemed a sense of duty when he “ persecuted
the Church of God” (1 Cor. xv. 9), which may be taken as his interpretation of the clause,
doing many things “‘contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.”

Ver. 10. The saints.—This designation, intelligible only to Christians (see ix. 13), Paul did
not use when addressing the Jews, but now employs before Agrippa, perhaps because he
deemed caution no longer necessary, and wished both to put honour on the followers of the
Nazarene and to aggravate his own guilt (compare Birk’s Hore Apostolice, vii. viii.). The
disciples of the Crucified were “the ‘holy ones’ of God’s people, Israel—what the Chasidim,
or ‘devout ones’ (the ‘Assideans’ of 1 Mace. vii. 13; 2 Macc. xiv. 6), had been in an
earlier generation” (Plumptre). I gave my voice—lit., Z cast my voting stone, calculum


£30


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.  omaP. xxvi.





adjeci, against them.—Whether this should be taken literally, as signifying that Paul
actually voted against the Christians (Conybeare and Howson, Alford, Holtzmann, Hausrath,
Plumptre), or figuratively (Bengel, Kuinoel, De Wette, Meyer, Lechler, Zéckler, Hackett,
Stier), that he assented to their condemnation, is debated. If the former interpretation be
the right one, then the probability is that Paul had been a member of the Sanhedrim, and
over thirty years of age, as well as married and the father of a family. As, however, Paul’s
age at the time of Stephen’s murder is uncertain, and as Scripture does not mention either
wife or child of the apostle (but see Hints on ver. 10), it is held by others that the
latter interpretation should be preferred.

Ver. 11. I... compelled them.—Lit., Z was compelling them—i.e., I strove to make them—
blaspheme.—It does not follow that he succeeded, though “that among the many who
suffered this violence, every one preserved his fidelity, it would be unreasonable to affirm”
(Hackett). Pliny (4p., n. 97) speaks of ordering the Bithynian Christians—maledicere
Christo—but adds that it could not be done—quorum nihil cogi posse dicuntur qui sunt revera
Christiuni. Strange cities were foreign cities, outside of Palestine, like Damascus.

Ver. 12. Whereupon.—Lit., i which (persecutions) being engaged. Compare xxiv. 18.

Ver. 13. At midday.—A note, omitted in Luke’s narration (ix. 3) but corresponding to
Paul’s previous statement “about noon” (xxii. 6). A light from heaven.—As in ix.3; spoken
of as great in xxii. 6, to which corresponds the next clause, above the brightness of the sun.
—This light is now said to have encompassed, not Paul alone (ix. 3, xxii. 6), but his com-
panions as well.

Ver. 14. Remarks that these companions, as well as the apostle, were all struck to the
ground in terror, though they appear to have recovered from their fright earlier than he
(ix..7). The voice which Paul heard, Luke says they also heard (ix. 7), though Paul affirms
they heard it not (xxii. 9), as conversely Luke reports they saw no man (ix. 7), while Paul
asserts they beheld the light (xx. 9). On these supposed contradictions see ix. 7, and xxii. 6,
and compare Dan. x. 7, 3 Macc. vi. 18, and John xii. 29, which all seem to imply that
heavenly voices and visions are understood and seen only by those for whom they are
intended. Paul mentioned that the voice spoke to him in the Hebrew tongue, because he
was then himself speaking in Greek, not in Hebrew, as in xxii. (see Hints on ver. 14),
It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.—Or, goads. The meaning was that his
resistance to the cause and will of Christ would be foolish and unavailing, as well as painful
to himself. The ox-goad, six or eight feet long, and pointed with iron, was held by the
Oriental ploughman in one hand, while the other grasped the one-handled plough. ‘The
refractory animal, when pierced or pricked with the iron-pointed goad, would, of course, kick
against it. Examples of this proverb have been produced from Greek and Latin writers
(see Aischylus, Agam., 1624: mpos krpa ph Ad«Tige; and Terence, Phormio, I. ii. 27; “ Nam
que inscitia est advorsum stimulum calces”).

Ver. 16. Which thou hast seen.—According to the best authorities this should be wherein
thou hast seen Me,

Ver. 18. To turn them should be that they may turn from darkness to light, the verb being
intransitive (see ver. 20, xiv. 15),

Ver. 19.— Begins the third part of Paul’s defence, and furnishes the reason for his Gentile
mission. "Whereupon.— Lit., whence, wherefore, accordingly—.e., having been so instructed.

Ver. 20. Showed first unto them of Damascus.—(Compare ix. 20.) No contradiction to
Gal. i. 17, which does not assert that Paul’s evangelistic work did not commence till after
his return from Arabia (Holtzmann).

Ver. 21. Works meet for repentance.—J.e., such works as proved repentance to be sincere.
It is simply ridiculous to find in this an evidence of non-historicity, since Paul’s doctrine
was that of justification by faith alone (Zeller).

Ver. 22. Witnessing.—If paprupovuevos (Received Text) be correct, then the rendering
should be “ borne witness to” (see vi. 3, x. 22, xxii. 12); but, as Paul was not witnessed to,
but accused by small and great, the reading paprupdmevos (Revised Text) is to be preferred,
in which case ‘“ witnessing,” “testifying,” is an accurate translation.

Ver. 23. That Christ should suffer.—Better, how that, or if, or whether—é«i presenting the
points—{nriuara questions (xxv. 19)--as Paul was wont to discuss them. 1. Whether the
Messiah, not must suffer, but is capable of suffering—raO@nrbs, passibilis (Vulgate) ; 7.e., not
whether He should have a nature capable of suffering, but whether the idea of suffering was
possible to be harmonised with the conception of Messiah laid down in the Old Testament.
And 2. Whether by rising from the dead (1 Cor. xv. 22; Col. i, 18) He should be the first to
show (or proclaim) light unto the people and to the Gentiles (Eph. ii. 17). As the revelation
contained in the law and the prophets had been called ¢Isa. ii, 5), so was the gospel (2 Cor.
iv. 4) now styled, ‘‘ Light.”

Ver. 24. As he thus spake for himself. —Lit., he speaking these things in his defence—raira,
these things, being the words just uttered about the resurrection, rather than the entire
speech, The notjon of a resurrection appeared. as absurd to Festus as it had done to the


531





cHar.xxvi. HOMILETiC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


ee


Athenians (xvii. 32), and caused him to think Paul beside himself, raving, or mad, and to say
so, not in jest (Olshausen), but in earnest, at the same time ascribing his insanity to his muck
learning—7odAd ypduuara, which, among the Jews, meant much theology (John vii. 15;
2 Tim. iii. 15). : 5

Ver. 25. Most noble.—Powerful, or excellent (xpdriore), aS in xxiii. 26, xxiv. 3; Luke i. 3.

Ver. 26. Before.— Better, wnto whom. Paul, with fearless confidence, appealed to Agrippa,
who knew perfectly that the doctrines just referred to, of a crucified and risen Christ, on
which his, Paul’s, gospel was founded, were not fancies, illusions, the ravings of a madman,
but words of truth and soberness, because relating to facts which had been done and events
which had taken place, not in a corner, but in the metropolis of Palestine, and therefore

ublicly.

Ver. 28, Almost (é& é\lyw = propemodum, a meaning of which no other example can be
given) thou persuadest me to be or become (yeréoOu) a Christian (Chrysostom, Luther,
Grotius, Bengel, Stier, Spence); or, with but little persuasion thou persuadest me to become,
or, according to a different reading, thow believest (thysclf able) to make of me a Christian ,
i.e., thou wouldest fain make me a Christion (R.V., Tischendorf, Meyer, Alford, Plumptre,
Holtzmann, and others); or, in a little time (i.e., if you go on speaking thus) you will
persuade me to become a Christian (Calvin, Olshausen, Neander, De Wette, Robinson,
Hackett, and others). The third is admissible, but does not so well suit the apostle’s
answer (sce below). The second fits best if the alternative reading, rajoa for yevéoba be
adopted. The first, though perhaps grammatically doubtful, harmonises best with the
seriousness which Paul’s oration was calculated to inspire. The second and third are more
or less ironical.

Ver. 29. Both almost and altogether.— Hy diiyw xal_év roAd@ (the best texts have év weydhw),
in little and in much. It must be admitted that this reply does not fit in well with the first
of the above renderings, while it suits admirably the second and third, as thus: either, I
would to God that whether with little or with much, or whether in a little time or in a great
time, not thou only, etc. In spite, therefore, of the seemingly ironical character of the
second and third, one or other of these should be preferred. These bonds.—(See xxiv.
23, 27.)

Ver. 30.—Unwilling to hear more, the auditors rose up in order, according to their rank.

Ver. 31.—After conferring with one another Festus and Agrippa came to the same con-
clusion as had already three times been reached concerning Panl—first by the Pharisees
(xxiii. 9), next by Lysias (xxiii. 29), and lastly by Festus (xxv. 25).

Ver. 32.—Agrippa adds that but for his appeal to Cesar the apostle might have been set
at liberty.


Note.—The authenticity of this and the two preceding chapters relating to Paul’s imprison-
ment at Caesarea has been questioned on the following grounds: 1. That the two trials—
before Felix and before Festus—have been artificially constructed by the author, and
manifestly on the samc plan, according to which in each the same incidents recur—the
same motives for the accusation, the same murder-proposal of the Jews, the same appearing
of Paul’s enemies before the Roman tribunal with their complaints, the same hearing before
a regularly constituted court, the same failure in the evidence offered, the same protection and
recognition of his innocence at the hands of the Roman procurator, and the same style of
defencc—viz., that Paul was an orthodox Jew, and indeed a Pharisee, who had been con-
strained by a irresistible Divine impulse to onter on his Gentile mission (Baur, Zeller,
Holtzmann). 2. That the position adoptcd by Paul was more in accordance with that taken
by the second-century apologists (Holtzmann), 3. That everything appears directed to show
how Paul, who was persecuted by the fanaticism of the Jews, was protected through the
righteousness of the Romans (Pfleiderer) ; and 4. That so completely is his innocence estab-
lished, over against both Roman policy and Jewish hate, that his continued imprisonment
(Weizsacker) and deportation to Rome (Holtzmann) are simply inconceivable. But to all this
it suffices to reply—1l. That similarity between two judicial processes does not necessarily
establish the unreality of both or of either—and all the more if the processes were conducted
by the same parties, against the same individual, about the same charge, and with the same
evidence, 2, That second-century apologists may well have learnt how to defend themselves,
by a careful studying of Paul’s defences. 3, That the favour shown by the Roman Governors
to Paul accords with what is known of the Roman policy towards Christianity in the first
century, and not with what is known of her policy in the second century (Ramsay, The
Church in the Roman Empire, p. 194); and 4, That Paul’s continued imprisonment requires
no explanation different from that ¢iven in the text—viz., the unwillingness of the Roman
governors either to please the Jews by punishing Paul or to displease them by setting him.
free ; while after his appeal to Caesar had been allowed, it would probably not have been
safe for either Festus or Agrippa to have disregarded it. But, even if they did, that would
only show they had failed in their duty, not that the narrative in the Acts was unhistorical.


532


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. ocuayv. xxvi.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—8.


Paul's Appeal to His Past Life ; or, a Vindication of his Jewish Orthodoxy.

I. Paul's happiness in entering on his defence—One might naturally have
supposed that Paul by this time would have felt it irksome to be called up to
speak for himself, having already twice attempted to vindicate his innocence,
before the Sanhedrim (xxii. 1) and before Felix (xxiv. 10), but with no good
result—only with this, that for two long years he had been detained in bonds.
Spirits of less noble mould than Paul’s would have been crushed—would have
renounced both faith in God and hope for themselves ; but he, “ as sorrowful yet
always rejoicing ” (2 Cor. vi. 10), as “perplexed but not in despair, persecuted
but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed ” (2 Cor. iv. 8, 9), continued bright
and cheerful, never losing heart or hope, constantly confident that all things
were working together for his good (Rom. viii. 28), as well as for God’s purpose
(Eph. i. 11), and therefore always ready to enter any door of service that might
be opened, not so much for the vindication of himself as for the furtherance of
the gospel and the cause of his Master. In particular, he welcomed the present
opportunity of appearing before Agrippa and answering the charges that had been
brought against him. 1. Because Agrippa was a king, and a king, it was written,
should ever love judgment (Psalm xcix. 4) and practise righteousness (Isa, xxxii.
1), yea, righteous lips should be his delight (Prov. xvi. 13), while to search out a
matter was his honour (Prov. xxv. 2), and to do wickedness should be to him an
abomination (Prov. xvi. 12). 2. Because Agrippa was an expert in all Jewish
customs and questions, and would be able to comprehend the point or points at
issue between him, Paul, and his countrymen—points which had somewhat
disconcerted the Governor (xxv. 20). “That Paul here praises the king’s
eminent knowledge of Jewish religion and morals is no empty flattery, but
appears to rest on this, that Agrippa, more than any other member of his family,
occupied himself with the people’s ecclesiastical affairs, although nothing definite
concerning this has been handed down by tradition” (Zoéckler). Rabbinic
writers speak of Agrippa II. as having excelled in a knowledge of the law; and
“as the traditions which these Rabbinic writers follow could not have flowed
from this passage, they confirm the representation here given by an unexpected
agreement ” (Hackett). Possibly Agrippa II. had been carefully instructed in
them by his father, Agrippa I., who was “ famous for his rigid observance of all
Jewish customs and rites” (Spence). 3. Because Agrippa was acquainted with
the Scriptures, which formed the ultimate standard of judgment for all, contro-
verted points in religion. Though Paul made no mention of this in his courteous
exordium, it lay clearly in the background of his consciousness (see ver. 27).
Notice, that in all this Paul introduces no word in flattery of the young
sovereign. Paul doubtless understood that—


“They do abuse the king that flatter him,


Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,
Fits kings as they are men, for they may err.”—Shakespeare.


II. Paul’s request for a patient hearing of his case.—1. Because heretofore he
had in every instance been interrupted and prevented from making a full statement
of his defence. By the Jews, when he spoke from the castle stairs in Jerusalem
(xx. 22); by the high priest, when he appeared before the Sanhedrim (xxiii. 2) ;
by Felix, when he stood before that governor (xxiv. 22)—though not stated, this
seems to have been the exact state of matters; by Festus, who succeeded Felix
(xxv. 9). And now, before beginning, he bespeaks a different treatment from
the Jewish sovereign. 2. Because he desired to make a complete presentation of his


533


cHap. xxvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a a ae en nn Sa


cause, without which justice could not be done either to himself, the accused
party, or by Agrippa, whose opinion on his case was sought. If, through his
imperfect exposition of the exact situation, Agrippa failed to apprehend the
matter requiring judgment, then neither would Agrippa be able to return nor
himself be likely to receive a righteous verdict. To a fair hearing and an honest
sentence even the worst of criminals is entitled.

III. Paul’s appeal to the knowledge of his contemporaries.—“ All the Jews ”
referred to were obviously all the Jews of Jerusalem and Judea; and these, the
apostle urged, had intimate acquaintance with him. 1. Where they had known
him. In Jerusalem, and therefore at first hand; not simply by report, as one
living at a distance, say in Tarsus, outside the limits of the Holy Land. In the
very Metropolis of Judaism, and therefore in the place where those lived who
were most capable of observing and judging of his character (see on xxii. 3).
2. How long they had known him. From his youth up. Not merely at one or
two brief particular times. This statement implies that Paul had in early life,
for some reason unknown, removed from Tarsus and settled at Jerusalem, where
he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel (see ‘“ Critical Remarks ” on xxii. 3).
3. As what they had known him. Not as a heretic, or unbeliever, but as one
who lived after the straitest sect of their religion, as a Pharisee, as a member
of that community of which Josephus writes: “The Pharisees are a Jewish sect
who appear to be more religious than others, and who appear to interpret the
law more strictly” (Wars, I. v. 2), and again: “they are supposed to excel
others in the accurate knowledge of their country” (Life, 38). All this the
Jews knew, and, were they willing—of which Paul was manifestly not sure—
could testify concerning him. That any of the ‘‘ grave and dignified members
of the Sanhedrim” were “present in that great assembly that morning”
(Spence) cannot be gathered from the narrative, but had they been, they could,
had they chosen, have bowed their heads in acquiescence to what Paul was-
stating to Agrippa.

IV. Paul’s exposition of the charge preferred against himself.—1. An explana-
tion. The offence for which he, a chained prisoner, was being presently examined
and judged consisted, not in his having committed any civil crime, political mis-
demeanour, or religious aberration, but in his having cherished the hope of the
promise which had been (1) made unto the fathers, and which in Paul’s judg-
ment was contained in the sacred Scriptures as well as embraced more than the
prediction of a Divine Messiah, even the announcement of a resurrection, and
of a future glorified life (see ‘“‘ Hints” on ver 6); and (2) was cherished at that
moment by all the Twelve Tribes, who earnestly served God day and night with
a splendid ritual worship, the ultimate end and aim of which was to secure for
them that eternal life, through the advent and work of Messiah, to whom their
sacrificial ceremonialism and symbolism looked forward. He was therefore in
complete harmony with the faith of his countrymen, and differed from them
solely in this, that he held that promise to have been fulfilled in the historical
appearing of Jesus of Nazareth, and that hope to be realised through His
resurrection from the dead. 2. A defence. Did they question what he now
asserted? Did they deem what he now preached a delusion? If he took for
granted that God could raise the dead, why should that be pronounced by them
incredible? Had their sacred books never spoken of a resurrection? Was so
marvellous a phenomenon.as the resuscitation of a dead body altogether unknown
to them? It ought not to be, if they had read that sacred volume with sufficient
care (see 1 Kings xvii. 17-23; 2 Kings iv. 18-37, xiii. 21). His allegation, then,
that he had seen the risen Christ ought not to be lightly waived aside, or the
doctrine of a resurrection contemptuously rejected (see “ Hints” on ver. 8).

Learn—1. The cheerfulness in trial which Divine grace can inspire, 2. The


34


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; THE ACTS.





CHAP. XXVI.





value of a wide and accurate knowledge in religion.


3. The advantage to be


derived in after years from a well-spent youth. 4. The fundamental basis of all
acceptable worship—the promise of God. 5. The reasonableness of faith in the


resurrection, and of hope of eternal life.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1.
Himself.

I. A dangerous temptation.— Before
which all ministers require to be on
their guard, lest, like false teachers,
they should speak merely for them-
selves, for their own glory, or their own
profit.

II. A painful duty.—Which minis-
ters sometimes need to perform, as
when their ministerial usefulness is
threatened by some prevailing calumny,
or they are charged with offences they
have not committed, and which, if not
disproved, would bring their office into
disrepute (2 Cor. vi. 3).

Ill. A blessed privilege.—Which
all ministers have, and true ministers
delight to avail themselves of, when it
means to speak for their Master, Christ
—for His glory, for the advancement
of His cause, for the diffusion of His
truth, for the extension of His kingdom.


A Chained Prisoner on His Deferce.—
A series of marvels.

I. Speaks before the great ones of
the earth without trepidation —An
example of holy courage (Psalm
xxvii, 15 Isa. li, 12).

II. Descants upon a lofty theme
without faltering. —A proof of high en-
dowment (Psalm xxxvii. 30; Prov.
viii. 6).

IIT. Seeks the glory of God without
a thought of self.—A sign of great grace
(John viii. 50).

IV. Enters on his task in sublime
cheerfulness, without a symptom of
despondent dulness:—An instance of
exalted faith.

V. Rises into glowing eloquence,
without a taint of sordid speech.—A
mark of complete self-control.


Ver. 2. The Secret of Paul's Joy in
Addressing Agrippa.

I. What it was not.—Neither (1)
gratification at being honoured to speak


Permitted to Speak for


before a king, since Paul would as
cheerfully have spoken before a common
man; nor (2) satisfaction at being able
to clear his character from the charges
brought against him, though Paul of
course was by no means indifferent to
this; nor (3) delight at the opportunity
of exposing the malice of his foes,
which richly merited both exposure
and rebuke, not to say punishment;
nor (4) expectation of thereby obtaining
his release, since Paul knew that he
must go to Rome.

II. What it was.—l. The prospect
of being able to testify concerning and
jor Christ before one “to whom the
circumstances of the Jewish nation,
the promises made to the fathers, and
the history of Christ, were not un-
known”; and 2. The hope of gaining
at least one convert, perhaps more than
one, to the faith of his exalted Lord.
“ Paul, stretching forth his hand, ap-
proached ‘the king, and aimed at his
heart” (Besser).


The Character of Paul’s Defence.
I. Humble without servility.

II. Fearless without pride.

III. Powerful without passion and
rancour.

IV. Mild without laxity.

V. Prudent without art.
VI. Simple, yet not without skill.


Ver. 3. A Patient Hearing.

I. Due to preachers of the gospel—
always supposing them to be faithful
and earnest. Because of—l. The
Master they serve—Christ. 2. The
message they bring—the good news of
reconciliation. 3. The end at which
they aim—the salvation of their hearers.

II. Frequently denied to preachers.
—Because of—1. Dislike of both the
preacher and his Master. 2. Disincli-
nation towards both the subject and
the aim of his message. 3. Dissatisfac-


535


CHAP. XXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


eT


tion with the manner or the method of
the preacher. 4. Pre-occupation with
other thoughts or things.


Ver. 4. My Manner of Life from
My Youth Up ; or, an Aged Christian’s
Retrospect of his Past Career.

I. Sometimes necessary.—This was
the case with Paul when before Agrippa.
It was needful for the vindication of
himself to appeal to his previous his-
tory, from his youth upwards, to show
that he had never really been out of
harmony with the faith or practice of
his people, as his enemies alleged. So
Christians have sometimes to establish
their own consistency by calling up
their manner of life in former years.

II. Always difficult.—Even Christ-
ians, like other people, are not above
the temptation of dealing gently with
themselves. It requires great grace
to enable even a good man to be faith-
ful in appreciating his own character,
not to over-estimate his virtues or
under-estimate his defects. Paul was
eminently successful in this work of
self-examination. What he claimed
before Agrippa was not that his past
life had been sinless in the sight of
God, but merely that it had been
externally faultless in the eyes of men.

III. Often profitable.— When it
leads to self-humiliation and repent-
ance before God on account of short-
comings ; when it shows that the past
has been at least constantly conscien-
tious, if not completely correct ; when
it enables one to see the guiding hand
of a gracious Providence leading on
from step to step towards the goal of
conversion and salvation.

IV. Not always satisfactory.—It
was not so with Paul. He recognised
that his past career had been out-
wardly correct and inwardly conscien-
tious; but he found that notwith-
standing he had been a persecutor and
a blasphemer—in short, the chief of
sinners.


Ver. 6. The Promise Made to the
Fathers.


I. Divine in its origin.—Made by
536


God. Had the author been man, the —
promise would have been worthless.

II. Ancient in its date.—Going
back to the fathers of the faithful,
yea, even to the first father of the
human family.

III. Gracious in its character —
Prompted by the spontaneous love and
kindness of God.

IV. Great in its contents.—A pro-
mise of salvation.

V. Varied in its form. — 1. To
Adam, the promise of a woman’s seed
who should bruise the serpent’s head
(Gen. iii, 15). 2. To Abraham, the
promise of a land (Gen. xii. 1), of a
seed (Gen. xiii. 15), of a son (Gen.
xv. 4). 3. To Israel under Moses,
the promise of a law-giver like unto
Moses (Deut. xviii. 18). 4. To David,
the promise of a son who should sit
and reign upon his throne for ever
(2 Sam. vii. 12). 5. To Israel in the
time of Isaiah, the promise (1) of a
virgin’s child, whose name should be
called Immanuel (Isa. vii. 14), Wonder-
ful Counsellor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of —
Peace (Isa. ix. 6): (2) of a suffering
servant of Jehovah, who should bear
the sins of many and make intercession
for the transgressors (Isa. liii. 11, 12).
6. To Israel, in the days of Jeremiah,
the promise of one who should be
called the Lord our Righteousness
(Jer. xxxiii. 15, 16). 7. To Israel, in
the era of Ezekiel, the promise of a
shepherd king like David to rule over
his people (Hzek. xxxvii. 24). 8. To
Israel, after the return from captivity,
the promise of one called “the Branch”
(Zech. iii. 8).

VI. Sure in its fulfilment.—This
involved in the fact of its being the
promise of a God who cannot lie.

VII. Realised in the person and
work of Christ.—This the burden of
the gospel message, as it was the theme
of Paul’s preaching.


Ver. 8. Raising the Dead—credible
or incredible ?

I. Incredible only on one or other,
or all, of the following suppositions:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXVI.





1. That the dead have entirely ceased to
be. In this case they could not be
raised, though other beings might be
created in‘ their stead. 2. That there
is no power adequate to effect their
resurrection. This will require to be
admitted if there is no God, since a
power less than Divine will not suffice.
3. That it is impossible for a Divine
power, should there be such, to interfere
with the ordinary laws of nature. This
the position occupied by those who hold
that the supernatural must never
transcend the limits, but always restrict
itself to the channels, of the natural.
4. That the Divine power, assuming
such exists, has distinctly declined to
interfere with natural law. This, how-
ever, God has nowhere done—certainly
not in Scripture. 5. That the Divine
Being has expressly asserted no such
event as a resurrection will ever take
place. This also He has nowhere
affirmed.

II. Credible.—1l. Jf the dead are
still living, though they have passed
beyond this mortal scene (Matt. xxii.
32). 2. If there be a God, as all nature
cries aloud through all her works, as


Scripture throughout asserts, and as
mans own nature attests there is.
3. If God has distinctly promised that
He will raise the dead. This He has
most certainly done. Both Old and
New Testaments supply texts in con-
firmation. 4. If Christ has already
risen from the dead. That He has is
what Paul asserted. For the sake of the
truth of this his fellow-apostles as well
as himself were willing to stake, and
actually did stake, their lives. 5. Jf
in the idea of a resurrection nothing
contrary to reason exists. Whatever
objections may be taken to its credi-
bility, it cannot be asserted that the
notion of a resurrection is either incon-
ceivable or irrational. 6. Jf a resur-
rection would raise man to a higher
stage of being than before. Were it
certain that man’s future rising would
be a backward step, it might be difficult
to credit the occurrence of any such
event in the future. 7. If a resurrec-
tion would furnish to the universe an
additional proof of the Divine glory.
This assuredly it would. It would
exhibit at once the glory of His grace
and power.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 9—18.


Paul's Rehearsal of An Old Story ; or, the Secret of his Conversion Explained.

J. The character of his pre-Christian life.—Briefly, one of opposition to the
name of Jesus, and to all who bore it. 1. Conscientious. Paul distinctly
claimed that at that time he was as truly conscientious as he had been since his
conversion. He imagined, ignorantly of course (1 Tim. i. 13), that in so
opposing, hindering, persecuting, and destroying Christians, he was actually
dving God service. He did not avow that, though acting, as he believed, from
conscientious motives, he was thereby free from guilt; otherwise he could not
have written, ‘‘ Howbeit I obtained mercy.” Paul had by this time arrived at
the perception of this fundamental principle in morals, that while man is
responsible for acting in accordance with conscience, he is no less accountable for
the education and enlightenment of his conscience. It is only conscience
enlightened by the word of God which is an absolutely safe guide for the
Christian. 2. Active. His hostility towards the name of Jesus and its bearers
was not confined to the region of sentiment and feeling, but was no sooner
formed than translated into word and deed. Having concluded in the court of
conscience that he ought to harry out the Christians from Jerusalem and Judea,
and hunt them, if that were possible, from off the face of the earth, he adopted
every method in his power to give effect to his ferocious purpose. Armed with
authority from the chief priests, he became a furious inquisitor, persecutor, and
oppressor—(1) shutting up the saints in prison wherever and whenever they fell
into his clutches; (2) voting against them when they were put to death, either


537


CHAP. XXvI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
ep _._O ag


actually, as a member of the Sanhedrim, or metaphorically, by mentally assenting
to their condemnation, thus constituting himself participem criminis, or (to use
a Scottish law phrase) “art and part,” a sharer in the wickedness of shedding
their innocent blood; (3) punishing them in every synagogue in which they
were found, in order to make them blaspheme that holy name wherewith they
were called (Jas. ii. 7); and even (4) following them to strange cities, such as
Damascus, in order to arrest them and fetch them, bound, to Jerusalem. 3.
Passionate. Nor was it merely as an unpleasant task that this ferocious and
bloody occupation was undertaken and carried through by him, but as a
business into which he had enlisted all the energy and enthusiasm of his soul,
and from which he derived the most intoxicating and fiendish delight. He was
mad exceedingly, and, as Luke reports, breathed out threatenings and slaughter
against them. 4. Hatensive. His efforts were not restricted to Jerusalem or
Judea, but passed beyond the limits of the Holy Land, even to foreign cities.
From Paul’s description of his early career we can see that Luke’s account
(ix. 1-18) isin no degree exaggerated, while Agrippa might have inferred, had
he wished, that something extraordinary must have happened to produce the
change in Paul which he and all men beheld—a something hardly less super-
natural than that which Paul next proceeded to relate—viz., the appearance to
him of the risen Christ.

II. The story of his miraculous conversion.—1. The place where it occurretl.
In the vicinity of that very Damascus to which he had been journeying on the
unhallowed errand just described. Paul was not likely to forget a spot so
sacred as that on which he passcd so suddenly, completely, and for ever from the
darkness of sin and Satan into God’s own marvellous light. It can hardly be
supposed that the Eunuch would ever cease to remember the desert road to
Gaza, where he met with Philip the evangelist and found the key to the Bible
in the person of the Saviour (viii. 26); or that Lydia would ever become un-_
mindful of the place of prayer by the river side in Philippi, where the Lord
opened her heart to attend unto the things that were spoken by Paul (xvi. 13).
2 The time when it happened. “ At mid-day, O king.” This also was engraven
ineffaceably on the tablets of his memory, as was the tenth hour on the memory
of Andrew (John i. 39). Many who have undergone the same spiritual change
as Paul, the change of conversion, find it difficult to state precisely the moment
when the blinding scales of ignorance and unbelief fell from their eyes, and the
light of saving truth flashed in upon their understandings. But no such un-
certainty could exist with Paul, any more than with the just named Lydia
(xvi. 14), or with the Philippian gaoler (xvi. 34). 3. The instrumentality that
effected it. “A light from heaven.” (1) That this was no mere flash of
lightning or other natural phenomenon, but a supernatural illumination, is
proved by four things: its splendour, which was above the brightness of the
sun ; its time, which was mid-day, when the sun is at its brightest, and lightning,
should it occur then, is scarcely visible; its locality, which was not the broad
expanse of the firmament, but the vicinity of the apostle and his companions—
the light ‘shone round about them ; its effect—it hurled the apostle and _ his
companions to the ground, probably threw them from the beasts on which they
rode, filling the apostle’s companions with terror, and striking the apostle himself
with blindness (ix. 7, 8), though the apostle does not now deem it necessary to
introduce these details into his speech. (2) That the light was the glory nimbus
of the exalted Saviour is apparent from the circumstances next narrated by Paul
—that he heard a voice issuing from it which he afterwards recognised to be
that of Jesus, whom he had been persecuting, and that he carried on a con-
versation with that same Jesus, whose glorified form he discerned in the midst
of the light. 4. The power that wrought it. This was not the light, which was

538


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omar. xxvt.





simply the radiant symbol of Jesus presence, or, the alarm into which he,
no less than his companions, had been thrown, since, though fear may awaken
conviction, it cannot convert ; but the grace of Him who had, in this mysterious
fashion, appeared to him on the way. “It is the Spirit (of Christ) that
quickeneth” (John vi. 63). Souls are born again, “not of flesh or of blood,
or by the will of man, but by the power of God” (John i. 13). 5. The
process by which it was completed. 'The conversation carried on by Christ with
his soul. (1) The double form of address—“ Saul! Saul !”—indicative of
earnestness ; the pathetic interrogation—“ Why persecutest thou Me?”; and the
solemn declaration, “It is hard for thee to kick against the goads” ;—made it
evident that he was standing before One who not only knew his name and the
details of his past career, but was acquainted with the interior history of his soul,
and understood the moods of mind through which he had been passing on the
road to Damascus, and probably ever since he had witnessed the trial and execu-
tion of Stephen. If Paul on that day remembered the words of Scripture at all,
it is far from unlikely that these were the words which instinctively leapt into
his thoughts: “O Lord, Thou hast searched me and known me.. .” (Psalm
exxxix. 1-12). (2) Vhe answer returned by Christ to his question, “ Who art
Thou, Lord ?”—‘“ I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest”—must have discovered to
his mind three things of which he had been previously unaware, and up to that
moment had presumably not imagined could be true: that Jesus of Nazareth wa;
no longer dead, but risen, as the Christians affirmed, and was the Messiah ; that
his conception of himself and his past career as highly pleasing to God was
fundamentally and totally wrong; and that in persecuting the followers of th»
Way he was practically fighting against God. All which must have humbled him
in the dust of penitence and self-abasement. (3) The command of Jesus that he
should rise, stand upon his feet, and proceed upon a different mission—not agains .
but for, the cause he had been seeking to destroy—could not fail to inspire withi:
him hopes of pardon and acceptance, notwithstanding his heinous wickednes::
and sin. When Paul found that Jesus did not strike him into death, confound
him with terrors, or declare against him bitter and relentless enmity, what could
he conclude but that Jesus was willing to forgive the past? If doubt lingered
in his soul, it must have been for ever banished when Christ proceeded to talk
about employing him as a preacher of the faith ?

IfI. The tenor of his apostolical commission.—This was—1. Based upon the
fact that Christ had now appeared to him, as to all the other apostolic persons.
Paul afterwards relied on this as a sufficient guarantee of his apostolical authority
(1 Cor. ix. 1, xv. 8). 2. Defined as a witness-bearing about the things in which
Christ both had appeared and would appear to him. In conformity with this Paul
constantly claimed that his gospel had not been derived indirectly from man, but
had been communicated to him directly by Christ (Gali. 12). 3. Directed to the
Gentiles—not exclusively, but ultimately and chiefly. It is not in accordance
with fact that Paul originally did not contemplate a Gentile mission (Baur,
Hausrath), but was only reluctantly compelled by circumstances to adopt this,
because of the refusal of his countrymen, the Jews, to hear the gospel (xiii. 47).
That Paul did not start at once with a Gentile mission constituted no proof that
that formed not his intention from the first, or that he was not aware of his
Divine designation for such an enterprise, but only attested his wisdom in
(1) waiting for heavenly leading to open up his path, and (2) seeking a point of
connection for himself and his gospel with the heathen, through the synagogues,
in which these mingled as proselytes with the Jews. Besides, had Paul not
commenced with the Jews he would have both given to his hearers an erroneous
impression of his gospel, which was no entirely new religion, but the necessary,
because Divinely arranged, development of the old faith of the Hebrews, and


90d


cap. xxvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


would have lacked a congenial soil for it to fix its first roots in. 4. Designed for
the salvation of the heathen: by (1) opening their eyes—i.e., imparting to them
spiritual illumination (Luke i. 79; Eph. i. 18); (2) turning them, as the result
of such enlightenment, from darkness unto light (Eph. v.11; Col. i. 13; 1 Peter
ii. 9), and from the power of Satan unto God (Eph. ii. 2; Rom. xvi. 20);
(3) bestowing on them forgiveness—i.¢., remission of sins (Rom. iii, 25); and
(4) securing for them an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in
Christ (xx. 22; Eph. i. 11, 14, 18; Col. i. 12; 1 Peteri. 4). ‘An excellent
description of St. Paul’s commission to preach, by the five ends or effects of it,
viz., conversion, faith, remission of sins, sanctification, salvation” (Trapp). 5.
Accompanied by a promise of protection against the machinations of both Jews
and Gentiles, a promise which his past history and present position showed had


been marvellously fulfilled.


Learn—1. That to follow conscience (unless it is enlightened) is no guarantee


that one will not commit sin and incur guilt.
greatest wickedness by appealing to the dictates of conscience.


2. That men have justified the
3. That men’s


judgments on their characters and lives differ greatly according to the stand-
points from which they are pronounced. 4. That Divine grace can change the


worst of sinners.


5. That nothing transpiring on earth is or can be hid from
the eyes of Jesus Christ (Heb. iv. 13; Rev. i. 14).
appoints a messenger He gives him a message.


6. That when Christ
7. That the grand end of the


ministry is the salvation of them that hear (1 Cor. i. 21; 1 Tim. iv. 16).


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Paul's Mistaken Thoughis.

I. That Jesus of Nazareth was an
imposter.—Not a few regard Christ in
this light still. Many consider Him
to have been a mere man, and Divine
in no sense, in which others may not
also be Divine.

II. That the followers of Jesus should
be persecuted and put to death.—This
opinion is not yet extinct. Many who
would tolerate Christianity hold that
other religions should be put down and
their professors suppressed by force.
To punish men for their religious views,
besides being a blunder, is a sin.

ITI. That the favour of Heaven could
be secured only by them who obeyed
the law, and observed the ritual, of
Moses.—Thousands still hold that none
can be saved outside of their sect, and
thousands more that salvation is pos-
sible only to them who seek it through
the works of the law—both of which
opinions are delusions.

IV. That the resurrection of Jesus of
Nazareth was a fiction.—So numerous
unbelievers still hold. But as Paul
was undeceived on this point, so will
they eventually be.


rin
Ut


Ver. 10. Was Paul a Member of the
Sanhedrim ?—The answer to this ques-
tion largely turns on the other, Was.
Paul married? That he was, Luther
and the Reformers generally inferred
from 1 Cor. vii. 8: ‘“ But I say to the
unmarried and to widows, It is good
for them, if they abide even as I.”
“That the unmarried are widowers is
clear from this, that Paul has already
spoken to the unmarried (ver. 1), and
married (ver. 7), and now comes to the
widowed (ver. 8). Accordingly, the
apostle appears to reckon himself in
the category of widowers, and already
Luther’s sound judgment has discerned
that directions concerning the married
life, such as are given immediately
before ver. 8, are suitable only in the
mouth of a man who is, or was, married,
and who knows from his own experience
that of which he speaks. An impartial
reading of 1 Cor. vi. 12, vii. 10, cannot
but confirm this judgment of Luther’s ;
and many other passages in the Pauline
letters, as, eg., 1 Thess. ii. 7, v. 4;
1 Cor. ili. 2, iv. 15, vii. 14, manifest so
deep a feeling for the family life, and
so rich experiences out of the same,


a


a HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





that this impression is only confiymed ”
(Hausrath, Der Apostel Paulus, p. 47).


Ver. 13. Memorable Moments.—Paul
never forgot the hour when the glori-
fied Redeemer first appeared to him,
shattered with a glance and a word
the entire superstructure of his past
life, and transformed him intoa new
man.

I. Such moments occur in the lives
of men.—Such are those, e.g., in which
Christ, through His word and by His
Spirit, for the first time looks in upon
a soyl, awakening within it a sense of
sin, shining into it with His gracious
countenance, translating it out of dark-
ness into light, and turning it from
Satan to serve the living and true God.

IT. Such moments should not be for-
gotten.—Should be remembered by men
rather—l. For the eternal praise of
the Lord whose grace has been so
signally displayed in them. 2. For the
continual instruction of themselves,
reminding them of the grace they have
received and the gratitude they should
feel 3. For a permanent memorial
to the world, to rebuke them in their
sins and call them to the way of salva-
tion.


Vers. 14, 15. Did Christ speak
Hebrew ?—Compare Christ’s words to
Paul in ix. 4, 5. That on this occasion
He did, Paul distinctly states. Whether
‘this was Christ’s language on earth is
debated. The probability is that He
could use both Greek and Hebrew.
Brought up, as He had been, in a Jewish
household, it is hardly supposable that
He could not think, read, write, and
speak, in Hebrew. It is even likely that
when He taught in the synagogues, the
language used by Him was Hebrew.
Occasionally when working miracles,
as the Gospel records show, He used
Aramaic terms, such as “Talitha cumi,”
“ Ephatha”; while on the cross He cried:
“ Eloi, Eloi, lama sabacthani.” At
the same time, as Greek was at this
period commonly spoken in all those
countries which were washed by the
Mediterranean waters, it is just as


CHAP. XXVI.








reasonable to conjecture that Christ
could speak Greek. Whether He em-
ployed this tongue in ordinary inter-
course with His countrymen will most
likely never be determined. Nor is it
of much consequence. The instance
here given of Christ speaking! from
heaven to a mortal is a solitary one,
and not much can be founded on it in
the way of argument for one conclusion
or another. Some think that John’s
revelations were given to him in
Hebrew. But this is, of course, con-
jectural,


Vers. 16-18. Zrue Ministerial Ordi-
nation.—Illustrated in the case of Paul.

I. Proceeds from Christ. — Prayer
and the imposition of hands, whether
by bishop or presbytery, does not make
an unconverted man a minister of Jesus
Christ.

II. Appoints to personal service.—
Not to temporal or ecclesiastical digni-
ties, or even to wealth and comfort,
but to lowly labour in witness-bearing
for Jesus Christ.

III. Guarantees spiritual illumina-
tion.—Whe Christ ordains a man to
be His witness He reveals Himself to
that man’s soul, not only at the begin-
ning, and as a necessary condition of
being ordained as a minister, but from
time to time, as his work of witness-
bearing requires.

IV. Promises adequate protection.
—As Christ shielded Paul from his
adversaries, so can and will He guard
His faithful minister and witness so
long as his service is required.

V. Contemplates lofty aims.—1. The
enlightenment of souls—“ to open their
eyes.” 2. The conversion of sinners—
“that they may turn from darkness to
light.” 3. The bestowment of pardon—
“that they may receive remission of
sins.” 4. The preparation of those
who are enlightened, converted, par-
doned for glory —‘‘that they may receive
an inheritance among them that are
sanctified.” 5. The implantation of
faith—“ through faith that is in Me.”


Ver. 18. The Way to The Inheritance.
I. No inheritance without sanctifica-


At


Pe 4


OHAP. XXVI.





tion.—(See xx. 32, and compare Heb.
xii. 14). “ Follow holiness,” or, the
sanctification without which “no man
shall see the Lord.”

II. No sanctification without faith.
—Since justification must precede, and
justification is impossible without faith
(Gal. ii. 16), while Christ can be made
of God sanctification only to them who
believe (1 Cor. i. 30).

III. No faith without Christ.—J.c.,
without the crucified, risen, and glorified
Christ, who alone is the proper, personal
object of faith (xx. 21; Col. ii. 7;
1 John iii. 23).


Faith in Christ.

I. The object of faith.—Christ:
Christianity not merely a system of
truths about God, nor a code of morality
deducible from these, but the affiance
of the whole spirit fixed upon the re-
deeming, revealing Christ.

II. The nature and the essence of
the act of faith —Faith is not merely
she assent of the understanding to
certain truths, or the persuasion of the
reality of unseen things; it is not even
merely the confident expectation of
future good; it is the personal relation
of him that believes to the living person
its object ; in other words, faith is trust.

III. The power of faith—1l. We
aresaved—.e., justified and sanctified —
by faith. But 2. The power that saves
comes, not from the faith, but from the
Christ in whom faith trusts. It is
Christ’s biood, Christ’s sacrifice, Christ’s
life, Christ’s intercession, that saves.
Faith is the channel through which
the Divine fulness flows over into the
soul’s emptiness.

IV. The guilt and criminality of
unbelief—I1l. Because, assuming that
God is to be the author of salvation,
no other way can be conceived in which
the Divine fulness should pass over
into the soul than that of receiving what
God has provided. 2. Because the
difficulties in the way of exercising
faith are not intellectual, but moral,
and lie, not in the region of the under-
standing, but in that of the heart. 3.
Because the fact that a man will not


542


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





believe proves his nature to be turned
or turning away from, and setting
itself in rebellion against, God’s love.—
Alexander Maclaren, D.D.


A Sermon on Conversion.

I. How it is effected—1. By the
grace of God. 2. Through the instru-
mentality of the Word. 3. With the
active concurrence of the human will.

TI. What it implies —A turning.
1. From darkness to light. 2. From the
power of Satan unto God.

III. What it secures.—1. Remission
of sins. 2, Inheritance among the
sanctified.


“ Faith that isin Me.” Saving Faith
is Faith in Christ.—1. It is faith in
Christ as a Person. There is assent to
a proposition, an acknowledgment of
its truth. There is reliance on a
Person as able and willing to do what
He has undertaken. Saving faith is
such a belief of the inspired testimony
concerning the Person as leads to sin-
cere trust in Him for salvation. 2. It
is faith in Christ as a Person who has -
accomplished a work. Christ has not
only delivered a system of theological
and ethical doctrines. He has done
something. It is what He has done—
His sufferings and death—that consti-
tutes Him the proper object of saving
faith. It contemplates Him, not as a
Teacher, but as a Saviour. 3. It is
faith in Christ as a Person who has
accomplished a work which has a God-
ward aspect. True it is that His work
has a manward aspect—exercises a
moral influence on men, as drawing
them to God. But it has also a God-
ward aspect—has a legal value, as
satisfying the claims of the Divine
governmerit. Take away the latter,
and you remove the basis of the former.
4. It is faith in Christ as a Person
who, after having accomplished by His
death a work which has a Godward
aspect, is now alive. There may be a
dead faith in a dead Saviour. There
may be a dead faith in a living Saviour
There ought to be a living faith in a
living Saviour.—G. Brooks.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. ocHAP. XXVI.





HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 19—23.


Paul’s Subsequent Career as a Christian; or, how he turned to the Gentile
Mission.

I. The hidden impulse of his ministry.—The heavenly vision of the glorified
Saviour who had appeared to him, pardoned, called, and appointed him to his
special life-work. Captivated by that “vision” he felt himself to be no longer a
freeman, but the bond-slave of Jesus Christ (Phil. i. 1). It remained in and
with him, a memory unfading, which cheered him in solitude and depression,
strengthened him in weakness and weariness, and generally rendered it an
absolute necessity to preach the gospel and keep ever moving on towards regions
beyond (1 Cor. ix. 16 ; 2 Cor. x. 16). It accompanied him wherever he wandered,
supplying him at every stage and in every time of need with fresh inspiration,
zeal, and courage. Whatever he had been and done since that memorable day,
he. told the king, had been due to that “heavenly vision” to which he had not
been disobedient. Did Christ’s people evince the like joyful submission to, and
cheerful following of, the ‘heavenly visions” which shine in upon their souls,
they might emulate, if they could not rival, the apostle in lofty characters and
noble deeds.

II. The wide extent of his ministry.—1. Jt commenced in Damascus. There he
preached in the synagogues and confounded the Jews, proving that Jesus was
the Christ (ix. 20, 22). 2. Zt advanced to Jerusalem. There he spake boldly in the
name of the Lord Jesus and disputed against the Grecians (ix. 29). 3. I¢
extended throughout Judea. Not before or immediately after his first visit to
Jerusalem, when he retired to Syria and Cilicia (see Gal. i. 22). Perhaps when
he repaired to the Metropolis on the occasion of the famine (xi. 30), or when he
visited the capital between his first and second missionary journeys (xviii. 22).
4. It passed to the Gentiles. First in Antioch of Pisidia (xiii. 46), and ever
afterwards, as opportunity presented, in Iconium (xiv. 1), in Lystra (xiv. 15), in
Philippi (xvi. 17), etc. Note the ever-widening circles of the apostle’s useful-
ness. First in Damascus, where he had been converted; next in Jerusalem,
where he had been known from his youth up (ver. 4); then in Judea, among
the homes and haunts of his countrymen, for whose salvation he ardently
longed (Rom. ix. 3, x. 1); and lastly in the heathen world, beyond the confines
of Palestine.

III. The unvarying burden of his ministry.—1. That the Messiah predicted by
Moses and the prophets had come, as was testified by the correspondence between
their writings and Christ’s sufferings, death, and resurrection. If Paul
attempted to establish Christ’s Messiahship by finding in the Old Testament
allusions to His death and resurrection, this cannot, with reasonable fairness, be
ascribed to the apostle’s Pharisaic Bible studies and vivid imagination, but must
be set down to the fact that such allusions are really in the Old Testament,
although prior to the illumination shed upon these by the events in Christ’s
history, they were not perceived by him any more than by the other apostles
(John ii. 22). 2. That Christ by His resurrection had brought light to both Jews
and Gentiles,—light they did not possess and could not have possessed until after
that event, as, ¢.g., (1) upon the personality of Christ Himself, showing Him to
be both the Messiah and the Son of God (Rom. i. 4); (2) upon the purpose
and plan of salvation, which had ever been through grace and by faith
(Rom. iii. 24-26) ; (3) upon the character and value of Christ’s death, which was
thereby declared to have been an atonement for sin (Rom. iv. 25); and (4) upon
the reality of a resurrection to eternal life and glory (Rom. vii. 11 ; 2 Tim. i. 10).
3. That Jews and Gentiles both should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy
of repentance. This had been a never-failing theme in Ephesus (xx. 21), in Athens


543


oHap xxvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





(xvii. 20), in Thessalonica (1 Thess. i, 9), and elsewhere—as, indeed, it could not
have been otherwise, if his mission were to be executed in accordance with instruc-
tions received (ver. 18).

IV. The enormous difficulty of his ministry.—This arose from—1. The severe
labours it entailed in travelling from place to place, on long and arduous journeys,
amidst severe bodily weakness and much infirmity. 2. Zhe manifold dangers it
involved, of which the apostle furnishes an affecting enumeration in 2 Cor. xi.
23-27. But chiefly from 3. The ferocious enemies it aroused, who were princi-
pally found amongst his own countrymen, the Jews, the Gentiles having seldom
opposed him except when stirred up by these. Note.—“ There are three chief
points in the writings of the prophets. Christ’s sufferings, Christ’s resurrection,
and the publication of them amongall nations. And it was precisely these three
points that the Jews were most against; they were offended at the first, denied
the second, and grudged the third” (Starke). And 4. The deadly persecutions it
raised against him, from the period of his first evangelistic labours in Damascus
(ix. 23) till the day when the Jews apprehended him in the temple at Jerusalem,
and sought to kill him (ver. 21). Only a man of heroic spirit could have under-
gone the fatigues, hardships, oppositions, and persecutions, that fell to the lot of
Paul; and not even he, any more than Paul, could have done it in his own strength.

V. The secret support of his ministry.—The help of God. As he claimed to
be what he was solely by the grace of God (1 Cor. xv. 10), so he arrogated to
himself no credit or glory for what he had donein the ministry of the gospel, but
ascribed all to God’s power, which had been graciously vouchsafed to him
(Phil. iv. 13). Never before had the nothingness of human strength in the
domain of religion been realised as it was by Paul, and certainly no one has sur-
passed, or even rivalled, him since in the feeling of dependence upon God. Paul,
in all that he became, all the soul-grandeur which he exhibited, was like plastic
clay in the hands of the potter; in all that he achieved he served as a passive
instrument in God’s hand. ‘“ Not I, but the grace of God which was with me,”
constituted his explanation of both phenomena. “That which impels him is
never caprice ; egoistic, subjective interests are wholly wanting in him. What
impels him is to him always something higher than himself. The objective rules
over him. His personality is only the ‘vessel’ for the heavenly contents”
(Hausrath, Der Apostel Paulus, p. 51). At every stage in his life’s journey
Paul could have sung :—

“Here I raise my Ebenezer,
Hither by Thy help I’m come ;
And Ihope, by Thy good pleasure,
Safely to arrive at home.”


Learn—1. That the first act of a converted heart is faith. 2. That the first
sphere of labour for a convert should be amongst his own. 3. That the first
word in the gospel message should be “repent and turn to God.” 4. That the
first sign of repentance should be forsaking old sins and performing new works.
5. That the first trial which a convert will encounter will be the opposition of the
unbelieving world. 6. That the first qualification requisite to constitute Christ
a Saviour was His resurrection from the dead. 7. That the first thing
demanded by a Christian for the successful performance of his duty is the help
of God.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 19. The Heavenly Vision. see God revealed as a Saviour, and is
J. The highest privilege that can therefore the beginning of new life to
possibly be conferred upon a soul.— the soul.
To see Christ by the eye of faith is to II. The most powerful force that


544


ra


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cnap. xxv.


a eeEeeeeeeee="


can operate upon a soul.—tThe soul
that beholds that vision is immediately
changed in its whole inner nature,
lifted out of its old grooves of thought,
feeling, and action, and started upon a
new career, which will terminate in
eternal life and'glory.

ITF. The sublimest message that
can be uttered by a soul.—Nothing
greater can be told by human lips than
what such a vision of the Divine love,
grace, and pity, means for fallen man.


Was Paul's Vision of Christ an
Objective Reality ?—“‘ It is incontro-
vertible that Paul felt convinced that
Jesus had there (¢.¢., before Damascus)
stepped forth to meet him objectively,
visibly, and audibly. He does not at
all compare this appearance with the
visions which, according to his own and
others’ faith, continued even at a later
time to be possible, and which he him-
self, along with others, actually shared
—or with the wonderful subjective
experiences in which, when in a con-
dition of ecstasy, he saw and heard
the Lord, or in which, without knowing
whether he was in the body or out of
the body, he found himself rapt up into
the heavenly paradise (2 Cor. xii. 2 7)
—hbut exactly with those appearances
of which the Evangelists have reported
to us the details, and concerning which
Paul clearly supposes and presupposes
as generally recognised, that. they are
now closed, since he says that to him
as the last of all (1 Cor. xv. 8) had
Christ become visible. And just this
appearance of the Risen One with the
word addressed to him by that Risen
One was the power which brought him,
the persecutor of the Christian Church,
to faith in Christ.’—Kostlin: Der
Glaube und seine Bedeutung, etc., p. 40.


Visions of Heavenly Things.—
“Wherefore, O King Agrippa, I was
not disobedient unto the heavenly
vision” (ver. 19). “For, see, saith
He, that thou make all things accord-
ing to the pattern that was shewed
thee in the mount” (Heb. viii. 5).
These words bring before our minds


uN


the work of two of the very greatest
men in the world’s history, and they
suggest an important analogy of ex-
perience, as fitting them for their work.
The work of Moses, it is true, might
easily be under-estimated. We might
think of him as the lawgiver of but
one nation; that nation, moreover,
being very restricted in its domains,
and of comparatively small numbers.
We have rather to think of the unique
mission of Israel as a people that
should ultimately pervade the world
with their influence, and of the work
of their lawgiver as fitting them to
fulfil this mission well. It is impossible,
however, to do justice to the work of


' Moses without taking into considera-


tion, along with it, the work of his
great successor, Paul. For it was in
the mission of the apostle that the
mission of Moses was continued and
fulfilled. The Jews were already
scattered abroad in many lands; “for
Moses from generations of old hath in
every city them that preach him”
(xv. 21). Thus was his law more or
less penetrating the nations with its
influence. And in that day, when
“the fulness of the Gentiles” shall
have “come in, and all Israel shall be
saved” (Rom. xi. 25, 26), it shall be
more than ever manifest how great is
the world’s debt to these two men of
God. In either case, the work was
extremely difficult. Think of the con-
dition of Israel at the time when
Moses was entrusted with his great
responsibility. Think, again, of the
condition of the Roman world at the
time when Paul received his commis-
sion, In such work, moreover, there
is one element of inspiration, one secret
of strength, without which no mere
enthusiasm of feeling, or power of de-
votion, can be effectual—viz., the inspi-
ration and strength of a Divine Ideal.

I. Great ideals are the glory of man.
—No other creatures here can have
them ; only men may receive an inspi-
ration that shall raise them above
themselves. This being so, whence
comes the ideal? It is not of man


himself, obviously, but of God. So
545


CHAP. XXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Moses could have no inspiring ideal of
what Israel might be, and should be
one day, an ideal that should possess
his imagination and fill his soul with
a holy glow of hope, abiding with him
day and night, and making him strong
to endure and to do, unless the pattern
had been shown him in the mount.
But there God unveiled to him all the
possibilities of that people of Israel,
and thenceforth Moses set himself, by
God’s help, to make the vision real.
In like manner, Paul could not have
portrayed for himself the glowing
picture of a regenerate Roman world,
all bowing in adoration to the Cruci-
fied, had not the glory, beyond the
brightness of the sun, shone from the
heavens, blinding, for a while, the
natural vision, but photographing it-
self indelibly on the soul; so that
thenceforth only “one thing” could he
do—traverse city and country, land
and sea, toil tired but untiringly, and
endure infamy and death, if only he
might reduce vision to fact, and make
his high imaginations actual realities.
So all man’s true ideals, of personal life
and of service for man’s sake, are of


God. They may come to us mediately,


indeed ; for they shine before us in the
lives of noble men, they burn with
quenchless fire in the poems of the
ages, they lift their fair beauty before
our view in the manifold Scriptures of
God, and they show themselves as at
once ideal and real in the glory of the
Only-Begotten, ‘“‘full of grace and
truth” (John i. 14). But, mediately
as these ideals may thus be presented
to us, they must take immediate hold
of our imagination, and kindle the
fervours of our own soul—even as
though we ourselves were in the mount,
alone with God, or were struck by the
sudden glory from the skies. Other-
wise their Divine purpose will be un-
fulfilled, and our life largely unblessed.

II. It has been already partly
assumed, but must now be more
strongly emphasised, that the great
ideals which are intended to ennoble
and transfigure human life are not
ideals of mere happiness, as though


546


we were to be only dreamers dreaming
of our own joy, although there shall
be a supreme happiness as the inevi-
table result of making our life accord-
ing to the pattern shown us in the


mount, and of obeying the heavenly


vision. But such happiness comes
only when it is not sought for its own
sake, its delicate bloom being spoiled,
and its very essence perishing, if we
snatch at it greedily. The ideal, so far
as it pertains to ourselves, is an ideal
of character, a revelation to ourselves
of what, by the grace of God, it is
possible we may become. And just in
so far as it is a revelation of possibili-
ties of character, it is a command to
us that we do our utmost to make the
possible an accomplished fact, saying
to us ever, with a more august and
sacred behest than that of mere words,
“Thou shalt!” Thus the true ideal of
man’s life is the law of life. But
human character, at its best, is possible
only through service, loving and loyal
service rendered to man, for man’s own
sake and for God’s. For even charac-
ter may be made too exclusively an end ~
in itself, as an achievement of our own,
and as meaning the ennoblement
merely of our personal manhood; in
which case its nobleness is tarnished,
being vitiated by the selfishness of our
motive and aim. Our own character
cannot have true worth save in so far
as it isin true relation to the charac-
ters of others, and to the one perfect
character of God. And such relation
implies service—the service of loyal
love.

III. The ideals of life are neces-
sarily progressive, partly on account
of the material which has to be
fashioned by them, and partly through
their own nature.—The material will
not always allow of the ideal being at
first so perfect as it shall be afterwards.
The pattern of what Israel was to be-
come, as a people, did not show all the
possibilities of ultimate good; nor did
the heavenly vision, perhaps, reveal
immediately to the apostle all that was
in God’s heart for the world. Enough,
if, for the present, the ideal can accom-


e HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


CHAP. XXVI.





plish its present work. King Alfred’s
ideal of what England might be made,
as a nation, was perhaps not such as
may be cherished by the successors of
his spirit, discerning the needs and
the possibilities of our country in the
light of later history. In like manner,
the ideal of our personal life will not
be so full, perhaps not so imperious, in
the immaturer days of life; it will
rather be according to our needs and
our capabilities. The ideal grows in
significance as the material which is
to be fashioned by it becomes more
susceptible more responsive. But in
its own nature the ideal is necessarily
growing and progressive. It grows


with all our growth; but it grows like- ©


wise because it is intrinsically infinite,
and must always make larger demands
on our faith and loyalty the more
fully we yield to the demands already
made. Let us learn, however, the
solemn truth that, just as surely as
our ideals will grow and live, if we
believe in them and live by them, so
surely will they dwindle and die, if we
are untrue to their Divine claims and
promises, Yes; the pattern may lose
its beauty, the vision may fade; the
inspirations of life may die away.—
T. F. Lockyer, B.A.


Ver. 20. Works Worthy of Repent-
ance.—Are works—

I. Springing from a spirit of re-
pentance.

II. Attesting the sincerity of re-
pentance.

III. Accomplishing the purpose of
repentance.

IV. Disclosing the beauty of re-
pentance.


Ver. 21. Men Whom the World Some-
times Seeks to Murder.

I. Those who would lead it into
higher truths.—Too often verified in
other spheres than that of religion.
Prophets and preachers with new ideas
have commonly had a poor reception
from the world.

II. Those who decline to be partners
iv its wickedness——When a man





enters upon the path of holiness, all
who walk in sinful ways interpret his
behaviour as a silent protest against,
and rebuke of, their ungodliness and
dislike, if they do not hate and per-
secute him accordingly (1 Pet. iv. 4).

III. Those who have conferred upon
it most good.—The world has never
been kind to its philanthropists and
social benefactors, but for the most.
part has killed them, if not by open
assassination by cold and cruel neg-
lect (see Eccles. ix. 15).


Ver. 22. Paul a Model Witness of
Gospel Truth.

I. Through whom does he witness ?
Through the Lord, whose strength
is perfected in his weakness.

II. Before whom does he witness ?
—Small and great, the people and the
Gentiles—i.e., all who have ears to
hear.

III. Of whom does he witness ?—
Of Christ, promised, manifested, cruci-
fied, raised, preached.—Gerok.





Vers. 22-23. The Glory of the Gospel
of the Grace of God.—This consists in
the following facts, that the Gospel is—

I. Designed for all.—1. All ranks
and conditions of men. Small and
great—i.e., high and low, rich and
poor, young and old. 2. Adi times and
climes on earth. For pre-Christian ages,
since it was substantially contained in
the Hebrew prophets and in Moses ;
for the Christian centuries, since it was
meant to be published among the
Gentiles.

II. Adapted to all.—Proclaiming as
it does—1. An atonement for sin, which
all need. This involved in the idea of
a suffering Messiah (Isa. liii. 5, 6, 10).
2. A resurrection from the grave, which
all desire. This guaranteed by the
resurrection of Jesus (1 Cor. xv. 20).

III. Offered to all.—This a necessary
consequence of the public proclamation
of the gospel, both to the people (the
Jews) and the Gentiles, since it is incon-
ceivable that men should be called
upon to accept, and punished for re:


547


cHap. xxvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
tae FR On


fusing, what was not really offered IV. Bestowed on all.—All who
to them. Compare Mark xvi. 15; believe without distinction become par-
Rom. i. 16, iii, 22. takers of its light and life.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 24—32.


Pauls Two Distinguished Listeners, Festus and Agrippa; or, Two Souls
Struggling against the Truth.

I. Paul and Festus ; or, the apostle and the governor.—1. The exclamation of
. the governor. “Paul, thou art beside thyself,” or, thou art mad !— much
learning doth make thee mad,” or, doth turn thee to madness. So far as Festus
was concerned, Paul, by his lofty oration, had effected this only, that Festus
esteemed him a lunatic. Strange perversity of the world! When Paul of
Tarsus raved against God, blasphemed Christ, and breathed out threatenings and
slaughter against the Christians, his contemporaries counted him both wise and
prudent ; now that, as Paul the aged, he talks in sublime strains of a crucified
and risen Saviour, the world, as represented by the Judean procurator, sets
him down for a madman, or, at least, for one whose brain had been touched by
overmuch study. Paul! much learning doth turn thee to madness. To the
governor it seemed incomprehensible that one should not only rave about such
transcendental delusions, but should actually risk his life in preaching them.
Doubtless at the present day many hold with the governor that earnest and
enthusiastic Christians, who base their prospects of present happiness and future
felicity on such (as the world thinks) imaginary facts as the incarnation, pro-
pitiation, and resurrection, of Jesus Christ, are idle dreamers, foolish visionaries,
crack-brained enthusiasts, half-mad fanatics who simply mistake the vague and
shadowy creations of a disordered or diseased fancy for solid and substantial
truths, and who accordingly sacrifice themselves for whims and crotchets. But -
for all that numbers of those who affect to regard Christians in this light have
their secret misgivings that the Christians are right. That Festus felt un-
comfortable beneath the glowing utterances of Paul is a plausible deduction from
the fact that he rather shouted at than calmly expostulated with the apostle.
Had he really believed the apostle to be beside himself, he would not have flamed
forth into a rage against him, but would have pitied him, and perhaps spoken
gently to him, or at least would have not troubled himself about his utterances.
And so the circumstance that men of the world habitually become vehement and
angry when denouncing the faith of Christians is a proof they are not inwardly
convinced of its error, 2. The reply of the apostle. “Iam not mad, most noble
Festus, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.” In repudiating the
charge of the governor, Paul fell back upon two defences. 1) The testimony of
his own consciousness, which enabled him to assure Festus that he was neither
‘‘ beside” nor beneath nor outside of himself, as insinuated, but in full possession
of his faculties—not at all the victim of an ill-balanced judgment, an exuberant
fancy, or an unbridled imagination, but the master of a calm, clear intellect and
a sober, regulated reason, which understood well the thoughts it was thinking
and the words it was uttering. (2) The unchallengeable truthfulness of his
assertions, in support of which he confidently appealed to the wide publicity
which had been gained by the main facts of gospel history, the death and
resurrection of Christ, which had not taken place in some remote corner of the
country, but had occurred in its very centre and heart, the Metropolis itself,
Jerusalem, and which therefore could not be unknown to the king, to whom
accordingly he next directed his address. The apostle meant that if the story
of Christ’s death and resurrection had not been true, it could easily have been
demonstrated false, as the people of Jerusalem were well aware of all that had

548


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxvt.








transpired. But so far from being exposed as an idle fiction, the report of the
resurrection—of the crucifixion denial was impossible—had kept on spreading
and gaining adherents during the last quarter of a century, which it could hardly
have done had it been false.

II. Paul and Agrippa; or, the apostle and the king.—l. The fervent appeal
of the apostle. “ King Agrippa, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou
believest.” Whether the apostle, “who had studied psychology in the school
of the Holy Ghost” (Leonhard and Spiegel) discerned in the king’s heart a
secret inclination to yield to the truth as set forth in the apostle’s oration, must
be left undecided. (1) The ground on which Paul’s appeal rested appears to
have been the assumption that Agrippa II., as a Jew, must have been perfectly
cognisant of the fact that the Hebrew Scriptures predicted the coming of a
suffering, dying, and rising Messiah. That they did so has been frequently
pointed out. (2) The force of Paul’s appeal lay in this, that Agrippa, having
been possessed of such knowledge, ought to have had no difficulty in recognising
the reasonableness of Paul’s words, which simply declared that such predictions
as were contained in the prophets had been fulfilled by the death and resur-
rection of Jesus. Paul’s interpretation of the connection between these events and
the Scripture prophecies might be at fault—nay, Paul’s assertion about the resur-
rection might be incorrect ; but in the statements themselves no impartial judge
could find evidence of unreason or folly. 2. The ambiguous answer of the king.
“ Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian”; or, ‘“ with but little persuasion
thou wouldest fain make me a Christian” (R.V.); or, in a little time (at this
rate) you will persuade me to become (or, you believe you can make of me) a
Christian (see “ Critical Remarks”). According to the first of these renderings,
Agrippa was supposed to admit that Paul had almost carried the citadel of his
judgment, and that only a little more was wanting to gain him altogether for
the Christian cause. According to the second, his meaning ran that Paul must
not imagine he could convert a Jewish sovereign like him with so little show of
argument, or so inconsiderable effort. According to the third, that if Paul went
on as he was doing he would soon make of him, Agrippa II., a Christian. The
first had its source in incipient seriousness, the second in supercilious contempt,
the third in superficial levity. Those who wish to think the best of Agrippa
naturally prefer the first interpretation of his words, notwithstanding the
grammatical difficulty attaching to them; those who adhere to the best text
select the second or third interpretation of Agrippa’s words, though these
charge him with feelings—either of irony or of jest—which certainly look in-
compatible with a situation so grave and solemn as that in which they were
spoken. 3. The sublime ejaculation of the apostle. ‘1 would to God that not
only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether
such as I am, except these bonds”; or, “I would to God that whether with
little or with much ...” (R.V.); or, “whether in a little time or in much
time ” ; or, adopting another reading, “ whether with a little effort or with a great
effort, not only thou, but also all that hear me this day,” ete. (see “ Oritical
Remarks”). Taken either way, the sense of the apostle’s utterance practically
amounted to this: (1) that he wished, not only Agrippa, but all who listened to
him that day, to be, like himself, Christians ; (2) that, could he only hope to see
that wish fulfilled, he would willingly spend a long time or a short, and put
forth a great effort or a small, as the case might be ; and (3) that the sole point
in which he did not ask God that they might resemble him was ‘‘ these bonds,”
which he held up before them. The magnanimity of this reply has evoked never-
failing admiration from all hearts capable of understanding and appreciating
true heroism. 4. The response of the king. Obviously Agrippa’s was not a
heart of the order just depicted, No sooner had the apostle’s words died away


549


cHap. xxvi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


®


in the hushed atmosphere of the marble hall than Agrippa IT. rose from his
seat, followed by the governor, Bernice, and all that sat with them. Having
withdrawn from the audience-chamber and talked amongst themselves, they
came to the conclusion that Paul had committed no offence worthy of death.
Most likely all concurred in pronouncing him a harmless fanatic. What they
said to one another about his last words is not recorded. Possibly all were
silent, each afraid to reveal to his neighbour the thoughts that had been stirred
within his bosom. Only one more item of the conversation has been preserved.
Agrippa II. expressed his mind to the governor, that, had Paul not appealed to
Cesar, he might forthwith have been set at liberty. The result of this “ may
have been that Festus modified his report and commended the apostle to the
clemency of the court at Rome ” (Hackett).

Learn—1. The outrageous slanders that are sometimes propagated against
Christians. 2. The certainty that truth and soberness lie rather with the
Christian than with the worldling. 3. The fearlessness with which Christianity
can make appeal to the court of enlightened reason. 4. The unwisdom of those


who decline to allow themselves to be persuaded to become Christians.


5. The


fervent desire true Christians possess that others should share the salvation of


which they are conscious.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 24-29. Paul and His Princely
Hearers; or, the different attitudes of
men toward the gospel.

I. Festus, who turns entirely aside
from it—‘ Paul, thou ravest !”

II. Agrippa, who is half turned
towards it—‘‘ Almost thou persuadest
me!”

III. Paul, who entirely lives in it—
“T would to God that all who hear
me were such as I am.”—G@erok, in
Lange.


Ver. 24. Which is the Madman ?—
Paul or Festus? the Christian or the
non-Christian ?

I. The Christian who believes in a
personal God—a God of power, who
has made the universe, and a God of
love, who has devised a way of salva-
tion for man? Or the non-Christian
who, if he acknowledges a God at all,
conceives of Him as either hostile to,
or indifferent about, man ?

II. The Christian who believes that
God has made known His mind and will
to man for his salvation in the sacred
Seriptures? Or the non-Christian who
holds that God has never placed Him-
self in communication with the human
race at all?

Ill. The Christian who believes that


550


man, even in his sin, is a child of God,
and a possible heir of immortality? Or
the non-Christian whose creed is that
man is nothing more than an animated
clod which will in course of years
mingle with the other (unanimated)
clods of the valley, and be never more ~
heard of, in this or any other world ?

IV. The Christian who believes that
Jesus of Nazareth was God’s Son
incarnate, who died and rose again,
bringing life and immortality to light ?
Or, the non-Christian whose faith is’
that Jesus was a common and there-
fore a sinful man, who never rose from
the dead, and that the grave will never
open to restore a single form that goes
down into its gloomy chambers !

V. The Christian who believes in a
hereafter and lives for it? Or, the
non-Christian who knows of no world
but this, and lives and dies as if there
were none ?


Ver. 25. Words of Truth and Sober-
ness.

I. Such were Paul’s words to all
who heard his gospel.—1. Proved from
the past history of the Church. For the
words of Paul remain to this day,
whereas the wit of Festus has long
since died away. 2. Confirmed by Chris-


s HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





tian experience. Since honest hearts
in all ages have found in Paul’s words
(written) their clearest light, best
strength, and sweetest comfort. 3. They
will likewise be placed in the light at
the great day of eternity. Inasmuch as
heaven and earth will pass away, but
the word of God endureth for ever.

II. Such should be the words of
preachers still to all who listen to
their teaching.—And such they will
be—l. If they discourse upon Paul’s
theme,—a crucified and risen Saviour.
2. If they speak with Paul's earnest-
ness,—which all can imitate, though
all cannot equal. What is wanted in
preaching is not “sound and fury,


signifying nothing,” but deep-toned -


and full-hearted fervour. 3. Jf they
seek Paul’s aims,—the glory of Christ
and the salvation of souls. None but
words of truth and soberness will
accomplish these.


Ver. 27. ‘‘Believest thou the prophets?”

I. A great question.—For modern
readers of the Bible no less than for
Agrippa. 1. Believest thou the Hebrew
prophets were inspired ? This question
lies at the foundation of Christianity.
If the Hebrew prophets were only
statesmen, somewhat more far-seeing
than their contemporaries, but in no
sense channels of Divine communication
for their age and generation, then it is
vain to attempt to derive from their
utterances any evidence in support
of the Messiahship of Jesus. It was
clearly in the faith that Old-Testament
Scripture prophesied beforehand of the
sufferings of Christ and the glory that
should follow that Paul appealed to
them so confidently in support of his
gospel; and those who think the
foundations of the Christian system
will remain undisturbed if the credi-
bility of Old-Testament literature is
impaired, have not reflected deeply
enough on this momentous problem.
As the New-Testament Scriptures are
the flower and fruit, the crown and
apex, of the Old, so are the Old-
Testament Scriptures the root and
support of the New. 2. Believest thou


CHAP, XXVI.


a |





what the Hebrew prophets teach? Men
might, and many do, believe the
Hebrew prophets to have been inspired,
who nevertheless disregard the testi-
mony they furnish concerning the
person and work of Christ. But the
Christological argument derived from
the Messianic prophecies was, in Paul’s
judgment, and is in the estimation of
many Bible scholars of to-day, one of
the most powerful factors in demon-
strating the truth of the New-Testament
declarations with reference to Christ’s
divinity, atoning work, and resurrec-
tion. 3. Believest thou that what the
Hebrew prophets taught concerning
Christ has been fulfilled? This prac-
tically means, Believest thou that
Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah
of Israel and Saviour of the world?
Believest thou that He was God’s Son
incarnate, that He died for our sins
according to the Scriptures, that He
was buried, and that He rose again
according to the Scriptures? (1 Cor.
xv. 1-4). 4. Believest thow for thyself,
individually, in the Christ of whom
the prophets spoke? All believing that
stops short of this is worthless for
saving.

II. A powerful argument. — Of
which the following are the several
steps: 1. He who believes in the
prophets of the Old Testament should
also believe in the apostles of the New.
The authors of the New-Testament
writings can produce as good claims to
be inspired as could the prophets of the
Old. 2. He who believes in the Messiah,
foreshadowed by the prophets, should
likewise believe in the Christ preached
by the apostles. The first was the type
of the second ; the second is the anti-
type of the first. If the prophets
spoke the truth when they said Christ
should suffer and rise again, so did the
apostles teach no falsehood when they
affirmed that Jesus was the Christ,
since they alleged that He both
suffered and rose. 3. He who believes
that Jesus is the Christ should likewise
Sor himself believe in Him for salvation.
This, after all, is the great question :
Dost thou believe on the Son of God ?


551


CHAP. XXVI.





(John ix. 35). The man who accepts
the testimony of both prophets and
apostles should feel himself shut up to
the acceptance of Christ as his personal
Saviour.


Ver. 28. Almost Persuaded.—A con-
dition of soul—

I. Frequently attained.—The heart
touched, the mind enlightened, the will
moved, the spirit trembling on the
verge of a decision for Christ ; nothing
wanting but—the decision, Many
reach this position as well as Agrippa.

II. Highly responsible. — Seeing
that only a little is lacking to carry
the spirit over into faith, the obliga-
tion to supply that little is the greater.
What guilt will they incur who refuse
or omit to take the final step that is
necessary for salvation.

III. Extremely perilous.—Besides
being in itself an unsafe condition, it
is also an unstable one. No soul can
remain permanently in the position
these words describe. Hither it will
move on and become fully persuaded,
or it will drift back and become less
persuaded.


Almost a Christian.—A position—

I. Of gracious privilege.—Implying
that one has been brought near the
kingdom, and enabled to understand
somewhat of its nature, of its terms
of membership, of its duties, and of its
blessings.

IT. Of hopeful promise.—That the
“almost” shall, before long, be con-
verted into an “altogether.” That
the one step wanting to make one a
Christian shall be taken.

III. Of solemn responsibility. —
That the one “almost” shall become


552


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


—


“ altogether” a Christian. That he
shall not remain on the borders of the
kingdom, but cross the boundary and
enter in.

IV. Of great danger.—Lest one
should be satisfied with being ‘almost ”
without becoming “altogether” a
Christian.


Vers. 28, 29. The Shortcomings of
Agrippa.

I. What they were.—l. He only
says “almost,” not yet “altogether,”
and thus at once recalls what he
appears to allow. He remains standing
without the doors of salvation, and will
not enter in. 2. He only says, “ Thou
persuadest me”; but a persuasion is
much less than faith or conviction,
and may, as in this case, come to an
end with the words which called it
forth. 3. He only says, “to be oa
Christian,” meaning, to join thy party,
in an external way, instead of saying,
“T believingly accept thy testimony
about Jesus.”

II. How they were answered.—
1. By suggesting that much more than
he thought was still deficient in him. —
Every “almost,” like Agrippa’s, implies
that much is still wanting. 2. By
expressing a desire that, whether much
or little was lacking, all might be fully
persuaded. At whatever stage of
nearness or distance they stood from
the kingdom, he longed for the salva-
tion of all. 3. By reminding him, and
all who listened, that becoming a
Christian meant more than joining
the party of the Nazarenes, meant
becoming like him, Paul, in everything
except his bonds, meant becoming a
lowly and devoted follower of Christ.
—Compiled from Stier.


ri HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cnar. xxvit.





CHAPTER XXVII. %


Pavu’s Voyace to Rome—Suipwreck at MALtrTa.


. Setting Sail; or, from Cesarea to Fair Havens (vers. 1-8).

. Caught in a Storm ; or, from Fair Havens to the Coast of Crete (vers. 9-14),
. Drifting on the Deep ; or, Preparing for the Worst (vers. 15-26).

. Nearing the Breakers; or, a Night of Anxiety (vers. 27-36).

. Running Aground; or, Escaping Safe to Land (vers. 37-44).


O2 O20 SO
OU O89 bo eS


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1. Determined.—By Festus. Not as to purpose (xxv. 12), but as to time, which was
late in autumn, A.D. 60, and manner, which was by sea. We.—Last used (xxi.15-18). Here
including, besides Paul, Luke and Aristarchus of Thessalonica (ver. 2, xix. 29, xx.4). Luke’s
presence on shipboard accounts for the liveliness of the ensuing narration. Certain other—
additional, not necessarily different in character (Meyer, Zockler, Plumptre)—prisoners, —
Tuis shows (Lardner, Paley) that it was customary to forward accused persons to Rome to
be tried ; an inference confirmed by Josephus (Life, § 3). Julius.—Tacitus (Hist., ii. 92,
iv. 11) mentions about this time a centurion of this name, Julius Priscus, one of the pretor-
ians, who, seven years afterwards, was promoted by Cesar Vitellius to be Preetorian Prefect,
and who, when his royal patron died a miserable and dishonourable death, declined to
survive, and committed suicide by falling on his own sword. Hausrath (Der Apostel Paulus,
p. 466) conjectures he may have come to Palestine on some important mission, and been
entrusted with command of the prisoners about to be despatched to Rome. Augustus’, or,
the Augustan band to which he belonged has been supposed to be (1) a cohort of soldiers
from Sebaste or Samaria (Kuinoel), in support of which is cited the mention by Josephus
(Ant., XIX, ix. 2; KX. vi. 1) of a squadron of Sebastene cavalry; or (2) a bodyguard
organised by Nero, and called by him Augustani (Suet., We7., xx. 25) or Augustiani (Tacit.,
Ann., xiv. 15), which would harmonise with the preceding statement from Tacitus (Wieseler);
or (3) an auxiliary cohort belonging to Agrippa’s army, and bearing the name Augustan in
honour of the emperor, as many other cohorts did (Holtzmann, Ramsay); or (4) an independent
cohort which waited on the procurator, and was styled the Augustan because it corresponded
to the emperor’s life guard at Rome (Hackett). That it was identical with the Italian cohoit
mentioned in x. 1 (Meyer, Ewald) is doubtful (Zockler).

Ver. 2. Adramyttium.—-Not Hadrumetum in North Africa, but a seaport of Mysia in Asia
Minor, situated at the head of a bay of the same name, and on the River Kysos; called to-day
Adramiti or Edramit. To this port the ship on which Paul embarked at Sebaste, the harbour
of Czsarea, belonged, and was a coaster homeward bound. It was obviously Julius’s inten-
tion either to trans-sbip for Italy at the Asian harbour, or from that point to take the land
route to Rome (see “ Homiletical Analysis ”). Meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia.—The best
authorities for uéAdovres read peAdovTt, which was about to sail, not along the coasts, but
for the places on the coast of Asia.

Ver. 3. Sidon—Hebrew, Sid6n (meaning, perhaps, fisher town); on Assyrian monuments
Sidunu—was situated on the Mediterranean coast, not far from Lebanon, and only five miles
north of Tyre. In ancient times the most important of the Phoenician towns, it named itself
upon its coins “ The Mother of Tyre.” The modern town of Saida stands upon the site of the
oll, from which numerous relics of antiquity have been recovered, the most remarkable being
the marble coffin of the Sidonian king, Eschmunazar, B.C. 350-300. (See Riehm’s Hand-
worterbuch des Biblischen Altertums; art. Sidon.) Refresh himself.—Lit., to meet with, or
receive attention from his friends. By obtaining from them that outfit for the voyage
which, on account of the official precision of his custody at Caesarea, he could not there be
provided with (Alford, Holtzmann),

Ver. 4. Cyprus.—See on iv. 36.

Ver. 5. Sea of (better, off, or along) Cilicia and Pamphylia.—On the reverse voyage (xxi. 3)
Cyprus was passed upon the left band—+.e., the ship sailed south of the island. The neigh-
bourhood of Myra, two or three miles from the coast, is full of magnificent ruins. Its haven
was the neighbouring Andraki. In later times it became celebrated as the seat of the sup-
posed bishopric of Nicolaus at the time of the council of Nice, A.D. 350.

Ver. 6, Aship of Alexandria. Probably belonging to the Alexandrian fleet in the Imperial


553 ‘


onar. xxvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





service, (Ramsay).—See “ Homiletical Analysis.” That part of her cargo was wheat is obvious
(ver. 38), though she may have carried other goods (ver. 18), which were cast overboard
before the cereals were thrown away. : }

Ver.7. Scarce,—Better, with dificulty. The wind not suffering us may mean not suffering
the ship to get to Cnidus to find shelter in its harbour (Hackett, Hausrath, Holtzmann), or
not suffering it to get any quicker over against Cnidus—explaining the preceding clause
(Alford, Lechler), or not suffering it to proceed farther (Conybeare and Howson, Revised
Version, Spence). 4 i:

Ver. 8, Hardly passing it (Crete) should be with difficulty coasting along it. The participle
is a nautical term. The harbour of Fair Havens, though mentioned by no ancient writer,
was undoubtedly that still known by the same name (Kali) on the south of Crete, a few miles
to the east of Cape Matala, beyond which the land suddenly springs towards the north.
“The harbour consists of an open roadstead, or rather two roadsteads contiguous to each
other, which may account for the plural designation.” The epithet “fair” may have been
given to it in joke, on account of its unfavourable character, ver. 12 (Zockler). The town of
Lasea, probably mentioned as better known, is still recognisable by ‘‘two white pillars,
masses of masonry, and other ruins,” which “occur on the spot” (Hackett). Its discovery
by “a Scotch yachting party may be classed among the really valuable geographical
evidences of the truth of the Bible which have been accumulating of late years ” (Spence).

Ver. 9, Sailing meant the further prosecution of the voyage. The fast signified the Great
Day of Atonement (Lev. xvi. 29ff., xxiii. 26 /7.; Jos., Ant., XIV. xvi. 4), which the Jews
celebrated on the 10th Tisri—i.e., about the beginning of October, after which season,
according to Philo, no prudent man thought of putting to sea. “The Greeks and Romans
considered the period of safe navigation as closing in October and recommencing about the
middle of March” (Hackett). Accordingly Paul admonished, or exhorted them—ze., the
shipmaster, shipowner, and Julius (ver. 11)—to remain in “ The Fair Havens.” —

Ver. 10. Hurt. —ipis, not to be taken in a moral sense as meaning “ presumption ” (Ewald,
Meyer), a meaning unsuitable for ver. 21, but in a physical sense, as signifying violence—as,
ég., of the waves (Zéckler, Holtzmann), a significance the word has in Josephus (Anz.,
III. vi. 4, dad 7rGv 8uBpwv HBpis) and in 2 Cor. xii. 10. Compare nisi ventis debes ludibrium
(Hor., Odes, I, xiv. 15). Loss expressed what would result from the “ violence.”

Ver. 11. The master of the ship corresponded to our steersman or captain; the owner was
the person to whom the ship belonged. Ramsay says the owners of private merchant ships
were called éuopa, as distinguished from vat«Anpo, who were captains of the Imperial fleet
(St. Paul, etc., p. 324). .

Ver. 12. The more part showed that the situation had become critical, and that a general
consultation had been held. Phenice, rather Phenix, was a haven situated on the south of
Crete, a little to the west of Fair Havens. Strabo (x. 475) mentions a harbour with this
name on the south of Crete, and Ptolemy (iii. 17), a town called Phcenix, with a port which
‘ he names Pheenicus. Smith, whom Alford, Conybeare and Howson, and Plumptre, follow,
Zockler, and Hertzberg in Riehm’s Handworterbuch, identify the port with the modern Lutro,
which, as seen from the sea, lieth towards the south-west (Aly, Latin Africus) and the north-
west (xSpos = Caurus), lit., looking down the south-west and the north-west winds—i.e., looking
north-east and south-east (R.V.). Hackett, Lechler, Zockler, and Holtzmann, regard this
interpretation as incorrect, and understand Luke to say that the haven looked towards the
south-west and the north-west, while the lands encompassing it were directed towards the
north and the south.

Ver. 13. Loosing thence.—Better, having weighed anchor. Close by Crete meant close in to
the shore, nearer (docov) than usual.

Ver. 14, Euroclydon, or Huraquilo (according to the Sinaitic text), was an east-north-east
wind of great violence—lit., a typhonic wind—a hurricane, which either struck against it, the
ship (A.V., Hackett, Lechler, Winer, Zécklcr), not the island (Kuinoel, De Wette, Meyer), or
hurled itself down from it—viz., Crete, the island (Alford, Howson, Humphrey, Wordsworth,
Plumptre, Spence, Holtzmann),

Ver. 15. The result was that the vessel could not bear up into the wind—lit., cowld not look
into, or face the wind—a remarkably expressive phrase, considering that in ancient ships eyes
were painted on each side of the bow; English sailors still call the “bow” the eyes of a
ship (Conybeare and Howson)—so that the sailors let her drive or gave way to her, and were
driven (R.V.)—lit., having given up the vessel to the wind, we were borne along at its mercy.

Ver. 16, Clauda, or, according to best authorities, Cauda or Gauda; Claudos (Ptolemy) ;
_ presently named Gaudo by the Greeks, and Gozzo by the Italians; an island twenty-three
miles south-west of Crete, “ different from the similarly-called island near Malta” (Holtz-
mann). Much work to come by the boat.—Lit., we were able with difficulty to become masters
of the boat—i.e., to get possession of it; which, however, they did, hoisting it up on board so
that it might not be dashed to pieces in the storm, and might serve asa last means of escape
(ver. 30).


554


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omap. XXxvi





Ver. 17. Helps, undergirding the ship.—Z.ec., ropes, chains, and such like, for putting over
the gunwale and under the keel, so as, by drawing them together, to strengthen the hull and
keep it from falling to pieces. The term for this in the English navy is “frapping.” Com-
Hor., Od., I. xiv. 6: “ Sine funibus viv durare carine possint imperiosius equor.” The
quicksands, or the Syrtis, were the Syrtis Major, on the coast of Africa, south-west of Crete, a
dangerous shoal or sandbank, of which ancient mariners were much afraid (Jos., Wars,
I. xvi. 4). Here Virgil placed the shipwreck of Aineas (Aneid, i. 153). Strake sail.—t it.
lowered the gear, the verb being that employed to describe the letting down of the boat into
the sea (ver, 30), and of Paul over the wall of Damascus (ix. 25; 2 Cor. xi. 33)... What was
lowered was, either (1) the sails, so that the vessel scudded along under bare poles (Meyer,
De Wette, Hackett, Lechler, Holtzmann) ; or (2) the great yard, or top hamper, leaving only
a small storm-sail (Conybeare and Howson, Smith, Alford, Plumptre); or (3) the stern
anchor, so as, by dragging, to retard as much as possible the ship’s progress (Brensing).
And so were driven, or were borne along—i.e,, they drifted.

Ver. 18. They lightened the ship.—By casting out what of the cargo could be spared. This
occurred during the second day of the storm. The ship had obviously sprung a leak.

Ver. 19. On the third day the tackling followed. This was either (1) the yards, masts, and
sails of the ship (Olshausen Ewald, Smith, Conybeare and Howson) ; or (2) the tables, chests,
beds, and the like, the ship’s furniture (De Wette, Meyer, Alford, Lechler, Hackett, Holtz-
mann); or (3) the baggage of the passengers (Wetstein, Kuinoel, Winer, Plumptre). The
best texts read they instead of we cast out.

Ver. 20. When neither sun nor stars in many days appeared.—This, the overclouding of
the sky, ‘‘a circumstance not unusual during a Levanter” (Conybeare and Howson), rendered
ancient navigation perilous, as without a compass they had no other means of determining
their position than by observation of the heavenly bodies.

Ver. 21. Long abstinence.—Not necessarily entire (compare ver. 33), but partial, and
occasioned not by lack of provisions, but by fear and the difficulty of preparing food during
the continuance of the gale. Ye should have hearkened unto me was said, not so much to
rebuke them as to secure their attention to what he was about to state.

Ver. 22. Be of good cheer.—Compare xxiii. 11. ‘ Look and tone, we may well believe,
helped the words. It was something in that scene of misery and dejection to see one man
stand forward with a brave, calm confidence ” (Plumptre).

Ver. 24, Fear not, Paul.—One naturally infers from this that the apostle was not entirely
free from anxiety (compare xviii. 9). Thou must be brought, or stand (R.V.), before Cesar.—
Compare xxiii. 11.

Ver. 26. This whole passage (vers. 21-26) has been pronounced an interpolation by the
writer of the Acts (Zeller, Overbeck, Hilgenfeld, Holtzmann), on the ground that it does not
harmonise with the statements in vers. 10 and 31. But while God’s purposes are certain in
fulfilment, man is not, on that account, relieved from the necessity of employing means for
their accomplishment. See “ Hints” on vers. 21-26. 7

Ver. 27. The fourteenth night dated from the rising of the gale, which occurred soon after
leaving the Fair Havens. The Sea of Adria.—See ‘“ Homiletical Analysis.” Though applied
to the sea between Greece and Italy, it also embraced the ocean waters around Sicily and as
far south as the coast of Africa, The country towards which the ship drifted was not the
island of Meleda near the Dalmatian coast, but that of Malta, south of Sicily, so that the
course of drifting was west-by-north.

Ver. 29. They cast four anchors out of the stern.—One advantage’of doing so was that the
ship was thus ready for running ashore. Besides, had they anchored from the prow, the vessel
might have swung round and been dashed against the rocks. Cesar (De Bel., Civ., i. 25)
secured his ships by means of four anchors: naves guaternis anchoris destinabat, ne fluctibus
moverentur ; and Nelson is said to have anchored his ships in this way at the Battle of Copen-
hagen, having been led to do so by reading on the morning before the battle the twenty-
seventh chapter of the Acts (Conybeare and Howson).

Ver. 30, Cast anchors out of the foreship should be, stretch or lay out anchors from the
foreships. The idea seems to have been to pretend to sail out from the bows in the boat with
one or, two anchors, so as to drop them into the sea at the full length of the cables. The
intention was to escape and leave the soldiers and prisoners to their fate.

Ver. 31. On the seeming inconsistency of this verse with ver. 22 see on ver. 26. Notwith-
standing Paul’s previous assurance of safety, nothing but death could result if the only
persons who could man the vessel were allowed to leave it.

Ver. 32. The soldiers to whom Paul gave the alarm prevented the base attempt of the
sailors to desert the ship from being successful.

Ver. 33. Paul besought them all to take meat, or food.—Because of their long fast, and
because of the labours which the dawning day might bring them. Before they could reach
the shore, much fatigue would require to be endured, and for this they would need to recruit
their strength by means of food.


555


emap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


—_—





Ver. 35. He took bread and gave thanks.—Neither celebrating a love-feast or Eucharist
(Olshausen, Ewald), nor acting as a father of a family (Meyer, Hackett), since there is no
mention made of any distribution of the bread, as in Luke xxiy. 30 ; but simply setting them
example as a pious Jew or Christian, who asks a blessing on his food (De Wette, Zockler,
Alford)—an example which they all followed (ver, 36). :

Ver. 37. Two hundred tureescore and sixteen souls.—The number is probably correct,
though some ancient authorities read about threescore and sixteen. The vessel must there-
fore have been quite equal’in size to the largest class of modern merchantmen. Its keel, it
has been estimated, would be about one hundred feet in length, while its carrying capacity
would be about eleven and twelve hundred tons. ;

Ver. 38. They lightened the ship.—For the third time (see vers. 18,19). Hither because of
its sinking condition, or because they wished it to get nearer shore. What they threw out
was the wheat, rév ctrov. Hither (1) the ship’s provisions (Alford, Plumptre, Holtzmann,
Hausrath) which were now no longer needed—against this has been urged that by this time
these must have been so reduced as to make little difference to the load (Smith), though it
must not be overlooked that for the past fourteen days these provisions had been barely
touched ; or (2) the remainder of the ship’s cargo (Smith, Conybeare and Howson, Zockler).

Ver. 39. A certain creek with a shore, or bay with a beach, as distinguished from the island
in the middle of the sea (ver, 16). St. Paul’s Bay, supposed to be here referred to, “is
situated at the north-west extremity of the island of Malta, and is formed by the main shore
on the south and the island of Salmonetta on the north” (Hackett). They were minded.—
Better, they took counsel.

Ver. 40. They committed themselves should be the anchors unto the sea.—Having no time
to haul in the anchors, the sailors cut the ropes and abandoned them, The mainsail,
6 dpréuwy is considered a wrong translation by nautical authorities, who substitute for it the
foresail—i.ec., the sail attached to the mast nearest the prow.

Ver. 41. A place where two seas met was probably the channel between the smaller
Salmonetta and the larger Malta (Smith). The sea flowing in from both sides would create
a sand- or mud-bank, upon which the-vessel ran aground before reaching the beach.

Ver. 42. The inhuman proposal] of this verse, which proceeded from the soldiers, because
they were, in a measure, answerable for the safety of the prisoners, could only be equalled by
its base ingratitude, since it involved the killing of Paul, to whom they had already more
than once owed their lives.

Ver. 48, Willing should be wishing to save Paul.—This clause shows the impression made
by Paul upon his keeper, but need not, on that account, have been a later interpolation
(Zeller), Should cast themselves first into the sea should be having cast themselves overboard
(from the ship, ard) should go forth first (é«, trom the sea) upon the land.—This would enable
them to assist the others, and prevent the escape of the prisoners.

Ver. 44. It is a comfort to know that Baur and Weizsicker recognise the historical
credibility of this chapter. ‘“ Although here and there betraying another hand,” says the
former, “it is for the most part authentic;” the latter adds, “ with this section we tread the
firm ground of history”; ‘“ here everything is fresh, simple and natural, and reported with
a skilful pen.”


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—8.


Setting Sail ; or, from Cesarea to Fair Havens.

I. The passengers. 1. Zhe prisoners. (1) Foremost among these was Paul, the
venerable and weather-beaten missionary of the Cross, who had already, by sea
and land, travelled farther, and suffered and laboured more than all the other
apostles, singly or together (2 Cor, xi. 23). A veritable king of men, his moral
majesty will, before this voyage ends, assert itself, and place him, though now a
prisoner, high in rank above all on board ship beside him. The finest qualities
of good men are evoked by situations of trial, as the stars shine clearest in the
darkest nights. (2) Along with him voyag«d certain other prisoners who, for
various offences laid to their charge, some probably as imaginary as those
advanced against the apostle, were being despatched to Rome for trial before the
emperor's tribunal. That it was customary so to ship accused persons to the
capital Josephus (Life, 3) has shown, by relating how he himself, when a young
man, was wrecked in the Adriatic when proceeding to Rome for the purpose of
defending “certain priests of his acquaintance, and very excellent persons they
were, whom on a small and trifling occasion he (Felix) had put into bonds and


556


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuap. xxvit.
s





sent to Rome to plead their cause before Cesar.” 2. The centurion. (1) As
to his identity, he was probably the Julius Priscus mentioned by Tacitus as a
Preetorian officer, who may have been despatched on some imperial errand to
Palestine, and to whom the company of prisoners was entrusted. (2) As to the
Augustan cohort or “ troop of the Emperor” (Ramsay) to which he belonged, the
different views stated in the “ Critical Remarks” are all worthy of consideration,
though the likeliest makes him a commander either in Nero’s or the procurator’s
body-guard. Never before had Julius been entrusted with so remarkable a
prisoner as Paul—a prisoner of Jesus Christ rather than of Cesar. Had he
known that Paul was the servant of a more exalted king than Nero, an officer
in a more distinguished army than that of the Augustan band, and journeyed
to Rome on a more important mission than that which had brought him to
Palestine, he would have hesitated before taking up such a charge as had been
thrust upon him. Could he have understood the gospel of which Paul was the
bearer, he would have learnt that not Paul, but he, was the real prisoner.
3. The fellow-voyagers. These were certainly two. (1) Luke, the writer of the
Acts, who, in resuming the first person at this point in his narrative, gives
his readers to understand that in all that relates to the voyage Romeward he
writes as “an eyewitness.” The detailed account which Luke furnishes of
this voyage reveals the estimate which Luke had of its importance, in the
providence of God, as a link in the chain of events which brought Paul to
the capital of the world. (2) Aristarchus of Thessalonica (ver. 2), who had
probably been with, or near Paul during his two years’ imprisonment at Czsarea
and may have been now returning home to Macedonia, though the subsequent
alteration of plan on the part of Julius (ver. 6) led to his being carried on to
Rome. It would not be difficult for either Luke or Aristarchus to get a berth
on board Paul’s ship. Christ can raise up friends for His people in the darkest
hour. Vote.—The opinion here expressed is not that of Professor Ramsay
(St. Paul, etc., p. 316), who thinks that Luke and Aristarchus would not find
it easy to obtain a passage in the corn-ship, and must have accompanied Paul
“as slaves, not merely performing the duties of slaves, but actually passing as
slaves,” and that in this way ‘not merely had Paul faithful friends always beside
him,” but “his importance in the eyes of the centurion would be much enhanced.”
The Professor, however, must surely have a different conception of Paul’s
character from the present writer, if he believes that Paul would assent to so
much deception on the part either of himself or others.

II. The ships. 1. A ship of Adramyttiwm. Adramyttium, on the coast of
Mysia, and opposite Lesbos, was then a flourishing city; though no antiquities
have been found on its site except a few coins. The selection of this vessel,
apparently engaged in the coasting trade, was due to the two facts (1) that
direct communication between Caesarea and Rome was at that time irregular,
and (2) that the ship of Adramyttium was on the eve of sailing (see “ Critical
Remarks”). At Adramyttium, should they reach it—which they never did—it
would most likely be Julius’ purpose to tranship himself and prisoners into
another craft going west, across the Aigean, or, to take the overland route
described below. How frequently in life are man’s plans overturned! Man
proposes, but God disposes. 2. A ship of Alexandria, On reaching Myra, in
the south of Lycia—or rather, since Myra stood back two or three miles from
the coast, on casting anchor in the port of Myra, Andriace, which has been
identified as the bay of Andraki—the centurion, no doubt counting himself
fortunate, fell in with a larger vessel, an Alexandrian corn-ship, in those
days much esteemed for its size and sea-going qualities, on her way to Italy,
to which he forthwith transferred himself and party. At this point Besser
well remarks: “Had not another than the chief officer of the imperial


097


cHap. xxvix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





troops lifted Paul and his companions into the ship, the whole ship’s company
would have come to grief.” By this trans-shipment the number of souls on
board, including crew and passengers, was brought up to two hundred and
seventy-six—not an unlikely figure when it is remembered that the ship in
which Josephus was wrecked contained six hundred persons (Life, § 3). The
ship must thus have been about the size of the largest merchant vessels of
modern times, (See “ Critical Remarks.”) That she was carrying corn from
Alexandria receives explanation from the well-known fact that at that time
Egypt was the granary of the world. If she left Alexandria about the begin-
ning of August, when grain cargoes from Upper Egypt were usually shipped at
that port, she might easily have reached Myra towards the end of the
month, or beginning of September, and been found lying in the harbour, detained
by contrary winds, when Paul’s ship arrived. The west wind which enabled the
Adramyttium vessel to tack along from Cesarea to Myra might have forced
the Alexandrian merchantman to hold due north till she found shelter in Myra
(see Conybeare and Howson, The Life and Epistles of St. Paul, ii. 337).

III. The voyage. 1. Jts destination. Rome (see on xxviii. 16). Both
Jehovah and Julius concurred in this. Both were conducting the apostle
thitherward, but for different ends. The way thither also God had arranged, not
Julius. Julius’ plan was first to sail to Adramyttium, and then proceed to
Rome—either by sailing from that port, or by ‘the overland route, the great Via
Egnatia from Neapolis through Philippi, Thessalonica, and the Macedonian
towns to Dyrrachium, the port for Brundusium” (Lewin). Jehovah, however,
altered that at Myra, and put the centurion, with his company, on board the
corn-ship of Alexandria. Then, Julius expected, it may well be assumed, to sail
direct to the port of Rome. But again Jehovah interfered. Julius and his
fellow-voyagers had to drift about the Mediterranean and be wrecked at Malta
before the voyage ended. Again, “ Man proposes but God disposes,” and none
but God can count on working out the counsel of his own will (Dan. iv. 35;
Eph. i. 11). 2. Jts stages. (1) From Czsarea, or Port Sebastus, which was
left in August, A.D. 58, to Sidon. On Caesarea see xii. 19. The latter city, Sidon,
upon the Assyrian inscriptions Sidwnu, “had anciently one of the finest harbours
in the East.” The rival of Tyre (xxi. 3), it was, in Paul’s day, celebrated for its
wealth and commerce. The present-day Saida, built upon the site of the old
town, is pleasantly situated at the foot of the snow-capped Lebanon, and is
surrounded by a circle of orchards, whose fruit is far-famed (Riehm’s Handwérter-
buch des Bibkischen Altertums ; art. Sidon). Its distance from Czsarea, sixty-
seven miles, with a favourable wind, might easily have been accomplished in a
day. The ship having cast anchor in the harbour during the time in which
the captain was transacting his business, either putting out or taking in cargo,
an operation which occupied some hours, the centurion permitted Paul to go
ashore, in company, of course, with a guard, and visit such friends as he had in
the town. The narrative, it has been pointed out (Hackett), tacitly assumes
that Paul had informed the centurion he had Christian brethren in Sidon, which
Luke’s narrative, indeed, in its earlier parts (xi. 19, xxi. 4), renders highly
probable. Paul’s object in making their acquaintance may have been to offer
them some word of exhortation, but was more likely, as Luke states, to refresh
himself, or receive attention from them—.e., obtain from them a supply of such
things as he might need upon the journey (Holtzmann). (2) From Sidon to
Myra. The direct course would have run to the southward of Cyprus, but as
the wind continued westerly, the ship steered in a northerly direction, passing
Cyprus, not upon the right (Meyer), but upon the left (see “ Critical Remarks”),
sailing under the lee of the long island, from Salamis to the promontory of
Dinaretium, rounding which it headed westward before a land breeze usually


558


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; THE ACTS. cuap, xxvu.
&





prevailing along the coast of Asia Minor, till it had crossed the Sea of Cilicia
and Pamphylia, and landed at Myra (see above). (3) From Myra to the Fair
Havens. How long the voyagers stayed in the Lycian harbour of Andriace is not
reported. Probably not more than a day. Having embarked on board the
Alexandrian corn-ship above described, Julius and his company proceeded on
their voyage, but so slowly that it took them “many days” to reach Cnidus,
distant not more than a hundred and thirty miles from Myra. This slow pro-
gress was, doubtless, owing to a contrary wind from the north-west which
ordinarily prevails in the Archipelago during the summer months (Pliny says it
blows for forty days from the beginning of August), and which, though it per-
mitted the ship to work up to Cnidus with difficulty, nevertheless rendered it
impossible for her to proceed farther in that direction. Having, therefore, stood
away southward, or rather south-south-west to the easternmost point of Crete, she
rounded that island and again commenced a struggle with wind and wave along
its southern coast, till the harbour of Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea, was
gained (see ‘‘ Critical Remarks”).

Learn.—1. How all things are made to wait upon the servants of God. When
God’s time was come for Paul to be despatched to Rome, ships were ready to
convey him, friends and companions to cheer him, winds and waves to bear him
along. ‘More servants wait on man than he'll take notice of” (Herbert).
2. How God transforms men’s plans to suit Himself. His own plans never
change, but men’s are often changed against their will. Julius’ route was
altered, that Paul’s character might be further revealed, that Paul might have
Aristarchus’ company to Rome, that a great ship-load of immortal souls might
have a better opportunity of hearing the gospel, and that God’s grace and
glory might be seen in all. 3. How God conducts His people by devious paths
and brings them into port by contrary winds. To few, one might almost say to
none, is the voyage of life all smooth and pleasant sailing.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Paul’s Voyage to Italy.

I. Determined by Festus.—As to
time and manner—the procurator
being probably guided in his judgment
by the opinion of Agrippa and the
presence of Julius, who was about to
return to Rome.

II. Carried out by Julius.—The
shipmasters were his servants and in-
struments whom he used for the exe-
cution of his plans, which he formed
and altered at will.

III. Over-ruled by God.— Along the
whole course of the voyage the hand of
God can be seen interposing for higher
purposes than those of either Festus or
Julius. It was more God that was
leading Paul to Rome than Festus that
was sending him or Julius that was con-
ducting him.

IV. Reported by Luke.—The liveli-
ness of the narration indicates the pen
of an eyewitness, which could be no


other than that of the good physician
who accompanied the apostle (see “ In-
troduction ”).

V. Endorsed by Paul.—The second
epistle to Timothy, by attesting Paul’s
presence in Rome, shows the likelihocd
at least that this voyage was per-
formed.


Ver. 3, Paul’s Friends—the Sidonian
believers.

I, The ground on which Paul
claimed them as friends.—Their Christ-
ian discipleship, which meant their
common relationship to Jesus Christ,
and as a consequence their common
membership in God’s house.

II. The service Paul expected to
receive at their hands.— Refreshment,
a supply of such things as might be
needful for the voyage (see James
ii. 16, and compare 2 Tim. iv. 13, 21).

III. The probability that Paul’s ex-


559


CHAP. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





pectations were fulfilled.—Not simply
because they were disciples, to whom his
name would be well known, but because
in all likelihood he had personal ac-
quaintances among them, having
recently been at Tyre (xxi. 3) and at
Ptolemais (xxi. 7). Besides, he may
have passed through Sidon when
travelling with Barnabas from Antioch





I. Frequently occur on the voyage
of life, :

II. Are seldom agreeable to the
voyagers.

Ill. Always useful, furthering the
designs of the chief shipmaster, God.


Ver. 8. The Fair Havens.
I. Many havens counted fair by |


man are incommodious to winter in.
II. One haven only is secure against
life’s storms—that of heaven.


to Jerusalem (xi. 30, xv. 3).


Ver. 4. Contrary Winds—


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 9—14.


Caught in a Storm; or, from Fair Havens to Crete.

I. The advice proffered by Paul.—l. The purport of it. Whether “ Julius
the centurion and the captain and the pilot and other naval officers, met in
council,” at which Paul, through the courtesy of Julius, was invited to assist
(Lewin), can only be conjectured. In any case, whether asked or volunteered, —
‘Paul’s counsel was, not to quit the shelter of the Fair Havens, incommodious
though it was, but to spend the winter there. Though not exactly stated in the
narrative, from the considerations urged by Paul it may be reasonably inferred
that this was the tenor of his admonition. 2. The reason of it. The apostle
apprehended, not from supernatural guidance, but from the exercise of his own
judgment, looking to the lateness of the season—the Fast or Great Day of Atone-
ment, which fell about the beginning of October, being past—that to proceed
further with the voyage would only result in disaster to the vessel, and probably
in loss of life to the crew and passengers. It is noticeable that Paul says “Our ~
lives,” since no angel had as yet given him assurance of his personal safety (con-
trast ver. 23). 3. The rejection of it. Though his advice was disregarded, the
event showed that he was right at least in recommending the voyage to be
arrested and the ship laid up for the winter months. His fear lest life should be
lost likewise proved so far correct that only a merciful Providence prevented it
from being realised.

II. The mistake committed by the centurion.—He “ gave more heed to the
master and the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by
Paul.” This was—1. Perhaps natural. Considering that Paul was a landsman, —
whereas the master (pilot, steersman, or captain) was an experienced mariner,
and the owner of the vessel possessed at least some knowledge of nautical
affairs, humanly speaking, Julius with whom, as the highest officer on board, the
ultimate decision lay (Ramsay), could hardly be blamed for listening to their
words rather than to those of Paul. Julius, however, overlooked two things—
(1) that experts are not always correct in their judgments, while non-experts are
not always wrong, and (2) that Paul, besides being no common man, had had
considerable experience in sailing on Mediterranean waters, having once narrowly
escaped from drowning, after shipwreck, by drifting about on a spar—hardly
swimming (Ramsay)—for a night and a day (2 Cor. xi. 25, 26), and so was better
qualified than most people to pronounce an opinion on the advisability of
risking a winter voyage. Yet the centurion’s mistake was—2. Certainly serious.
It led to all the future misfortunes that befell the large ship and its crew. To
proceed at the late season which had then arrived was a false step, and, like other
false steps, when once.taken could not be retrieved.


560


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cHAP. XXVIL.
(EE ye a ek BE AN I SE SS SEE re Ne EN


III. The course recommended by the crew and passengers.—1. The tenor of
it. To put to sea at once and make for the harbour of Phoenix, on the south of
Crete. If the Alexandrian sailors knew of the existence of such a harbour,
recent geographical discovery has shown the accuracy of their information. It
was long held that no spot on the south shore of Crete answered the description
of Pheenix furnished by Luke; but “at length the point was entirely settled and
made clear by the publication of the charts of our British surveying officers.
There is no difficulty now in identifying Phcenix with Lutro in the narrowest part
of the island of Crete. It is a place of admirable shelter, with deep water close
under the rocks and precisely protected from south-west and north-west winds as
was said in the discussion at Fair Havens” (Spence). 2. The arguments for it.
(1) That Fair Havens was not a suitable harbour to winter in. This appears to
have been the case. The anchorage there, while affording shelter from the north-
west gales, was open to those from other points of the compass. (2) That Phoenix
was better adapted for winter quarters. This also accorded with fact. Accord-
ing to Luke’s narrative Pheenix looked toward the south-west and the north-west,
which the best expositors explain as meaning that its two openings looked down
the directions of these winds, or, in other words, that it faced the north-east and
south-east (see ‘Critical Remarks.”) ‘“ Lutro,” with which Phenix has been
identified, “is an admirable harbour. You open it like a box; unexpectedly the
rocks stand apart, and the town appears within. ... There are fifteen fathoms
in the middle of the harbour, diminishing gradually to two close to the village ”
(Conybeare and Howson, ii. 343). 3. The adoption of it. The majority having
recommended that Pheenix should be made for, the captain, favoured by a change
of wind from strong north-west to soft south-east, weighed anchor and sailed along
close in shore, so little apprehensive of danger that the ship’s boat was left towing
astern (ver. 16). 4. The mistake of it. The treacherous character of the wind
which had decoyed them forth from the Fair Havens soon revealed itself. Sud-
denly it reverted to its old quarter and swept down with hurricane fury upon the
ill-fated corn-ship. Whether named Euroclydon or Euraquilo, the wind belonged
to the typhonic order, an east-north-easter fierce and strong, ‘‘a sudden eddying
squall,” before which the vessel could not stand.


“ Colder and colder blew the wind
A gale from the north-east.
The snow fell hissing in the brine,
And the billows frothed like yeast.


“ Down came the storm, and smote amain
The vessel in its strength ;
She shuddered and paused, like a frighted steed,
Then leaped her cable’s length.”
Longfellow.


“Every one,” writes Ramsay (St. Paul, etc., p. 327), wh» has any experience of
sailing on lakes or bays overhung by mountains, can appreciate the epithet
‘typhonic’ which Luke uses”—adding that a ship captain when relating an
experience of his own in Cretan waters, said, “The wind comes down from those
mountains fit to blow the ship out of the water.” Turning her back to the gale
Paul’s ship ran before the wind.

Learn—1. The danger of either always trusting to experts or always follow-
ing the majority. In this case the sailors and passengers were wrong, and Paul
right. 2. The almightiness of God, as seen in the elements of nature. Wind
and wave are only instruments in God’s hand, and vehicles of His power. 3. The
wisdom of always acting with prudent foresight. Boast not thyself of to-morrow.
Hurricanes may succeed south winds.


00 461


©HAP. XXVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


THE ACTS.











HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. Dangerous Voyages.—Such
are those which are undertaken—
I, At unsuitable times.
II. Over stormy seas.
III. Against advice from the ex-
perienced.
IV. With overweening confidence in
one’s own ability.
V. In defiance of almost certain
risks.—Many such voyages of a moral
kind are made by souls.


Vers. 10-14. The Counsel of the
Good.

I. Is often despised by the world.—
1. Because it proceeds from the good.
2. Because it is unpleasant, and con-
trary to the world’s wishes.

IJ. May sometimes appear to be un-
called for.—This probably was felt to
be the case with Paul’s advice to the
captain and owner, which was—1. Not
asked, and may have looked officious.
2. Not probable, as emanating from a
landsman and a prisoner.

III. Can seldom be neglected with
impunity.—B«fore the voyage was over,
all on board must have wished they had
hearkened to the apostle.


Ver. 12. The Vote of the Majority.

J. As a general rule it is wise that
the majority should prevail.—On this
principle only can social government or
co-operative action proceed. ‘To set
aside the will of the majority where all
have equal rights, in favour of the wish
of the minority is of the essence of
tyranny and oppression.

II. There are times when the
majority should bow to the minority.
—As, for instance, when the subject in
debate is one upon which the minority
is better informed or more likely to be
able to give a right decision. To refuse
to do so is not intelligence, but stupidity,
not principle, but stubbornness.

III. The vote of the majority has
not unfrequently been wrong.—In-
stanees might be quoted from almost
every department of life — business,
politics, religion.


Ver. 14. The Storms of Life.—Are
most—
I. Unexpected in their coming.
II. Severe in their operation.
IIL. Long in their continuance.
IV. Disastrous in their effects.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 15-26.


Drifting Upon the Deep ; or, Preparing for The Worst.

I. Making for shelter.—This the storm-driven vessel found for a little under the
lee of a small island named Clauda or Cauda, the modern Gozzo, about twenty
miles south-west of Cape Matala. The word used by Luke “running under,” it
has been observed (Smith, The Shipwreck of St. Paul, 2nd ed., p. 100), is a
striking nautical term which expresses first that the ship had the wind behind
it, and secondly, that it had the wind between itself and the island. Hence the
inference is that it passed to the south-east of the island.

II. Hoisting up the boat.—This, as already remarked, had been towing astern
when the ship left the Fair Havens. Either the storm had arisen so suddenly or
had not been expected to continue, so that at first no attention was turned to the
boat. When the vessel was fairly caught by the hurricane, it was impossible to
do anything in the way of securing the boat. In the temporary shelter afforded
by the island, the sailors managed, though with difficulty, to get it brought on
board. It had obviously by this time become waterlogged. It was not much
of a protection for two hundred and seventy passengers; but should things
come to the worst it might be the means of saving some, if not all.

III. Frapping the ship.—So apprehensive were the captain and owner that
the violence of the storm might cause the ship’s timbers to start, and the ship to
spring a leak, that they resorted to a practice which, though seldom necessary, in
consequence of the superior construction of modern vessels, is nevertheless still


562


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwar. xxvut.








~~


occasionally employed by sailors in a storm. They used helps, undergirding the
ship. They put chains under the keel and over the gunwale of the vessel, and
probably ropes along its sides, to strengthen the hull and keep it from being
battered to pieces. Mr. Smith and Conybeare and Howson mention several
instances of the practice here referred to, of which the following may be cited.
1. At the battle of Navarino the Albion man-of-war reccived so much damage
during the action, that it became necessary to have recourse to frapping, and the
vessel had chain cables passed round her under the keel, which were tightened
by others passed horizontally along the sides, interlacing them; and she was
brought home in this state to Portsmouth: 2. On December 20th, 1837, the
schooner St. Croix, fifty-three tons burden, bound for Kingston, Jamaica,
encountered a severe gale from south-west and lay to for seven days. On the
26th she shipped a heavy sea, which took away about one-third of her deck-load.
For the preservation of the crew, vessel, and balance of deck-load, it was found
necessary to secure the top of the ship, which was done by passing a coil of
four-inch Manilla rope round and round the vessel, and making them as tight as
possible by means of heavers. One of the chains was also passed round and
fastened with tackles and heavers, so that the top of the vessel was secured and
the leak in the waterways was stopped. In this way the vessel reached its
destination.

IV. Lowering the gear.—Considerable dubiety exists as to the exact import
of this expression—some supposing it to mean that the sails were taken down so
as to let the vessel scud along under bare poles, and others that the stern anchor
was paid out, that, by dragging, it might impede the ship’s progress; but the
opinion most in favour is that the top hamper was lowered and the mast rigged
with only a small storm-sail. The reason for this precaution was that the
sailors dreaded being driven upon the Great Syrtis (to-day called the Gulf of
Sidra), a dangerous shoal upon the coast of Africa, which was a terror to all
ancient seamen—“a place terrible to such as barely hear it described,” said
Agrippa in his memorable speech, dissuading his countrymen from going to war
with the Romans (Jos., Wars, II. xvi. 4)—and on which, according to Virgil, the
ship of Alneas was wrecked (/neid, i. 157). This might, to some extent, have
been hindered, if not wholly prevented, by the second of the above methods,
lowering a stern anchor—by the first not at all; but the probability is that the
course adopted was that suggested by the third,—viz., lying to, with the ship’s
head turned towards the wind or brought as near it as possible, with as much
canvas set as would prevent her from falling off into the trough of sea. Smith,
Conybeare and Howson, Lewin, Penrose, and other competent authorities, are of
opinion that she lay to within seven points of the wind on what is called the
starboard tack.

V. Lightening the ship-——The violence of the gale continuing, additional
measures were required to ensure safety. 1. A part of the cargo—perhaps the
deck cargo, or whatever portion of the freight could be most easily spared—was
thrown overboard on the second day of the storm. That all was not thrown out
appears later on (ver. 38). 2. The tackling of the ship followed on the succeeding
day, the third of the hurricane. What the spare gear meant cannot be definitely
stated. Mr. Smith conjectures it may have been the mainyard, “ an immense
spar, probably as long as the ship, which would require the united efforts of
passengers and crew to launch overboard,” and adds, “The relief a ship would
experience by this would be of the same kind as in a modern war-vessel when the
guns are thrown overboard.” In this work of casting out “ the ship’s furniture ”
the A.V., following certain ancient MSS. represents Luke and his companions,
perhaps including Paul, as taking part ; but, according to the best texts the work
was done by the sailors alone,

563


cHAP. xxvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





VI. Despairing of safety.—This was the condition of the crew and passengers
for the next few days. When the ship Jay to under the starboard tack she began
to drift away westward, or, more correctly speaking, west by north, at the rate
of (say) thirty-six miles in twenty-four hours. With a ship manifestly leaking,
a wild storm raging, a grey sky overhead during day, concealing the sun, and a
black pall at night shutting out the stars, so that no observations could be made
of their whereabouts, it was not surprising that all on board began to anticipate
the worst. ‘Tossed about at the mercy of wind and wave, with creaking and
slackening timbers, they had no more cheerful prospect than that before long their
ship would founder and go down, as Josephus’s vessel, with six hundred souls on
board, had done in this same sea, the Adriatic.

VII. Taking heart of cheer—How many days had passed before Paul
interposed with his words of comfort is not told. Despair had laid its icy grasp
on every heart. Nobody cared for food, and nobody could have eaten though
food had been prepared. In such circumstances the apostle, the hurricane
having for a moment lulled, it may be conjectured, stood forth among them,
crew and passengers, to offer words of cheer. 1. He reproved them for not
having acted on his advice when he counselled them to winter in Fair Havens
(ver. 10) ;—which perhaps shows that Paul regarded that advice as having been
founded on more than his own natural sagacity. Had they listened to his
suggestion, they had not come by their present injury and loss. 2. He assured
them that no lives would perish, though the ship would be lost. This he stated,
not as an inference of his own foresight, but as the result of a communication
made to him during the preceding night, direct from heaven, by an angel of the
God whom he served, and in answer to prayer. That heavenly ambassador had
repeated an intimation previously made (xxiii. 11), that he must go to Rome
and stand before Cesar (which implied that his life would not be lost in
that storm), adding the further statement that, in answer to his supplication,
God had granted him the lives of all his fellow-passengers. 3. He exhorted
them to be of good cheer. Twice used (vers. 22-25), this expression revealed -
at once his earnestness and strong conviction of the truth of what he said—
a conviction which arose from his faith m God, whose promises to him
were Yea and amen (2 Cor. i. 20). He believed that what God had spoken to
him would come to pass. Hence he could afford to dismiss all anxiety as to the
issue of the voyage. Could they have believed him, as he believed God, they
might have done the same. That Luke and Aristarchus were relieved of theirr
apprehensions by Paul’s address need hardly be questioned. But that the crew
and passengers continued in alarm is apparent from the circumstance that when
next Paul spoke to them, on the fourteenth night (ver. 33), they had not
broken fast. 4. He told them they would be cast upon a certain island. As
land was not then visible, this announcement must be regarded as having formed
part of the communication made to Paul by the angel. The addition of this fact
reminded the crew and passengers that, even if they did credit Paul’s assurance,
there was still need for caution, lest in the stranding of the vessel they should,
after all, be drowned. God’s promise in no way relieved them of the necessity of
caring for their own safety.

Learn—1. The helplessness of man when he falls into the hands of God.
Sailors and passengers realise this when caught in a storm at sea. 2. The
worthlessness of material treasure when compared with life. ‘Skin for skin,
yea, all that a man hath, will he give for his life.” 3. The holy courage which
true piety inspires. Paul lost neither heart nor head in the storm. 4. The
certainty that worldly and unbelieving men receive many blessings from God for
His people’s sakes. 5. The assurance possessed by faith that God will keep His
promise.


564


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cHap. xxvit
ee a Ti a


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. The Drifting Life and Its
Opposite (compared with John vi. 21),
1. The drifting lite is our first subject.
Its name is legion. It is not the only
life of the human being—but it is the
life of hundreds of thousands. “ Drift-
ing ” is its superscription. Caught by
the Euroclydon of chance and change,
of accident and circumstance, it gives
way to it, and so is driven. It drifts.
Its very framework and setting—its
external condition, its employment, its
occupation, its profession—has perhaps
been accident. It had a home, and it
went to school, it did its lessons, and
ate and drank, and it grew up, and it
took its chance, and here it is. The
outward life drifted. If this were all,
something might be said of its quiet
submission to a higher guidance—
human guidance or even Divine. But
this is not all. ‘The life which we are
describing is not only passive in the
sense of submission—it is passive also
in departments where it is death not
to be active. For example, there is
such a thing as drifting into associa-
tions, drifting into habits, drifting into
a course of conduct. How else can we
describe nine-tenths of the companion-
ships, nine-tenths of the attachments,
nine-tenths of the marriages, which
may almost be said to have the life
itself in their keeping? Drifting is
the explanation of half the personal
habits which make a good or a bad
life. Letting alone is another word
for it. Habits are only tricks on a
large seale; every one knows how easy
these are to fall into, how difficult to
get rid of ; what else are those habits
of temper, habits of speech, habits of
thoughts—sloth, debt, intemperance,
profaneness, immoralit y—what else are
they but negligences at first, things
thought not worth attending to, so
trivial, so immaterial, so easily dropped
at any moment if they should go too
far or become troublesome? We drift
into them. There are positive habits
and negative, You let your morning


prayer pass one morning—you just
drifted out of the good habit, as you
drifted into the bad one. There are
habits of the mind as well as of the life.
Opinion is a habit of the mind—not
least on the highest subjects. Faith
itself is a mental habit-—faith, and its
opposite. But how few are they, by
comparison, who carefully and earnestly
form these mental habits. Reflect for
a moment upon your reasons for
thinking this, for believing that. “ Be
ready,” St. Peter says, ‘to answer
when men ask you for a reason for the
hope that is in you”—can we obey
that precept? Must we not say, most
of us, I drifted into my faith—it is the
religion of my home and of my country.
Very sad, sometimes, is the spectacle
of this kind of drifting. 2. Thus we
reach the second text, and the second’
picture, and the second parable—that
which shows us the disciples crossing
the sea of Galilee through wind and
storm, terrified in the midst of it first
by the absence and then by the appari-
tion of their Master, then calmed by
His voice of reassurance, receiving Him
into their ship, and straightway finding
themselves at the land whither they
went. The opposite of a life of drifting
is obviously a life of aim, of purpose, of
directness. A life which goes, not
anywhere, but somewhither. A life
with a terminus, with a destination,
with a haven. A life possessing both
helm and pilot, a controlling hand and
a guiding will. Such a life may be,
and yet be earthly. A business life
may have, in terms at least, all these
conditions. But how when we take
into view the whole of being—eternity,
as well as time? How then? We
want to know what is the security
against drifting when we take in two
worlds. And we find it in the words,
“They received Him into the ship.”
No life is safe from drifting unless
it has religion in it. A strong will
cannot prevent the ship, which is
the life, from being caught by some


565


CHAP, XXVIIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Euroclydon, and driven, helpless, before
it.—Dean Vaughan.


Vers. 15-20. The Voyage of Life-—As
depicted in that of Paul from Crete.
Such as sail across the ocean of life
are—

I. Often exceedingly tossed with a
tempest.—l. Of physical affliction.
2. Of mental tribulation. 3. Of
heart-anxiety. 4. Of spiritual distress.

II. Sometimes reduced to such
straits that they must part with all
they count dear.—l. With material
substance. 2. With intellectual wealth.
3. With (supposed) spiritual riches.
4. With all ordinary means of saving
themselves.

III. Not unfrequently plunged into
despair.—l. About their bodily life.
2. Concerning their soul’s salvation.


Ver. 22. Good Cheer for Christian
Sailors.

I. No soul shall be lost, however
severe may be the tempests that arise
against it.

“ Let troubles rise and terrors frown,

And days of darkness fall ;
Through Him all dangers we'll defy,
And more than conquer all.”
Scotch Paraphrase.


II. No guarantee that everything
else may not be lost.—The ship the
Christian sails in may be lost. His
body may perish. His creature com-
forts may be removed. All he confides
in may be shattered. He himself shall
be saved (1 Cor. iii. 15).


Four Anchors. — The wessage—
“T exhort you to be of good cheer”
—is Christianity’s message to storm-
tossed souls. When the long voyage
has been one of continual storm ; when
you iook back and see nothing but cloud,
and darkness, and disappointment ;
when the very cargo that you ventured
all upon has bcen thrown overboard,
and there is nothing left; when you
look forward and hear the surf pounding
on the rocks—a sign of death close at
hand ;—then Christianity comes with
this message: “I exhort you to be cheer-


566


ful.” Tn such a time as that there
are four anchors which the Christian
may throw out while he wishes for
day. They are, Duty, Hope, Christ,
and God.

I. Duty.—When there is no longer
any inspiration in life; when you can
no longer see that you can do anything ;
when it seems that all life thus far has
been a failure; when you cannot see
that you can accomplish anything in
the future;—then comes Duty to stand
by your side and say, “ Do not leave
the ship. Youarein peril with others ;
you are bearing a burden with others:
bear the burden, and do not throw
it off upon them.” Duty—all her
surliness turns to serenity, and all her
serenity to peace. Let a man live for
happiness—for himself, for his wife,
for his children, for his home, for
others—and sooner or later the time
of shipwreck will come to him. Let
him live for what men call honour,
and honour will not leave him in the
hour of shipwreck. It was duty that
enabled the six hundred to make that
charge at Balaclava, though some one
had blundered, and they rode to death.
It is duty that enables many a man to ~
stand where honour has no reward for
him, and fame no value to him, and
yet to stand, and, having done all, still
stand ; for duty inspires him, and duty
is the voice of God speaking in con-
science.

II. The second anchor is Hope—
that is, immortal hope. Let a man
live under the impression that the
horizon of this present time is the
horizon of his life, and I do not see
how he can help at times asking him-
self, Is life worth living? and shaking
his head sorrowfully in reply. One is
prosperous and makes money, and is
wealthy—what then? What can he
do with it? Life is like an ocean voyage.
The man comes out in the morning from
his cabin and starts to walk the deck.
Whether it is a little boat or a big one
does not make much difference, for
after a few years he has traversed the
whole deck from stern to stem, stands
on the bow, and knows all the life


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwarv. xxvut.
a


that is. What then? ~ Lie down to
sleep, wearied one; in the morning
we shall wake in the harbour, a new
continent before you, and your friends
there waiting to receive you. This is
the anchor that you are to throw out
while you wish for day: ‘ Weeping
may endure for a night, but joy cometh
in the morning.” Blessed are those
that believe in a morning.

Til. The third anchor is Christ—
Christ as a real Saviour from sorrow
and sin, here and now; Christ as the
noblest example of heroism; Christ
as the inspiration to right life, because
one that has entered into life and
borne the brunt of life’s battle; Christ,
the power to live the life that is worth
living.

TV. And then in all these, God.—
““My God, whom I serve, sent His angel
to stand by methis night.” The presence
of God. God in the garden and God in
the desert ; God at the cradle and God
at the grave; God at the wedding-feast
and God at the funeral; God in the
hour of plenty and God in the hour
of famine; God in that voice of duty,
making conscience really Divine; God
in that word of hope, the God of all
hope, filling us with hope ; God in that
Christ, coming to take man’s burdens
and show them how, not to get free
from them, but how bravely to bear
them. Christ’s message to the men
who are storm-tossed, whose past is
one long cyclone, whose future is an
unknown grave, and the only comfort
in whose ears is the sound of the
breakers on the shore—the message of
Christ to them is: Be of good cheer ;
Duty still lives, though happiness is
dead; Hope has come—it beckons
from beyond the grave; Christ is the
model of a perfect| heroism and the
power of a Divine life; and over all,
and in all, and through all, is the
Father, God.—Lyman Abbott, D.D.


Ver, 23. The Confession in the Midst
of the Storm.—Paul here speaks—1.
Decidedly. He is no waverer, no halter
between two opinions. He has made
up hismind. He is thoroughly decided.


He speaks as one who has made his
choice. 2. Certainly. He interposes
no “if” or ‘ perhaps,” but speaks as
one who knows his relationship to God.
3. Calmly. These are not the words
of excitement or fanaticism. 4. Joy-
fully. They are the words of one
exulting in the consciousness of this
Divine relationship. 5. Harnestly.
With him all connected with God is a
profound reality. Such is our model !
Though we be not apostles, we are to
take our stand here. Nothing less than
this will do. Indecision, oscillation,
half-heartedness, will not do. Com-
promise will not do. Lukewarmness
will not do. Formalism will not do.
In everything relating to God there
must be reality, sincerity, completeness.


“The whole heart must be there.—JZ.


Bonar, D.D.


Paul's Personal Religion. —It is
Paul’s personal religion, then, that
these words of his bring before us—not
in any of its doctrinal details, but,
better still, in the whole of its practical
essence. We will try to read some of
its features as the words reveal them.

I. First, we will note what we may
call the clearheadedness of Paul’s
religion. The religion of too many is
a thing of haze. They do not see
through it, and they do not know their
position in it. Their abounding ex-
perience is that of mist. They may be
Christians, happily, but also they may
not ; they themselves, at least, are not
clear on the subject. Yet itis in their
own consciousness that the evidence
ought to be strongest. Now, in Paul’s
religion there is not a trace of this.
His religious outlook is clean and clear.
He does not at this moment know very
well where he is as a voyager on God’s
world; but he does know distinctly
where He is, and what he is, as a
religious being under God’s govern-
ment. He is a Christian as surely as
he is a man. He lays his own hand
on all that belongs to a Christian.
There are mysteries enough without
having this, too, for a mystery. ‘ The
God,” says he to the hearkening crowd


567


CHAP. XXVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


reo Ol OTT


on the deck, ‘“‘ whose I am, whom also
I serve.”
awaiting him in Rome, but he will tell
himself, and he will tell other men,
that he foresees sufiiciently well what
is awaiting him in the heavenly “city
of the great King.”

II. A second thing, then, which we
note in Paul’s religion is its clear-.
heartedness. Paul, it is easy to see,
is not embarrassed with his religion.
There is nothing of load or weight in
it—nothing of the entanglement of
anxiety, or fear, or concealment, or
shame, It is plain that he is rather
proud than otherwise of his religion.
These words declare his religion, throb
with it, glory in it. On that long
voyage he has never kept it a secret
from any man how it stands between
God and him. This of itself is proof
enough that there is no degradation in
his religious position. There can be
nothing in it that is unworthy of a
man, nothing that is uncongenial to
the most gifted and capacious of
human spirits. Does it appear to
have broken his energy, or crushed his
high spirit—this submission of himself
and his powers to the control of his God ?
Nay; if all the truth were told, Paul
was never Paul at his best, or anything
near it, till he could say, “The God
whose I am, whom also I serve.”

III. A third thing we have to note
about the religion of Paul is its out-
ward expression—the form it pre-
sents to the observation of men. This
appears in the phrase “ Whom also I
serve.” That signifies, “To whom I
do worship—to whose honour I per-
form all my religious rites, and at
whose hands I take all my religious
duties.” In a word, Paul. worships his
God—obeys worshipping, and worships
obeying. His religion, rich with rever-
ence, seeks outward manifestation of
itself, and the manifestation it finds is
worship—the observance of all the
prescribed yet untrammelled methods
of homage which are suitable to such
a God as his. Those listening men had
most of them their gods, to whom they
did service, gave honour, made offer-


568


Paul does not see what is


ings—divinities whose anger they
sought to soothe, whose favour they
coveted to win, whose temples they
were fain to frequent. Men could
thus read their religion. So it was,
more finely, with Paul. His religion,
much more than theirs, was a spiritual
religion, but it was not left altogether
bodiless. He prayed, he praised—
alone, or in company with brethren.
TV. But a fourth thing which we
must now note about the religion of
Paul is its inward thoroughness—its
personalness, and depth, and solidity.
The essence of Paul’s religion, we have
said, is in this passage; we may now
say that the essence of the passage is
in these three words: “ Whose I am.”
Paul, then, simply does not belong to
himself, but to his God. For him, “to
live is Christ,” and to die is only more
of Christ. But we must let these three
words of Paul’s mean to ourselves the
whole that they meant ,to him.
Assuredly enough, he had consecrated
his life to God’s will; but he had done
more. He had given his whole being
to God Himself—to Father, Son, and
Spirit. ‘“ Whose,” says he, “ I am ”—
precisely meaning what he says. Of —
course Paul. was His—His, as the
flower on the mountain-side is His
who made it; as the silent, far-off
star is His, and all the bustling burden
of our wheeling world; for they bear
upon them the lines of His creating
hand. Of course Paul was His, for
nothing else than His all-working
providence from moment to moment
could have preserved Paul to this hour.
True; but the words carry more in-
tensity in them than these considera-
tions could ever have inspired. Paul
had seen more to stir him, and had
seen what stirred him more, than all
creation and all providence. Paul,
with his vision Divinely cleansed, had
looked and beheld how his God, as the
Man Jesus, had girded Himself to meet
the desperate needs of Paul, had pitied
Paul in his helplessness and guilt, had
set it before Himself to redeem Paul
at any cost that stayed short of un-
righteousness, and had verily redeemed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuar. xxvut.
et ee a eens. St. oki Gets. ss friar a ee


Paul at the cost of comfort, companion-
ship, reputation, lordship, life—borne
down under a great lone enduring to
which the world can bring no parallel.
“T am Thine: Thou hast saved me.”

V. The last thing we will note
about the religion of Paul is its tem-
poral and eternal actuality. That we
may better feel this momentous cha-
racteristic of Paul’s religion, let me ask
you to think again of the simple facts
of the record. Paul knows that his
God is great enough to be invisible,
and mighty enough to be controlling
all things everywhere. He knows he
is the friend of his God. He is now
in jeopardy. Paul’s religion, then,
with all its soaring sublimity, and all
its nearly incredible creed, was still a
system of facts, and not of fancies.
His religious sentiment worked among
actualities, and not among shadows.
His religious reliance had a vastness of
substantially behind it, and not an
infinitude of cloud. Paul felt his foot
firm, and had reason—firm for time,
and firm for eternity. It will be little
more than extending our consideration
of this last characteristic of Paul’s
religion if, ere we close, we turn our
our eye upon the first three of this
messenger’s words—the keynote of
his message—“‘ Fear not, Paul.”
Absolutely speaking, this is the key-
tone of the whole religion of Christ,
and it is the key-tone of no other—
hardly a tone at all of any other.
Not the best of other religions can
even pretend to carry into the very
heart of a man such strong self-
possession. But do not these three
words bring a breath of good cheer to
every Christian of us who, like Paul,
is on lines of duty set for him by a
gracious Providence, and on those lines
is meeting with what is adverse,
threatening, dangerous? As obedient
Christians, as dutiful men and women
of Christ, the last thing for us to do is
to fear.—J. A. Kerr Bain, M.A.


Ver. 23,24. The True Greatness of
the Christian.—Whether minister or
private believer,


I. His exalted character.—He be-
longs to God—“ whose I am.” 1. By
right of creation. 2. By title of pur-
chase. 38. By act of voluntary dedica-
tion.

IT. His noble profession.— He serves
God—‘‘ Whom [I serve.” 1. Intelli-
gently, not blindly. 2. Heartily, not
grudgingly. 3. Constantly, not inter-
mittently.

III. His heavenly privilege.—1.
Visited by angels— There stood by
me this night an angel of God.” “Are
they not all ministering spirits?” etc.
(Heb, i. 14). 2. Admitted to the throne
of grace. Paul had obviously been
praying for his fellow-voyagers.

IV. His wide-reaching influence.—
He becomes a means and a cause of
blessing, even to those who love neither
him nor his God. ‘God hath given
thee all them that sail with thee”
(compare Matt. v. 13).


Ver. 24. Paul’s God.

I. His glorious majesty.—1. Served
by angels. 2. Worshipped by men.

II. His wondrous condescension.—
1. In noting the drifting ship. 2. In
visiting His suffering servant. 3. In
answering that servant’s prayer.

Til. His regal sovereignty.—1.
Over the sea. 2. Over the lives of
men. 3. Over the course of events.

IV. His absolute faithfulness —
In keeping His promised word to Paul
—that he should stand before Cesar.

V. His boundless mercy.—-In grant-
ing the lives of all on board the ship,
of whom most knew Him not, and
many loved and served Him not.


The divine “ Must”; or what the
Angel's words signified.—Six things.

I. Three to Paul.—1. That his life
would be spared. Against all the
probabilities of opposing nature, who-
ever else might perish, he would not.
“‘ All things possible with God”; and
“ Our times in His hand,”

“ Not a single shaft can hit
Till the God of love sees fit.”


2. That his appeal to Cesar had not
been wrong. If Paul had ever felt


569


cHap. xxvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a SS Se


misgiving as to whether he had followed
the right course in claiming to have his
cause determined by the Emperor, the
angel’s words must have reassured him,
must in fact have led him to conclude
that his action had been dictated by
the Spirit of God, and was accordingly
approved by God as right. To a good
man it ever is a source of highest con-
solation to know that his footsteps are
being guided by the Lord. 3. That the
issue of his trial would be favourable.
The angel who said “ Fear not” could
hardly have intended that the Emperor
would condemn him.

II. Three to Paul’s fellow-voyagers.
—l. That Paul was under the special
protection of heaven. This must have
imparted considerable importance to
Paul in their eyes, and perhaps con-
vinced them of his innocence. God is
able to exalt his servants before men,
however strongly appearances may set
against them. 2. That Paul was in
God’s sight the principal person in the
ship. The real steersman and com-
mander, while all the rest only sailed
with him. How differently are men’s
positions even in this world estimated,
when God is the judge! 3. That Paul
would be to them a better protector than
either Julius or the captain. For Paul’s
sake were the whole ship’s company to
be saved. The men of the world little
know how many benefits they receive
at God’s hand, simply because God’s
servants are among them.—Compiled
from Stier.


Ver. 25. God and the Believer.

I. God’s promises to the believer
are—l. Great. 2. Clear. 3. Com-
forting. 4. Saving.

II. The believer's faith in God is—
1. Simple. 2. Hearty. 3. Undoubting.
4, Sustaining.


Vers. 21-26. Adrift upon the Deep ;
or, Paul’s Heroism in the Storm.

I. The magnificent spirit he dis-
played.—1. Calmness. The only man
on board the tempest-tossed merchant-
man that lost not his head, but whose
coolness was equal to, and even su-


570


perior to, the occasion, was Paul. Of
the two hundred and_ seventy-six
souls that formed the vessel’s living
freight—master and owner, centurion
and prisoners, sailors, soldiers, and
passengers, perhaps not even excepting
Luke and Aristarchus—it is obvious
that all were filled with alarm, plunged
in despair, preparing for the worst,
expecting every moment to go to the
bottom. Of course these were not to
be blamed. It is easy to be cool when
sailing over placid seas; but to be
caught in a Euroclydon, which whis-
tles through the canvas, makes the
cordage rattle, strains the timbers or
iron plates of the ship, and tosses it
about upon the boiling waters like a
plaything—is sufficient to try the
nerves of the strongest, bravest, and
best men. Even the disciples in similar
circumstances were afraid (Matt. viii.
23-27). Yet Paul was self-poss:ssed
and cool, prisoner though he was,
working all day (ver. 19) and at night
not sleeping, though he could have
done so more peacefully than Jonah
(i. 5), but waking, visited by angels
and communing with heaven, praying
for himself and his fellow-voyagers. ~
Might it not be said, “And he
thought of Christ, who stilled the wave
on the Lake of Galilee”? Not every
Christian could behave so in a founder-
ing ship! 2. Courage. Having
stepped forward amidst the crowd that
were huddled on the deck he reproved
the captain, centurion, and passengers,
for not listening to his advice, when he
besought them not to leave Fair
Havens (ver. 10). To some it may
look as if it were rather an irrelevant,
if not unbecoming and boastful, not to
say cruel, speech to make at a mo-
ment when all were standing face to
face with death. But it was none of
these. Rather it was needful to be
said if Paul was to gain a hearing for
what he had next to communicate ; and
it was manly, fearless, and noll>.
3. Confidence. He had no doubt as to |
the truthfulness of what he next told
them—that all.would eventually go
well with them; that their fears were.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: TIE ACTS. cnr. xxv





utmecessary ; that though the ship
would be lost they would not; that the
ship would be wrecked upon a certain
island (God had not promised him the
safety of the ship, ver. 22)—what
island he could not say—but that not
a life would be lost. It seemed all in
the highest degree improbable; but
nevertheless Paul believed all that he
had said to be certain, because all that
he had said had been revealed to him
frum heaven. Hence his confidence.
Had his fellow-voyagers believed him,
they too would have become confident ;
but they did not. Hence their hearts
were a prey to black despair. 4. Cheer-
fulness. While on every countenance
sat gloom, on his shone the lustre of
joy. Though exhorted to partake of
food, they could not. But he, standing
in their midst, took bread and, having
given thanks, brake it and began to
eat. What a picture of Christian
gladness ! (Eccles. ix. 7).

II. The secret of his lofty behaviour.
—The assurance which he had of three
things. 1. Of his soul’s salvation.
Paul knew that, though the ship went
to the bottom, it would make no differ-
ence to his eternal destiny, it would
only hasten him to his Master’s
presence. He understood and _ re-
membered the relation in which he
stood to God, and God stood to him.
He belonged to God—* whose I am”
(compare Isa. xliii. 1)—and lived for
God—* Whom I serve.” And God; he
could have reverently added, belonged
to him (Psalm xvi. 5), and watched
over him. Whatever happened he
could have sung—


“ When peace like a river attendeth my way,
When sorrows like sea-billows roll ;
Whatever my lot, Thou hast taught me to
know,
It is well, it is well with my soul! ”


God and he, Christ and he, could not
be parted (Rom. viii. 35-39). 2. Of his
body's preservation. The angel had
told him—what once before his Lord
had revealed to him (xxiii. 11)—that
he must stand before Cesar; and that
implied that he could not drown. The


knowledge of that kept him calm,
courageous, confident, and cheerful, so
far as his own fate was concerned
Whoever might be lost, he could not
be! Yet more! 3. Of the safety of his
Sellow-voyagers. It is hardly likely that
Paul would have been either calm or
cheerful if he had known that, while he
himself should be saved, all the rest of
the ship’s company should be lost. But
he was spared this tiial. The angel’s
communication was that all should be
rescued.. And so the mystery of his
singular behaviour was solved.
Lesson.-—They who would show
Paul’s calmness, courage, confidence,
and cheerfulness, amid the storms and
tempests of life, must be acquainted
with Paul’s God, possess Paul’s religion,


-and exercise Paul’s faith.


Note.—With regard to the objection
urged against the historical credibilit
of these verses (see “‘ Critical Remarks”),
the following observations may be
pondered :—‘‘ We may at once grant
that the narrative would go on without
any obvious awkwardness, if verses
21-26 were omitted, which is of course
true of many a paragraph describing
some special incident in a historical
work.” ... “But it is half-hearted
and useless to cut out verses 21-26 as
an interpolation without cutting out
verses 33-38; there, too, Paul is
represented as the prophet and the
consoler on a higher plane, though he
is also the mere passenger suffering
from hunger, and alive to the fact that
the safety of all depends on their taking
food and being fit for active exertion in
the morning. Some critics go so far
as to cut out verses 33-35. But it is
not spossible to cut these out alone ;
there is an obvious want of sequence
between verse 32 and verse 36, and
Holtzmann therefore seems to accept
verses 33-35. But if they are ac-
cepted, I fail to see any reason for
rejecting verses 21-26; these two
passages are so closely akin in purport
and bearing on the context, that they
must go together ; and all the mischief
attributed to verses 21-26 as placing
Paul on a higher plane is done in


571


onap. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
i ——


verses 33-35.” . . “Further, the
excision of verses 21-26 would cut
away a vital part of the narrative.
(1) These verses contain the additional
fact, natural in itself and assumed in
verse 34 as already known, that the
crew and passengers were starving and
weak. (2) They fit well into the
context, for they follow naturally after


the spiritlessness described in verse 20.”'


... “But let us cut out every verse
that puts Paul on a higher plane, and
observe the narrative that would result:
Paul twice comes forward with advice
that is cautiously prudent, and shows
keen regard to the chance of safety.
... The Paul who remains on the


interpolation theory could never have
written the Epistles.” ... ‘“ Finally,
the reason why the historian dwells at
such length on the voyage lies mainly
in verses 21-26 and 33-38.

But the interpolation theory would cut
out the centre of the picture.” ...
“There remains no reason to reject
verses 21-26 which I can discover,
except that it introduces the super-
human element. ... But the super-
human element is inextricably involved
in this book: you cannot cut it out by
any critical process that will bear
scrutiny. You must accept all or
leave all.”—Ramsay, St. Paul the
Traveller, etc., pp. 337-339.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 27—37,


Nea ing the Breakers ; or, a Night of Anwiety.

I. The situation on the fourteenth night.—(/.e, from the bursting of the
storm, which occurred soon after leaving Fair Havens, perhaps on the same day,
at nightfall.) 1. Drifting in the Adria. Though usually applied to the Gulf of
Venice, or the sea between Italy and Greece, the term “ Adria” comprehended, in a
wider sense, the ocean around Sicily, near which was Melita. The later Greek
and Roman writers even called by this name the entire sheet of water as far as
Africa. In what direction they drifted can be inferred from the statement that
they were wrecked on Melita, or Malta, near Sicily, not the island of the same
name on the Dalmatian coast. It was on this Ocean of Adria that Josephus
was wrecked (Life, 3). 2. Nearing land. The time was now midnight. What-
ever that may be to poets and landsmen, to tempest-tossed sailors in a sinking.
ship, with no moon or stars in the firmament overhead, or even with these, it
must ever be a season of deep horror and great danger. With the sound, too, of
breakers ahead announcing the proximity of unknown land, the acuteness of
distress felt by crew and passengers in such a plight must be simply appalling.

“ And fast through the midnight dark and drear,
Through the whistling sleet and snow,


Like a sheeted ghost the vessel swept
Towards the reef of Norman’s woe.


* And ever the fitful gusts between
A sound came from the land;
It was the sound of the trampling surf
On the rocks and the hard sea-sand.”
Longfellow.


‘Such was the position of Paul’s ship on that terrible fourteenth nicht. The
sailors on the look-out surmised, from the sound of foam-crested billows dashing
against rocks or breaking on the beach, that they were “ drawing near to some
country,” and this surmise the soundings forthwith taken confirmed—first
twenty fathoms, and again, after a little space, fifteen fathoms. 3. Letting go
anchors. So imminent was the peril, and so great the fear of being hurled amid
rocks, that the mariners dropped into the sea from the stern four anchors, in the
hope of retarding the fate which now appeared inevitable. Ancient vessels, not
carrying so large anchors as modern ships, had often more of them. Lucian


572


,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACT'S. cuap. xxvit
>





(Wav., v.), in describing the Alexandrian corn-ship, speaks of her as having
anchors (in the plural). “ Atheneus mentions a ship which had eight”
(Hackett); and that Paul’s possessed more than four is expressly stated (ver. 30).
The reason for dropping the anchors from the stern, instead of from the prow, as
was customary (Anchora de proré jacitur, Virgil, Zn. vi. 902), is evident. Had
the ship been anchored from the bows it might have swung round and struck
upon the rocks, whereas, anchored from the stern, it was ready to be run ashore
at any moment. The anchorage in St. Paul’s bay, the tiaditionary locality of
the shipwreck, is reported good. ‘While the cables hold there is no dauger,
as the anchors will never start” (Sailing Directions). 4. Longing for the day.
Whether or not the crew and passengers cried “‘ every man unto his god,” as the
mariners on Jonah’s ship did (Jon. i. 5), and as it may well be believed Paul did
(see ver. 24), all on board fervently wished the night gone, since, for aught they
knew, any moment the ship might founder, or the cables might snap. ‘The
tension of hope and fear, the suspense which made men almost cry—


‘And if our fate be death, give light and let us die’—


is vividly brought brought before us by Luke’s words” (Plumptre). 5. Attempt-
‘ng to escape. Under pretence of paying out anchors from the foreship a number,

erhaps all, of the sailors lowered the boat into the sea, and, mean-spirited and
elfish, would themselves have been overboard had not Paul, with his eagle eye,
perceived and frustrated their design by informing the centurion and the soldiers,
~A*nx with a peremptory tone of authority, that unless the sailors remained on

_wd, the rest of the ship’s company could not be saved. Either Paul had re-
veived a Divine intimation to that effect, or he reasoned that, should the sailors
abandon the vessel, no possibility could remain of successfully working it in any
favourable emergency that might arise. 6. Defeating the (would be) deserters.
“ Nothing can show more forcibly,” says Lewin, “ the absolute ascendency which
Paul had gained over his comredes than the implicit faith with which they now
executed his commands.” ‘“ With military promptitude the soldiers held no dis-
cussion on the subject, but dec. ed the question by immediate action. With that
short sword with which the Roman legions cleft their way through every
obstacle to universal victory, they ‘cut the ropes,’ and the boat fell off, and, if
not instantly swamped, drifted off to leeward into the darkness, and was dashed
to pieces on the rocks” (Conybeare and Howson). Beautifully writes Besser :
“Tt was a strong faith which did that. The last bridge between the lost ship,
for which there was no deliverance, and the near land was, with this act, broken.
At the same moment that the centurion ordered the boat’s ropes to be cut and
the boat to be dropped into the sea, he stepped with his soldiers into the salvation
boat of Paul’s word, which was hung with fast cords to the faithfulness of
Almighty God. Do thou also hew the cords from every boat upon which thou
hast placed thy confidence alongside of God, and then will to thee a morning light
dawn in thy night, when thou shalt see the glorious help of God.”

II. The situation on the fifteenth dawn.—At length the grey light of coming
dawn began to relieve the intolerable gloom which had prevailed during night.
The rain fell in torrents (xxviii. 2). The crew and passengers shivered through
cold, wet, hunger, and fear. A second time, therefore, Paul addressed himself to
the company. 1. He repeated his assurance of safety for all on board. Not a
hair of their heads should perish—not even of the sailors who had so meanly
attempted to leave them. Thus did he requite their evil with good, and heap
coals of fire upon their heads (Rom. ix. 20). How they were to get ashore lay,
as yet, beyond his knowledge. Only the fact that all should reach the beach alive
had been revealed to him, and he believed that that would come to pass which
God had said. When God speaks, faith immediately proceeds to hush her doubts,


573


cHap. xxvil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





knowing that nothing can be too hard for omnipotence (Jer. xxxii. 17), 2. He
besought them to take food. For fourteen days and nights they had eaten nothing
—-at least, nothing adequate to their necessities, having been able to obtain no
regular meals, and having had no heart to eat what they could obtain, fear and
despair having quenched their appetites. The idea that they had been keeping
a religious fast is not for a moment to be entertained. ‘ Appian,” says
Doddridge, “‘ speaks of an army which for twenty days together had neither food
nor sleep: by which he must mean that they neither made full meals nor slept
whole nights together. The same interpretation must be given to this phrase ”
(quoted by Hackett). ‘It was physically impossible that the two hundred and
seventy-six who were on board could have gone on for fourteen days without any
food at all. Scanty rations had, we must believe, been doled out to those who
came for them ; but the tension of suspense was so great that they had not sat
down to any regular meal” (Plumptre). As an inducement to their compliance
with his entreaty Paul explained that this was absolutely necessary for their
safety ; meaning that, though they might not perish through drowning, unless
they took support they might die of weakness induced by starvation. 3. He
himself set them an example. Having taken bread, he gave thanks to God in
presence of them all, and began to eat. There is no ground for assuming either
that Paul intended his action to be commemorative of the Lord’s Supper or that
the Christians present (who must have been few) understood it in this light.
Just as little did he purpose to represent himself as the father or head of the
family, since he did not distribute among the company the bread which he took.
Simply he designed, one may suppose, to exemplify his own precept; and in so
doing he properly acted as a pious Jew or a devout Christian, giving thanks to God
in presence of them all for the lives He had hitherto preserved amid the dangers of
the deep as well as for the prospect of safety that lay before them ; for the food
which, in His providence, they still possessed, and for the comparative calmness of
mind in which at last they were allowed to partake of it—after which, having
broken it, he began to eat. It must have been a sublime as well as strange
spectacle to that shipload of heathen soldiers and prisoners, sailors and passengers,
all shivering and shrunken, poor, emaciated creatures, starving and cold—to
look upon the face and hear the voice of the one unperturbed spirit among them
—a physically weak but spiritually strong Jew; a shackled prisoner, standing on
the deck in the grey light of dawn, amid the rain and storm, the howling of the
winds and dashing of the waves, perhaps the shrieking of the passengers, the
cursing of the soldiers, and the shoutings of the prisoners, lifting up his soul to
God in prayer, and then quietly partaking of food. ‘ Were I a painter,” writes
Besser, “I would paint that scene!” And one feels disposed to say, Amen !
One would like to have heard Paul’s “ grace,” and to have seen the faces of them
who listened to it! How it impressed them may never be known; how it
affected them is told. ‘Then were they all of good cheer, and themselves also
took food.”

Learn—1. Man’s helplessness, apart from God, amid the storms of life. 2, The
unspeakable baseness of the natural heart, as shown in the mean attempt of the
sailors, 3. ‘Che value of a good man in times of difficulty and danger. 4. The
sublimity of true religion, as seen in Paul.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 27. Midnight on the Sea. starless sky. 4. A rocky coast. 5, A
I. A gloomy picture.—1. A stormy despairing crew.
ocean, 2. A drifting wreck. 3, A II. A suggestive symbol.—Of the


674


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cuHap. xxvut.
pF en a i Re EE eee


Christless soul. 1. Tossed about upon
the sea of life. 2. Drifting he knows
not whither. 3. Without a star of
hope in the interior firmament of his
soul, 4. Nearing an unknown country,
the future world. 5, Filled with alarm
for his safety.

III, An instructive contrast.—The
voyage of the Christian soul different
in these respects. 1. Tossed about by
life’s tribulations, he is not afraid.
2. Driven to and fro, he always knows
whither he is bound. 3. Though stars
shine not without, they do within.
4, The country he nears is not un-
known. 5. A stranger to despair, he is
conscious of a settled peace and holy joy.


Ver. 29. Anchored from the Stern.—
Many whose faces are, or seem to be,
turned towards the shore of the better
country are held back, being anchored
from the stern—

I. By their secret lusts.
II. By their earthly affections.

III. By their worldly occupations.

IV. By their darling enjoyments.


Ver. 31, along with ver. 22. Theo-
logical Doctrines and Theological Mis-
takes.

I. Theological doctrines.—1. The
doctrine of Divine Fore-ordination. That
God fore-knows and fore-ordains (or,
vice versa, fore-ordains and fore-knows)
everything that comes to pass illus-
trated by the promise that no life
should be lost. 2. Zhe doctrine of
human freedom. That man is respon-
sible for working out his own destiny
exemplified by the statement that,
except the sailors remained in the
ship, neither they nor the rest could
be saved.

Il. Theological mistakes.—1. That
Diwine fore-ordination precludes human
freedom. ‘This is an error, since the
same wisdom that ordains the end
ordains also the means—viz., human
freedom. 2. That human freedom pre-
cludes Divine fore-ordination. This the
twofold mystery of God’s relation to
His intelligent creatures, that He can
create free beings without Himself
ceasing to be free, and that He can fix


His own plan without fixing (in the
sense of coercing) man’s.


Ver. 34. A Daring Prophecy. ‘‘ There
shall not a hair perish from the head
of any of you !”

I. Most unlikely in the view of
reason.—Beyond all reasonable ground
of hope or expectation it must have
seemed to crew and captain, centurion
and owner, soldiers and prisoners, that,
with a sinking ship on a wind-driven
ocean, and an unknown coast to the
leeward, with multitudes on board who
could not swim, none of them should
be lost! Had any one asserted it but
Paul, it would instantly have been
scorned as unworthy of credence. As
it was, it is not evident that much
trust was reposed in the prediction.
So most of God’s predictions (not, how-
ever, the world’s, which always seem
reasonable !) are spurned by the un-
believing world as contrary to common-
sense, if not impossible.

If. Absolutely certain in the eye of
faith —To Paul it looked neither im-
possible nor incredible that what he
had affirmed should come true. Paul
believed—1. That God had the power
to perform this unlikely thing ; since all
things were possible with God, and
nothing could be hard for Him who
held the water (Isa. xl. 12) and the
lives of men (Dan. v. 23) in the hollow
of Hishand. 2. That God was faith-
ful, and would perform that which He
had promised (ver. 25). Such faith
characteristic of God’s people (Rom.
iv. 21). On these grounds the Church
rests'her confidence to-day in the pre-
dictions of Scripture.

III. Exactly fulfilled in the course
of experience.—Precisely as Faul had
said it came to pass. At one time
failure threatened (vers. 30, 31), but
in the end all escaped safe to land
(ver. 44). So in the long run will
every word that God has uttered be
fulfilled (Matt. v. 18, xxiv. 35).


Ver. 35. Paul's Prayer upon The
Ship’s Deck; or, Grace before Meals.

I. A time-honoured practice Ren-
dered venerable and sacred by the


575


cHAP. xxvu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


a


example of Samuel (1 Sam. ix. 13) and
of Jesus (Matt. xiv. 19; Mark viii.
6, 7; Luke ix. 16).

II. A highly becoming practice.—
Considering whence the meals come
(James i. 17) and the undeservingness
of the recipient (Gen. xxxii. 10).

IlI. A truly religious practice.—
Practically enjoined upon Christians,
not alone by Christ’s example and
Paul’s (1 Cor. x. 30), but by direct
Scripture precept (1 Thess. v. 17;
1 Tim. iv. 4).

IV. An eminently useful practice.
—BPeing calculated, when not done with
ostentation or timidity, or in secrecy,
but humbly yet courageously, so as to let
its true character be seen—being cal-
culated to seriously impress beholders.

V. A greatly neglected practice.—
Much reason to fear that, even in pious
households and with individual Christ-
ians, this hallowed custom has much
fallen into disrepute—greatly to the
injury of religion.


Vers. 10-35. Paul in the Storm.—A
noble picture— 4

I, Of manly courage.—1. His pru-
dent counsel (ver. 10). 2. His presence
of mind (ver. 31).

II. Of Christian peace of mind.—
1. His friendly address (ver. 21).
2. His confident trust in God (ver. 25).

III. Of apostolic unction—1. His
prophetic exhortation (ver. 24). 2. His
priestly love-feast (ver. 35).


Paul in The Storm.—Christ’s glory
reflected in the apostle.

I. Christ’s prophetical office.—In
Paul’s warning (ver. 10) and promise
(ver. 25).

II. Christ’s priestly office. —In Paul’s
pastoral care (ver. 21) and love-feast
(vers. 34, 35).

III. Christ’s kingly office.—In Paul’s
greatness of mind (ver. 35) and the
souls given to him and rescued for
his sake (vers. 24, 31).—Gerok in
Lange.


HOMILETIOAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 37—44.


Running Ashore; or, Escaping Safe to Lamd.

I. Preparing the ship.—aAfter all on board, following Paul’s example, and -
doubtless comforted by Paul’s assurance of safety, had partaken of food, they
commenced to make ready for the work which lay before them of beaching their
vessel, In order either to keep it afloat or to enable it to run as far in towards
the shore as possible, they, for the third time, lightened it, by casting overboard
the wheat, by which must be understood either the ship’s provisions, which would
be no more needed, or the ship’s cargo (or what remained of it) which, in any case,
would be damaged and rendered practically worthless, if it was not totally lost.
(See “ Critical Remarks.”)

II. Selecting a place.—This was found in a certain bay which the morning
light reveaied, but which they did not recognise, on account of its not being the
usual spot for landing at Melita. It had a beach of sand, which made it look a
promising locality in which to land their disabled craft. Selecting a spot where
two opposite currents appeared to meet, they resolved at that point to make the
attempt, in which, however, they were not certain of succeeding. Hence the
clause ‘“‘if it were possible” (A.V.), or as it isin the R.V., “they took counsel
whether.” The bay is believed to have been St. Paul’s bay, on the northern
extremity of Malta, in front of which lay the small island of Salmonetta (see
“ Critical Remarks ”).

III. Running ashore.—First, the four anchors having been cast off, because,
in all probability, the sailors could not afford the time necessary to take them up,
were left in the sea. Next, the rudder bands were loosed—i.e., the lashings with
which they had been secured were untied. Then, hoisting up the foresail, the
seamen made for the beach. Passing the island of Salmonetta, and observing
the water behind they ran the ship in that direction. In a sandbank, most


576


t


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. Xxvh.


likely caused by the meeting of counter currents, the forepart of the vessel stuck
in the ground, while the stern continued to be lashed by the waves.


“She struck where the white and fleecy waves
Looked soft as the carded wool;
But the cruel rocks, they gored her side
Like the horns of an angry bull.”
Longfellow.


IV. Escaping to land.—1. The cownsel of the soldiers was inhuman, that the
prisoners should be killed, in case they should escape. Even if explainable by
the terrible responsibility which attached to soldiers entrusted with the safe
keeping of prisoners (compare xii. 19, xvi. 27), it was a gruesome proposal, which
might have been carried out had not Julius interposed. 2. The suggestion of the
centurion was generous. Dictated, if not by humanity, by a desire to protect
Paul, it served to show the influence Paul’s personality had begun to exercise
upon his mind. One cannot help recalling here that it was a Roman centurion
who recognised the superhuman majesty of Paul’s Master (Matt. xxvii. 54). The
course recommended by Julius was that those among the soldiers who could swim
should cast themselves overboard and get first to land—in which case they could
both look after the prisoners as they arrived upon the beach, and extend a help-
ing hand to any of the passengers that might need their aid. 3. The escape of
the others was accomplished with difficulty. The ship, unable to resist the storm,
fell to pieces. Those on board were driven to save themselves as best they could.
Happily, by means of planks of wood and broken pieces of the ship, this was
effected. Not with comfort or with ease, but with complete bodily safety, all
contrived to reach the land. j

Learn—1. That God helps those who help themselves. Though Paul had
assured his fellow-voyagers that their lives would be spared, it was needful that
they should take every precaution against their lives’ loss. 2. That—


“ Man’s inhumanity to man
Makes countless thousands mourn.”


The barbarous proposal of the soldiers to kill the prisoners was even worse
than the attempt of the sailorsto desert the ship. 3. That the silent influence
for good of a good man is often all the greater that it is unconsciously exercised.
Paul’s presence on board that ship saved the prisoners from a bloody death.
4. That God can always find means to fulfil His promises. He had promised
that not a life on board that ship should be lost, and so it came to pass
that they all escaped safe to land.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 37. A Great Ship’s Company.—
Two hundred threescore and sixteen
souls—

I. Exposed to a common peril.—That
of foundering in mid ocean.

II. Inspired by a common hope
(ver. 34).—That of ultimate safety.

TII. Engaged in a common work
(ver. 38).—That of self-preservation.

IV. Partakers of a common mercy
(ver. 44).—That of final deliverance.


PP


Ver. 42. The Soldiers’ Counsel.

I. A proposal of truculent bar-
barity.

II, An example of base ingrati-
tude.

III. An instance of heartless selfish-
ness.


Ver. 44. The Voyage of the Church of
Jesus Christ. Like that of Paul’s ship
in respect of five things.


577


CHAP. XXVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





I. The stormy sea over which it
sails.

II. The fierce and sudden hurricanes
it encounters.

III. The unknown country which it
nears.

IV. The mixed company which it
bears along.

V. The ultimate safety to which it
reaches.


Or, thus :—

The Barque of the Church Compared
to Paul's Ship.

I. Its dangers.—1. Contrary winds
(vers. 4, 14). 2. Foolish guides
(vers. 11, 12). 3. Superfluous posses-
sions (vers. 18, 19). 4. Disunited
associates (vers. 30, 42). 5. Concealed
rocks (vers. 39, 41).

It. Its means of help.—ti. The
testimony of pious teachers (vers. 9,
21). 2. The prophecies of the Divine
word (vers. 23, 24). 3. The comforts
of the holy sacraments (ver. 35).
4, The blessing of believing prayer
(ver. 35). 5. The rescuing hand of
the Almighty (vers. 24, 34, 44).—G@erok
im Lange.


Or, thus :—

I. The conflict of the ship with the
elements.—Winds and waves (vers.
14, 15).

II. The exertions of the sailors.—
They undergird the ship and cast the
furniture into the sea (vers. 16-19).

III. The apparent hopelessness of
safety.—Through the leaking of the
ship (ver. 20).

IV. The wonderful rescue.—Paul’s
exhortation and God’s aid (vers, 33-
43).—Lisco.


The Voyage of Life.

I. The setting out.—1. The various
changes of surrounding objects (vers,
1, 2, 4-8). 2. The friendships (ver. 3).
3. The first clouds in the heavens
(vers. 9-15).

II. Fear and hope.—1. The fear of
unbelief (vers. 16-20). 2. The con-
fidence of faith (vers. 21-26).

III. The contest with adversities.—


578


1. Trouble discloses hearts
27-32). 2.
(vers. 33-38).

IV. The haven of rest.—l. The
shipwreck and the billows of death
(vers. 39-43). 2. The rescue and the
landing on the unknown land of rest
(ver. 44)—Lisco.


(vers.
Trouble leads to God


Ver. 44. ‘‘ And so it came to pass” ;
or, thoughts concerning providence and
grace.—Human life often likened to a
voyage: “Ask what is human life,”
etc. (Cowper’s Hope, 1-6). Paul’s ship
an emblem of the Church, whose mem-
bers are sure of everlasting safety. The
safety of Paul’s ship’s company came to
pass.

I. In accordance with the Divine
purpose and plan.—Twice over was
this announced to Paul by God and
by Paul to his fellow-voyagers (vers.
22, 34). Not a life would be lost, not
a hair of their head would perish. So
—1l. In providence, everything comes to
pass in accordance with the same
Divine plan and purpose. ‘“ He doeth
according to His will,” etc. said
Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv. 35). “ He
worketh all things after the counsel of
His own will,” says Paul (Eph. i. 11).
“My counsel shall stand, and I shall
do all My pleasure,” adds Jehovah
(Isa. xlvi. 10). It is not conceivable
that any event should occur outside
and beyond God’s fore-knowledge and
fore-ordination (see on ii. 23). And—
2. In grace. The salvation of be-
lievers occurs in accordance with the
same Divine purpose and plan. They
are chosen, called, sanctified, and saved,
by sovereign grace (xiii. 48, xxii. 14;
Rom viii. 28-30; Eph. i, 4-11, iii. 11;
2 Thess. ii. 13; 1 Peter i, 2). It is
not supposable that God does not know
beforehand what the issues will be of
His own scheme of redeeming grace.

II. In spite of every obstacle or
hindrance. At least four things
threatened to defeat the Divine purpose
to save Paul and his fellow-voyagers:
1. The severity of the storm. 2. The
attempted desertion of the sailors.
3. The inhuman proposal of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxvu.





Fs
soldiers. 4. The breaking up of the
vessel. Nevertheless it came to pass


that all escaped safe to land. So
again—J]. In providence, the Divine
purpose may seem to be, and may
actually be, opposed by similar forces.
Take, for instance, the determination
to settle Abraham’s descendants in
Canaan. Notwithstanding their des-
cent into Egypt and _ enslavement
there, the turning away from them of
the royal favour, the inhuman edict
that their children should be cast into
the Nile, the failure of Moses’s first
attempt at their liberation, the general
breaking down of their national spirit,
their occupation of Egypt became, in
God’s time, an accomplished fact.
2. In grace, nothing can prevent the
ultimate salvation of Christ’s people—
neither the ills or calamities of time
nor the falling away of professed
disciples, nor the remains of indwelling
corruption in the hearts of sincere
disciples, nor the breaking up of
ecclesiastical institutions ; in short,
nothing and no one will be able to
separate them from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus their Lord
(Rom. viii. 38, 39).

III. Through the use of means.—
Paul and his fellow-voyagers had to
use means in order to effect their
preservation. Even after they had
been assured that not a life would be
lost they had, in a manner, to work out
their own deliverance, by lightening the
ship, running her ashore, and either
swimming to land or getting ashore on
planks or broken pieces of the skip.
So—l. In providence, the Divine plans
and purposes are carried out through
the employment of ordinary means
wielded by man’s intelligence. And
equally—2. In grace, the salvation
of believers is effected, not with-


out, but with and by means of,
their own co-operation, their ultimate
attainment to eternal life and glory
being accomplished through their
abiding in Christ, following holiness,
and generally working out their own
salvation with fear and trembling.


Vers, 1-44, (On the whole chapter.)
Paul and His Fellow Voyagers—a Com:
parison and a Contrast.

I. The comparison.—1l. Partakers
of a common humanity. 2. Bound for
a common port. 3. Exposed to a
common peril. 4. Subjects of a com-
amon deliverance.

II. The contrast.—1l. Grace and
nature. With the exception of Luke
and Aristarchus, Paul was probably
the only Christian among them.
2. Sagacity and dulness. Paul’s fore-
cast of the storm, and the want of in-
sight on the part of the centurion, the
owner, the pilot and crew (vers. 9-12).
3. Faith and unbelief. Paul’s con-
fidence that no lives would be lost : their
doubt of the correctness of this asser-'
tion (vers. 22-26). 3. Cowrage and
despair. Paul’s intrepidity throughout :
their universal faintheartedness - (vers.
31-33). 4. Piety and wickedness.
Paul’s prayers for (ver. 24), and ex-
hortations to (vers. 25, 33, 34) them ;
the baseness of the sailors (ver. 30),
and the inhumanity of the soldiers
(ver. 42).

III. The conclusion. 1. That all
are not alike because they happen to
sail in the same boat. 2. That com-
mon experiences do not always produce
on different men the same effects.
3. That circumstances which call fort’
the nobility of the good frequent]s
serve to evoke the meanness of the
base. 4. That goodness makes the
best leaders of men.


§79


CHAP. Xxvill. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
a a ee


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Paut’s VoyaGe To Romze—DeEpanturRE From MALTA.


§ 1. Three Months in Malta; or, Two Remarkable Incidents (vers. 1-10).
1, The Preservation of Paul (vers. 1-6).
2. The Healing of Publius’s father (vers. 7-10).

§ 2. The Castor and Pollux; or, Paul’s Arrival in Rome (vers. 11-16). :

§ 3. An Interview with the Jewish Leaders ; or, an Explanation of his Imprison-
ment (vers. 17-22). : ;

§ 4. A whole Day’s Preaching in his Private Lodging ; or, a Last Appeal to his
Countrymen (vers. 23-31).


CRITICAL REMARKS.


Ver. 1, The best authorities read, “ And when we were escaped, then we knew ”"_lit., And
having been saved, then we knew, or learned (by intercourse with the inhabitants) Melita.—
Not Meleda, an island off the Illyrian coast in the Gulf of Venice, but the modern Malta.

Ver. 2. The barbarous peoplo, oi BdpBapo., were not savages, but natives who spoke neither
the Greek nor the Roman tongue (compare Kom. i. 14; 1 Cor. xiv. 11; Col. iii. 11), but most
likely the Punic—é.e., Phoenician as used by the Carthaginians. No little kindness.— Meant
kindness not to be met with every day, wxcommon (compare xix. 11). They received us.—Not
to their fire (Meyer), but to their regards, as in Rom. xiv.1, The present rain.—Not the
rain which came on suddenly (Meyer), but the rain then falling.

Ver. 3, But when Paul had gathered—lit., twisted together—a bundle, large quantity, or
heap, of sticks. —It does not militate against the truthfulness of this part of the narrative,
that Malta now shows a great absence of wood; since the growth of population in the island
may have led to the destruction of the forests, while, as an additional consideration, the
sticks collected by Paul may have been driftwood from the wreck. A viper.— é@y.dva, the ~
female adder, the male being és. The reptile here referred to, the Vipera aspis, was
common in the Mediterranean isles (Tristram), Out of,—éx pointing to the local source,
The best MSS. read dé, which might signify by reason of (compare xx. 9; Luke xix. 3).
The heat.—According to Agassiz vipers become torpid when the warmth of the air sinks
below the mean temperature of the place they inhabit. The fact that poisonous serpents
are not now found in Malta was formerly adduced (Coleridge) as a difficulty connected with
the present narrative; but the disappearance of noxious reptiles from Malta may be satis-
factorily accounted for by the increase of population and the cutting down of the timber
in the island. In this way vipers have almost entirely disappeared from the island of
Arran in Scotland (The Landsboroughs: Arran, its Topography, etc., p. 242).

Ver. 4, The venomous beast.—Aristotlo (Eth. Nie., vii. 1) uses the word @xplov to
denote any animal below the nature of man; Dioscorides Physicus (A.D, 60) to designate
a reptile. @npiaxa (from which comes our word “treacle ”) pdpuwaxa mean antidotes against
the bites of poisonous animals. Hang —lit., hanging—on his hand.— The newer critics
(Ewald, Lekebush, Hausrath, and others) suppose either that the viper curled itself round
and hung from the Apostle’s hand without biting, or that though it fastened itself by biting,
it was not poisonous; but this opinion neither the natives nor the writer entertained ”
(Holtzmann). A murderer.—This the natives probably supposed Paul to be, not because the
viper had fastened on his hand (Kuinoel), or because a serpent’s bite was the Maltese punish-
ment for murder (Heinsius), but because they observed his chains (vincula videbant), and
concluded him to be a notorious criminal (Bengel). Vengeance.—Better, Justice, or Nemesis,
7 Sixn. The goddess Dike who avenged crimes was no mere poetical personification, but a
divinity honoured with a special sanctuary in the harbour town of Megaris. Her mother
was Themis, the ruling world power; her sisters were Irene (Peace) and Eunomia (Good
order) ” (Holtzmann).

Ver. 5, Felt or tovk no harm.—A fulfilment of Mark xvi. 12 (compare Luke x. 19).

Ver. 6. Swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly.—« Sudden collapse and death often ensue
from the bite of serpents ” (Hackett). “ Both these, the inflammation of the body and the
falling down dead suddenly, are recorded as results of the bite of the African serpents”


580


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. xxvuit.





-
(Alford). Lucan, ix. 790, describes the bite of an African serpent, Prester, named from
the verb mlumrpacbac—


“Nasidium Marsi cultorem torridus agri
Percussit Prestes. Illi ruber igneus ora
Succendit, tenditque cutem, pereunte figura,”


which may thus be rendered—


‘“‘Nasidius toiling in the Marsian fields
The burning Prestes bit—a fiery flush
Lit up his face and set the skin astretch,
And all its comely grace had passed away.”


And said that he was a god.—Compare xiv. 13-15, ‘Aut latro, inquiunt, aut deus: sic
modo tauri, modo lapides. Datur tertium; homo deo” (Bengel). What god the Maltese
imagined Paul to be, whether Hercules (Grotius) or Aisculapius (Wetstein), cannot be
determined.

Ver. 7, In the same quarters.—Better, in the parts about, or in the neighbourhood of
(R.V.) that place. Possessions.—Hstates or lands, xwpia, as in iv. 34. The chief (or first
mp@ros, as in ver, 17, xiii. 50; xxv. 2) man of the island was the Roman governor, the legate
or deputy of the preetor of Sicily, to which, as in the time of Cicero (4 Ver.,c. 11) the smaller
island was most propably annexed. The use of this official designation, rpdros, has justly
been regarded as a striking proof of Luke’s historical accuracy (Baumgarten, Tholuck,
Ebrard, Lardner, Paley, Howson), two inscriptions, one in Greek and another in Latin,
having been discovered in Malta at Citta Vecchia, in which this title is similarly employed.
Moreover, as the person named on the inscription is called Prudens, a Roman knight, it has
been inferred that Publius may have belonged to this class, Publius could hardly have
been called the first of the Melitzans, rpéros MeXratwv, from his social rank or wealth, so
long as his father lived. The us whom he received were probably, besides Paul and his com-
panions, Luke and Aristarchus, Julius the centurion. The notion can scarcely be entertained
that Publius provided for the whole ship’s company of two hundred and seventy-six persons.

Ver. 8. The specification of the disease under which Publius’s father suffered as a fever
and bloody flux or dysentery, besides according with Luke’s professional character as a
physician, was another testimony to his accuracy as a narrator of facts. Whereas formerly
the dry climate of Malta was supposed to be unfavourable to dysentery and inflammation of
the lower bowels, physicians resident in the island now report these diseases as by no
means uncommon among the inhabitants. Laid his hands on him—as in James vy. 14, 15—and
healed him.— Whether through the co-operation of Luke the physician is not stated—though
the probability is not. Yet the healings in ver. 9 may have been affected partly through
Luke’s aid.

Ver. 10. They laded ws with such things as were necessary.—Better, they put on board
such things as we needed for our journey.

Ver. 11. After three months.—The departure from Malta took place in the following
spring, probably towards the end of January—and once more in an Alexandrian ship
(compare xxvii. 6). Which had wintered in the isle.—At Valetta, the principal harbour of
Malta. Whose sign was Castor and Pollux.—Lit., marked or badged with the Dioscuroi—i.e.,
the Twin Brothers, Castor and Pollux, whom heathen mythology regarded as the sons of
Jupiter by Leda, and as the patrons of sailors (see Hor., Odes, I. 3, 2; 12, 27-32).

Ver, 12. Syracuse.—The capital of Sicily, on the south-east coast of the island, and about
eighty miles north of Malta, The modern Saragossa occupies only a portion of the ancient
city—viz., Ortygia.

Ver. 13. And from thence we fetched a compass, or, made a circuit (R.V.)—Lit., having
gone round about, repiehOdvres—t.é., either tacking because of the unfavourable wind (Smith),
or standing out to sea (Lewin). Some ancient authorities read, repedyres, taking up the
anchors, as in xxvii. 40, Rhegium.—The present-day Reggio, an Italian seaport opposite to
the north-east point of Sicily, at which ships from Alexandria were accustomed to touch on
their way to Rome, and where Caligula began the construction of a harbour for their
accommodation (Jos., Ant., XIX. ii. 5), Titus, taking the same road as Paul from Judza to
Rome, called in at Rhegium (Suet., Zit.,c. 5). Rhegium was “a city whose patron divinities
were, by a curious coincidence, the same hero-protectors of sea-faring men, ‘the Great Twin
Brethren,’ to whom the ship itself was dedicated ” (Conybeare and Howson, ii. 369). Puteoli.
—Now Pozzuoli, eight miles south-west of Neapolis, the modern Naples. The city earlier
called Acxadpxeca, derived its later name from the springs (putet) which abound there, or
from the odour of its waters (a putendv). From Rhegium to Puteoli was a distance of
about one hundred and eighty-two miles, a sail of two days with a fair wind.

Ver. 14. Where we found brethren.—The city, which was a principal station for Alexandrine
ships (Suet,, Awg.. 981) was at that time the seat of a Christian Church, which had probably


581


cHap. xxvii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.








been founded from Rome, Seven days.—Compare xx. 6, xxi. 4. Another indication that
the early Christians had special Sabbath-day gatherings, Ramsay considers this statement
about varying seven days “irreconcilable with Paul’s situation as a prisoner”; but Julius
may have had sufficient reasons for granting Paul permission to comply with the request of
the brethren (compare ver. 12). We went toward Rome.—Better that, we came to Rome
(R.V.). The road traversed by Julius and his prisoners would proceed first to Capua, distant
twelve miles, where it would join the Appian Way, from Rome to Brundusium, the modern
Brindisi. From Capua it would go by Sinuessa, twenty-one miles further on, and Terracina,
seventy Roman miles from Capua. At.Terracina “they would have to choose between two
modes of travel, taking the circuitous road round the Pontine Marshes, or going by the more
direct line of the canal,” both roads meeting at Appii Forum, eighteen miles from Terracina ”
(Plumptre),.

Ver. 15. Appii Forum, or “the Market of Appius” (R.V.).—A small (perhaps an assize)
town near the end of the above-named canal, forty-three miles distant from Rome, and
called after the builder of the Appian Way. The Three Taverns.—Another town or wayside
inn, ten miles nearer Rome. Cicero mentions both places in his letters to Atticus (ii. 10).

Ver. 16. And when we came to, or entered into Rome.—The capital of Italy and of the
Roman Empire, situated on the Tiber, fifteen miles from its mouth, was the residence of
many Jews (ii. 10, xviii. 2) and of numerous Christians, to whom Paul wrote an epistle (see
“ Hints” on ver. 17), The centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, or
the commander of the camp—i.e., of the Preetorian camp, where the Emperor’s bodyguard was
stationed.—This clause, omitted in the best MSS., is regarded as spurious by many competent
critics (Mill, Bengel, Griesbach, Lachmann, Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort), though by other
scholars (Meyer, Alford, Hackett, Plumptre, Hausrath, Holtzmann) it is retained. Alford
thinks the omission of the words may have been originally caused by the transcriber’s eye
passing from —apyos to—apxw, as in Syr. (permisit centurio Paulo); and that this done, the
emendation of the text became necessary. Lechler, while regarding the words as spurious,
considers them true in fact. Wieseler, founding on the circumstance that Luke speaks of
only one Stratopedarch or prefect of the Pretorian guard, whereas there were commonly two,
infers that Paul must have come to Rome not later than the early part of A.D. 62, since
Burrus Africanus, who had been appointed sole prefect by Claudius, died that year. Luke,
however, was not so precise in relating Roman and civil matters that he must necessarily
have written “to one of the new prefects,” if there were two, while even if there were Paul
would in all probability be delivered not to the two, but to one—to him, namely, whose
business it was to look after prisoners sent from the provinces. Ramsay (St. Paul, etc.,
pp. 347, 348) suggests that the Stratopedarch was not the Pretorian Prefect, but another
officer called Princeps Peregrinorwm, or Chief of the Foreigners—i.e., of the centurions who
belonged to legions in the provinces, and who, when at Rome on military service, resided
under his command in a camp on the Celian hill, called Castra Peregrinorum.

Ver. 17. The best authorities omit Paul. The chief of the Jews.—Better, those that were
the chief (first, or principal men) of the Jews, or, otherwise, those that were of the Jews first.
Most likely the parties summoned were the rulers of the synagogues, and such as were
socially exalted.

Ver. 18. Would have let me go, or desired to set me at liberty—Bethge and Holtzmann,
who regard this address of Paul’s to the Jews of Rome as a pure compilation of Luke’s, pro-
nounce the statement in this clause incorrect, and as justified neither by xxv. 9 nor by any
other verse. But the apostle’s intention obviously was to say that the Roman officials who
examined him had found no fault in him, and would have dismissed him from the bar had it
not been for the opposition of the Jews; and this is distinctly the impression one receives
from reading the accounts of the different trials the apostle underwent.

Ver, 21, We neither received letters out of Judea concerning thee.—Zeller, Baur, Wendt,
and Holtzmann think it incredible that the Jews of Rome had no knowledge of Paul, of his
missionary labours, or of his imprisonment. But the Jewish leaders do not say they were
entirely ignorant of either the apostle or his doings; merely they assert they had received no
official intelligence regarding him from the Palestinian Church, either by letter or by
messenger (see “‘ Homiletical Analysis”).

Ver. 22. As concerning this sect—The above critics also pronounce it strange that the
Jewish leaders should have affected to be ignorant of the existence of a Christian Church in
Rome, and detect in their statement a deliberate misrepresentation of history on the part of
the author of the Acts for the purpose of sustaining his theory that Paul was an orthodox
Jew, who only turned to the Gentile mission in Rome as elsewhere after the Jews had
declined to accept his gospel. (See “ Homiletical Analysis.”)

Ver. 23, Into his lodging.—Probably the “hired dwelling,” wlcOwua, of ver. 30, though
some (Heschyius, Hackett) consider the term ¢evia points to a private house—perhaps that
of Aquila, or of some other Roman Christian—in which he was entertained as a guest, For
expounded and testified read expounding, testifying, and persuading. ; ;


582


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE AC7S. cmay. xxvut.





-


Ver. 25. The one word spoken by Paul did not occasion (Meyer), but accompanied
(De Wette) the departure of the Jewish leaders.

Ver. 26. The Isaianic utterance, also quoted in the Gospels (Matt. xiii. 14; John xii. 40),
was taken from the LXX.

Ver. 28 gives the last recorded words of Paul in Luke’s narrative. Their resemblance to
the words uttered at the beginning of his mission (xiii. 46) deserves notice.

Ver. 29 is omitted by the best texts, and the majority of critics regard it as spurious
(Mill, Lachmann, Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort).

Ver, 30. Two whole years in his own hired house.—This almost implies that his former
lodging was not a rented dwelling, The charge of his present house would no doubt be
borne by his Christian friends at Rome, and perhaps also at Philippi (Phil. iv. 14, 18);
but see on xxi. 23 (“ Critical Remarks”). Whether he obtained release at the end of these
two years is doubtful. “What became of him after those two years,” writes Beyschlag
(Riehm’s Handworterbuch des Biblischen Altertums, art. Paulus), “whether he obtained
his freedom and made a journey to the far west, or whether the persecution under Nero,
A.D, 64, found him still in prison, can no more be ascertained.” ‘We must therefore abide
by the view,” says Weiss (Manual of Introduction to the New Testament, i. 373), “that
Paul’s deliverance from the Roman captivity can neituer be proved nor denied on secure
historical grounds.” According to Eusebius (H. #., iii. 22) Paul was released from his first,
and experienced a second captivity under Nero; and this opinion has been advocated by
Church historians like Mosheim, Neander, and Gieseler, as well as by introduction writers
like Ewald, Bleek, Schulze, Lange, Salmon, and Dodds. That he perished in the Neronian
persecution is supported by Baur, Hausrath, Holtzmann, and others, who dispute, as well
as by Wieseler, Ebrard, Reuss, Schaff, and others, who uphold, the authenticity of the
Pastoral Epistles. (See “ Hints” on ver. 30.)

Ver. 31. With all confidence, or doldness.—Referring rather to the unrestricted freedom
with which he preached than to the unwavering assurance he had that what he preached
was true. No man forbidding him explains what was meant by his boldness.

That the writer should have closed his work in this sudden fashion, without intimating
whether Paul was successful in his appeal or what became of him, has given rise to various
explanations; but manifestly, either (1) the book was written and published hefore the
trial came on—in which case its issue could not be mentioned—which is hardly likely; or
(2) if after his death or liberation, whichever of these was the issue of Paul’s triai, was
already known to Theophilus, and did not require to be mentioned—which again is not
perfectly satisfactory ; or (3) Luke may have ended as he did because he entertained the
idea of writing a third treatise, which once more is a plausible hypothesis, if Paul was
liberated and resumed his missionary labours, but not if he was put to death in A.D. 64,


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 1—10.


Three Months in Malta ; or, Two Remarkable Incidents.—1. The Preservation of
Paul.

I. The fire upon the beach (ver. 2).—1. The name of the island on which they
had been cast ashore, the shipwrecked voyagers ascertained, presumably, by
inquiring of the natives. Formerly believed to be the island of Meleda, in the
Gulf of Venice, and near the coast of Illyricum, the scene of Paul’s shipwreck is
now universally considered to have been the modern Malta (according to some
ancient authorities, Melitene) in the Mediterranean, about sixty miles south of
Sicily. The argument on which this conclusion rests one may sum up thus:
Malta lies in the track of a vessel driven by a north-east wind, such as the
Euroclydon or Euraquilo was ; the reputed locality of the wreck, as mentioned
in the apocryphal acts of Peter and of Paul, agrees with Luke’s account ; the
Alexandrian ship in which re-embarkment was made would naturally winter
there, rather than at Meleda; the subsequent course of the voyage to Puteoli
was that which a vessel would pursue in going from Malta, but not from Meleda
(Hackett, Zockler), 2. The kindness of the natives showed them to be barbarians
in speech only, but not in heart. The tongue they used was that of neither
Greece nor Rome, but most likely Punic, or a Carthaginian dialect of Pheenician.
Nevertheless the service they rendered to the cold and shivering sailors and
soldiers whom Providence had cast upon their coast, proved them to be less
degraded than many who have borne the Christian name, bvt by their cruel


AR3


char. xxvuz. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





treatment of shipwrecked mariners and passengers have placed themselves out-
side the pale of humanity. Observing the hapless plight of the two hundred
threescore and sixteen souls who had been rescued from the waves, and who,
besides being drenched with brine, were exposed to the combined severity of a
strong north-east wind and a steady rain, the natives proceeded to light a fire for
their comfort. It was a small thing to do, but it was the right thing at the
right time, and evinced the thoughtful consideration of those who did it. 3. The
co-operation of Paul was almost what might have been expected from one who had —
previously taken part in lightening the ship (xxvii. 19). The writer represents
him on this occasion as actively engaged in assisting the barbarians by gathering
up and twisting together into a bundle a quantity of sticks to cast upon the
flame. Some have objected to the truthfulness of the story on the ground that
the Malta of to-day is distinguished by a great absence of wood, but the Malta
of Paul’s time must have been a barren spot indeed if it contained no brushwood ;
and in any case there must have been within easy reach, strewed along the
beach, pieces of the wreck, which could have been made available for the purpose
of keeping up the fire when once it had been lighted.

II. The viper on Paul’s hand.—1. The possibility of the incident. That no
such venomous reptiles are now to be found in Malta does not prove that none
such existed there in Paul’s day, any more than the fact that vipers are now
almost extinct in Arran in the Frith of Clyde shows they were not formerly
numerous in that island. That Paul should have grasped a snake in the
handful of brushwood he collected is explainable by remembering that in con-
sequence of the coldness and lateness of the season the reptile may have been in
a torpid state, it being characteristic of such creatures that they sink into this
condition when the warmth of the air falls below the mean temperature of the
place they inhabit. That the beast was restored to activity by the heat of the
fire into which it was flung goes without saying, while that it could easily have
leaped high enough to fasten on Paul’s hand as he stood in the vicinity of the
flames is quite credible, since vipers are accustomed to lurk in rocky places, from -
which they dart out upon their enemies (Eccles. x. 8), rising sometimes several
feet at a bound. 2. The danger arising from the incident. Though not expressly
stated that the viper bit Paul, this was probably the case, and was evidently
believed to be the case by such of the natives as were standing round and
observed what had taken place. Knowing well the deadly nature of the reptile’s
sting, they expected every moment to behold the apostle either swelling up in his
arm with strong inflammation, or dropping down suddenly to the ground, as
Shakespeare (Antony and Cleopatra, Act v., sc. 2) says when speaking of the
asp-bitten Cleopatra and her maid Charmian—


“Tf they had swallowed poison, ’twould appear
By external swelling ” ;


and of Charmian, who, following Cleopatra’s example, applied the asp to her
bosom—


“Tremblingly she stood
And on the sudden dropped.”


(See “ Critical Remarks.”) 3. The termination of the incident. Neither of the
results anticipated by the spectators followed. Calmly the apostle shook the
beast back into the fire, out of which it never again rose; and, though the
wondering natives kept on in momentary expectation that something amiss
would happen to the apostle, he suffered no evil effects whatever. Rationalist
interpreters would like, if they could, to ascribe this either to the non-poisonous
character of the reptile or to the fact that it did not bite the apostle, but it is
certain that whether the creature bit him or not Paul would see in his preserva-


584


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap. xxvitt.





+
tion a result due to the providential care and special mercy of God. Nor does it
seem unreasonable to suppose that Paul was enabled to behave throughout with
the calmness he displayed, because he recalled the promise which his Master had
given to the eleven, and of which he must have heard (Mark xvi. 18), and
bethought himself of the twice-given assurance (xxiii. 11, xxvii. 24) that he
would see Rome, and therefore could not perish in Malta.

III. The thoughts of the Maltese.—These were various and deep, but mis-
taken. 1. A wrong conclusion. When they saw the reptile springing from the
flames and fastening on Paul’s hand, they reasoned, probably observing his
fettered wrists, that he must be some notorious criminal—a murderer, for
instance—whom, though he had escaped the waves, Divine Justice, that awful
minister of high Heaven’s wrath that ever follows on the heels of crime, would
not permit to live. This suspicion, which they whispered to each other, bore a
striking testimony to the sense or apprehension of Divine justice which sleeps in
every man, even the most degraded ; supplied a signal instance of man’s readi-
ness to lapse into error when interpreting providential occurrences or pronouncing
upon the characters of others ; and gave a salutary reminder to all that even the
best of men may be misjudged by their fellows. 2. A disappointed exvectation.
When the natives remembered what the bite of a viper signified they expected to
witness the apostle either dropping down before them a dead man or swelling
up along his arm and throughout his body with a strong inflammation ; but in
this also they were at fault, because of not knowing Him who had promised,
“‘ They shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall in no
wise hurt them.” Verily there were more things in heaven and on earth than
had been dreamt of in their philosophy ! 3. 4 superstitious exclamation. When
they found, as they kept looking on to witness the final collapse of the apostle’s
vitality, that nothing happened, and certainly that nothing amiss befell him,
they changed their minds, and ejaculated again to themselves and to each other,
*¢ He isa God !”—whether ‘“‘ Aisculapius, the god of physicians, who ruled over the
serpent, or Hercules, who crushed serpents in his cradle” (Stier), for both were
worshipped in Malta, cannot be determined. Once more they were as sadly
astray as when they had pronounced him a murderer. Thus “the multitude
know no moderation ; it either exalts one to heaven, or thrusts him down to
hell” (Starke). If Paul understood what the natives said about him, it need
hardly be doubted he would correct their misapprehension, as he did that of
the men of Lycaonia (xiv. 13).

Learn.—1, That human nature at its worst estate is not wholly lost. Soft
places exist even in the hardest hearts. 2. That Christ’s people should always
be forward in helping their fellows. Paul, though an apostle, disdained not to
assist in collecting sticks for the fire. 3. That God is able to protect His people
in the midst of greatest dangers. Paul, who had been rescued from the waves,
was again shielded from the serpent’s bite. 4. That the best of men are often
mistaken for the worst. Paul was looked upon as a notorious criminal.
Paul’s master had been condemned as a malefactor. 5. That ignorance and
superstition are exceedingly unstable in their judgments. The one moment Paul
was shunned as a murderer, the next moment honoured as a God.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Vo common kindness. The a time of urgent necessity, in raising
behaviour of the natives of Malta to up for them friends in a place where,


Paul and his fellow-voyagers was— and at a time when, these could least
I. A testimony to God’s providential have been expected.
care in providing for their wants in II. A proof of the remnant of good:


585


CHAP. xxvu1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





ness to be found in the hearts of even
the most degraded, which renders their
ultimate recovery neither impossible
nor hopeless.

III. A rebuke to many Christians
whose conduct in showing kindness to
their fellow-men falls far behind that
of these untutored islanders. ‘‘ Chris-
tian dwellers at the coast may learn a
Samaritan love from these strangers”
(Besser).


Two Fires upon the Beach.

I. On the shore of the Galilean
Lake (John xxi, 9).— Prepared by
Christ for His disciples. An emblem
of Christ’s love towards, thoughtful
care of, and bounteous provision for,
His people.

II. On the shore of St. Paul’s Bay
in Malta (xxviii. 2)—Prepared by
the islanders for the shipwrecked
voyagers. An emblem of the kindness
which men, and more especially Christ’s
followers, should show towards one
another, in sympathising with and
assisting one another.


Vers. 3-6. The Incident of the Viper ;
or, Faith and Superstition.

I. The barbarians’ eyes of supersti-
tion beheld in the incident four things :
1. An ordinary occurrence, the bite of
a serpent, which they expected to be
followed by the usual result, the death
of the bitten one. 2. A supernatural
detection of an evildcer as they sup-
posed, whom Divine justice would
not allow to live. 3. An inexplicable
phenomenon, which led them to as er-
roneous a conclusion as that they
abandoned. 4. The presence of a Divine
being, in which thought they were right,
though the Divine presence was not
that of Paul, but of Paul’s Master and
Lord.

II. Paul’s eye of faith beheld in the
incident four things: 1. A miracle of
Divine power. Hither in preserving him
from being bitten by the adder, or, if
bitten, in protecting him against hurt.
2. A token of Divine goodness in thus
shielding him from being injured by
what might otherwise have proved his

586





death. 3. A proof of the Divine faith-
fulness. Christ having promised to His
disciples before His ascension that they
should take up serpents and not be
hurt (Mark xvi. 17,18). 4. 4 mark of
Divine honour. Put upon Paul in pre-
sence of the islanders, not for his sake
alone, but for theirs as well, to open
for him a door of usefulness among
them so long as he remained in the
island.


Vers. 1-7. The Necessity of the Advent
for the Barbarian World. Exemplified
by the barbarian life and religion of
the inhabitants of Melita.

I. Barbarian virtues.—Two errors
held on the subject of natural goodness :
1. That of those who deny to fallen
man any goodness at all, and refuse to
admit even kindness of feeling, contra-
dicted by the virtues of hospitality and
sympathy which were found among
the islanders. 2. The opposite error
of placing too high a value on those
natural virtues. These Melitans, who
“showed no little kindness” to the
wrecked crew, belonged to a stock
who, in the most civilised days of
Carthage, offered human sacrifice,
and after every . successful battle
with the Romans burnt the chief
prisoners alive as a thank-offering to
Heaven. 3. The advent of Christ
brought a new spirit into the world.
“A new commandment give I unto you,
that ye love one another.” That was
not the new part. The Melitans would
not have disagreed with that. “ As
I have loved you.” ... That makes
all new.

II. Barbarian ideas of retribution.
—In some form or another the idea of
retribution underlies all mythologies,
and constitutes the basis of all natural
religion. 1. In the barbarian concep-
tion of it, however, there was something
gross, corporeal, and dangerous ; because
they misinterpreted natural laws into
vengeance. If we ask where these
Melitans got their idea of retribution,
the reply is out of their own hearts,
They felt the external connection be-
tween wrongdoing and penalty. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. criar. &xvuii.





penalty they would have executed on
murder was death. They naturally
threw this idea of theirs into the cha-
racter of God, and blended together
what was theirs and what is His.
This is valuable as a proof of the in-
stinctive testimony of man’s heart to
the realities of retribution. It is
utterly worthless as a testimony to the
form in which retributive justice works,
because it is not borne out by the
facts of life. 2. As information in-
creased this idea of retribution dis-
appears. Natural laws are understood
and retribution vanishes. Assuredly
there is no vengeance such as this which
suffers not the murderer to live, but
arms the powers of nature against
him. So the idea of retribution goes
for those who can see no deeper than
the outward chance of penalty. 3.
The advent of Christ brought deeper
and truer views. It taught what sin
is and what suffering is. It showed
the innocent on the cross bearing the
penalty of the world’s sin, but Him-





the Father was not angry but well
pleased.

III. Barbarian conception of Deity.
—‘ They changed their minds and said
that he was a god.” 1. This implied a
certain advance in religious notions.
There is a stage of worship prior to
that of man-worship. Men have wor-
shipped the powers of nature and even
brute life. The Melitans were a stage
beyond this. 2. In this worship of
the human, however, it was adoration
of the marvellous, not reverence for the
good, which they displayed. It was not
Paul’s character to which they yielded
homage, but the wonderful mystery of
his miraculous escape. The mere wor-
ship of the mysterious has but a
limited existence. As you _ teach
laws you undermine that religion.
3. The Redeemer’s advent taught a deeper
truth to man. The apostle spoke al-
most slightingly of the marvellous
(1 Cor. xiii. 1). Love is diviner than
all wondrous powers. The revelation
of the Son was to proclaim a Father,


self still the Son of God, with whom not a mystery.—Aobertson, of Brighton.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses T—10.


Three Months in Malta; or, Two Remarkable Incidents.
Publius’s Father.

I. The subject of the healing.—The father of Publius, the chief, or first man,
of the island, whose estates lay in the vicinity of the scene of the shipwreck.
That Publius was designated the “first of the Meliteans” was due neither to
his wealth, which was presumably great, nor to his rank, which was obviously
high, but to his office, which was that of representative, legate, or deputy of the
Roman pretor of Sicily, to which the smaller island of Malta was annexed as an
appanage. ‘Two inscriptions found in Malta, at Citta Vecchia, belonging to the
time of Augustus, one in Greek and the other in Latin, show that the term
“first” was frequently so used—the Greek inscription running, Lucius Caius,
son of Quirinus, a Roman knight, first of the Meliteans. That his father lived
with him was probably a testimony to his filial affection.

II. The motive of the healing.—A threefold desire on the part of Paul.
1. Philanthropical. To relieve, if he could, the suffering of the patient, who lay
sick of fever and dysentery. Paul was never unmindful of his own precept—“ As
therefore ye have opportunity, do good unto all men” (Gal. vi. 10; compare
Heb. xiii. 16). Like his Master, who “went about continually doing good”
(x. 38), he was ever on the watch for occasions to serve. Nor can one more
closely resemble either Christ or Paul than by ministering to the infirm and
afflicted. 2. Evangelical. To find an opening for the gospel, which he believed
and was always anxious to preach. Paul was ever ready to enter with his
message of salvation into any door that Providence might open, whether in


527


2. The Healing of


«na


cHap. xxvu1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





Ephesus or in Rome, in Cyprus or in Malta, Like Jesus Christ, who was always
about His Father’s business (Luke ii. 49), and whose meat and drink it was to


do His Father’s will (John iv. 32-34), Paul was one that never missed a chance .


of publishing the good news of grace and eternal life to those who would hear
(Rom, i. 15). 3, Hucharistical. To make some return for the generous hospi-
tality which for three days had been exhibited towards Paul and his companions,
which was only common gratitude, a virtue in which the apostle never failed
(2 Tim. i. 16-18). It is not absolutely certain that Publius’s hospitality was
extended to the whole ship’s company, though possibly the meaning of the
historian may be just this, that for three days Publius was engaged in showing
kindness to the shipwrecked voyagers, having them up in relays to his mansion
or grounds, and sumptuously feeding them. Others, however, suppose that the
entertainment referred to Paul and his companions, Luke and Aristarchus, with
perhaps Julius, the centurion, and the master of the ship. But in either case
Paul would naturally feel that such generosity would demand some return.

III. The nature of the healing.—1l. Ordinary. The cure of a fever and
dysentery, and yet the only cure of its kind reported of Paul—indeed, only the
third work of healing ascribed to him in the Acts, the other two having occurred
at Lystra (xiv. 1-10) and at Philippi (xvi. 16-18), unless the healings and exor-
cisms attributed to Paul in Ephesus (xix. 11, 12) be taken into account. That
the malady from which Publius’s father suffered was not impossible, even in
a dry climate like that of Malta, physicians resident in the island have shown.
2. Miraculous. It is evident that though Luke was a physician, it was not by
him but by Paul that the cure was wrought. It was Paul and not Luke who
entered into the sick man’s chamber. Yet Paul had no power in himself to cure,

IV. The method of the healing —1. Prayer. The apostle followed the usual
practice of Peter in attempting the sick man’s cure (ix. 40). It is possible that
on entering the patient’s chamber Paul had no idea beyond that of praying for
his restoration to health (James v. 14), and that the impulse to perform a mira-
culous act of healing was communicated to his mind during prayer. If he con-


templated a miracle from the first, then the precedence of the prayer would


assist the patient to detect the source whence his cure proceeded. 2. /mposition
of hands. In so acting Paul imitated the method of Christ (Mark vi. 5; Luke
iv. 20, xiii. 13). The action would in part serve to connect the healing and the
prayer as well as to aid the faith of him on whom the miracle was wrought.

V. The effect of the healing.—Threefold. 1. Spread of fame. The rest of
the islanders who had diseases on them came to Paul for assistance, which, like
his Master, he denied not, but freely granted, laying his hands upon them and
healing them all (Luke iv. 40), but whether in every instance miraculously, or
with the assistance of Luke, is not told. 2. Increase of honowr. The patients
whom he cured honoured him and his companions with many honours—not
rewards for their services, which Paul would hardly have accepted (xx. 33;
Phil. iv. 17), but “attentions,” marks of favour, in attestation of the kindly feel-
ings with which they were regarded. 3. Supply of need. When the time
arrived for departure from the island the natives put on board ship everything
they could think of that might be needful for the voyage of Paul and his com-
panions, as once before the friends at Sidon had done (xxvii. 3).

Learn—1. That Christians should never allow themselves to be surpassed in
courtesy by men of the world, though they sometimes are. 2. That Christ’s
people should be distinguished for their gratitude to those who show them kind-
ness, which they sometimes are not. 3. That wherever Christians go they
should endeavour to leave those they meet the better for their society, which
they do not always do. 4. That Christians will lose nothing either in this world
or in that which is to come by doing good, which they frequently forget.


588


ia}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS omar. xxvut.





HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 7. The First Man in Malta: a
Sermon on true Greatness.—Exemplified
in Publius.

I. First in rank.—The deputy of the
Sicilian pretor, the representative of
SJmperial Rome. Exalted station a
great talent, conferring great powers
and creating great responsibilities.

II. First in wealth.—A reasonable
inference from the mention of “ lands.”
Like social dignity, riches a splendid
endowment which, when rightly used,
may be productive of immense good to
their holder as well as to his less for-
tunate fellows in society around.

III. First in goodness.— Which after
all is the only greatness. Publius, it
is obvious, was distinguished by at
least three virtues which are rare.
1. Filial devotion. The presence of his
aged father in his official mansion pro-
bably spoke well for his respect for and
attention to his parents (Ephes. vi. 1, 2).
2. Humble condescension. Though a
great man, he did not shrink from con-
descending to men of low estate like
the shipwrecked sailors and prisoners
who had been cast upon his island
(Rom. xii. 16). 3. Generous hospitality.
A wealthy landowner, he freely parted
with his means to supply the necessities
of the poor voyagers whose whole goods
had been devoured by the sea (Prov.
xxi. 26; Psalm cxii.9; 1 Tim. vi. 18).


Ver. 1-10. The People of Malta: an
Expressive Representation of the Heathen
World.

I. In their need of redemption.—
Their dark superstition (vers. 4-6),
their manifold misery (vers. 8, 9).

II. In their capability of redemp-
tion—Their friendly hospitality


(ver. 2); their dim knowledge of God
(ver. 4) ; their lively susceptibilities for
impressions of the Divine (ver. 6) ; their
childlike gratitude for kindnesses re-
ceived (ver. 10).

III. In their relation to redemption.
—The gospel which Paul carried with
him to the island and _ doubtless
preached to its inhabitants having been
intended for them, adapted to them,
offered to them, and to some extent, it
may be hoped, believed and enjoyed by
them, as it is in the heathen world to-
day.—Enlarged from Gerok.


Vers. 4-10. The Mistakes of the
Maltese.

I. They misinterpreted the provi-
dence of God (ver. 4).

II. They misjudged the character of
Paul (vers. 4, 6).

III. They misunderstood their own
needs (ver. 9).


Vers. 7-10. The Beauty and the Profit
of Kindness. Illustrated by and in
Publius and Paul.

I. The beauty of kindness.—Shown
by—1. The courteous entertainment of
Paul and his companions by Publius.
2. The wnstinted philanthropy of Paul
in healing not only Publius’ father,
but all the diseased islanders who came
to him.

II. The profit of kindness.—Expe-
rienced by—1. Publius, who must have
felt his generosity to the apostle more
than repaid by the healing of his
father. 2. Paul, who doubtless also
owned himself abundantly recompensed
for his labours among the islanders by
the tributes of affection he bore away
with him from Malta.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 11—16.


Castor and Pollux ; or, Paul’s arrival in Rome.

I> Departure from Malta.—l. The time of sailing. After a three months’
residence in Malta, where Paul and his companions had been honourably and
courteously entertained by Publius the Roman governor, and by the natives of
the island who had been cured of their maladies, and no doubt in some degree


589


OHAP. ¥xvirr. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





had come to learn the true nobility of their benefactors’ characters, That these
three months were not allowed to pass without an endeavour to disseminate
amongst the islanders as well as the shipwrecked voyagers a knowledge of the
truth may almost be inferred from Paul’s well-known zeal and enthusiasm
for the gospel. This much is certain, that both he and his companions bore
away with them from Valetta many marks of the affection and esteem of those
whom they left behind. The precise date of embarkation, though not stated,
may be roughly calculated. If they landed upon Malta about the end of
October three months would bring them to the end of January, which was an
early but still a possible date for sailing, and the passengers, as well as
Julius, would naturally wish to embrace the first opportunity that offered for
proceeding with their journey. 2. The vessel in which the voyagers re-embarked.
Like the barque which had been wrecked, this was a ship of Alexandria; and
like the former also, was probably laden with Egyptian corn for the Roman
market. More fortunate than Paul’s vessel, it had escaped the storm which had
proved so disastrous to that; or overtaken by the same Euroclydon, it had
managed to reach the harbour of Valetta in safety. There, having spent the
inclement months of winter, with the opening of spring it was ready to a second
time affront the dangers of the deep. It lends to the picture a liveliness which
could have proceeded only from an eyewitness to be told that the figurehead
upon the ship’s bows was that of the Dioscuri or Twin Brethren, Castor and
Pollux, whom heathen mythology regarded as the sons of Jupiter and Leda, and
looked up to as the patrons of sea-faring men: ‘“ whose benign constellation,”
sings Horace (Odes, I. xii.), “as soon as it has shone forth to the sailors, the
troubled surge falls down from the rocks, the winds cease, the clouds vanish, and
the threatening waves subside in the sea, because it was their will.”

II. Progress of the voyage.—1. Three days at Syracuse. This grand historic
city, the capital of Sicily, famous for the siege which it suffered during the
Peloponnesian war, lay about eighty or a hundred miles north of Malta—z.e., a
day’s sail with a fair wind. Founded in B.c. 735 by Corinthian Dorians on
the adjacent island of Ortygia, in B.c. 485 under Gelon, first its Tyrannus and
afterwards its king, it became a splendid city, which extended over to the main
island. In Paul’s day it contained the residence of the Roman governor, who,
since the close of the Second Punic War, had ruled the Romish insular province
of Sicily (Riehm’s Handwirterbuch des Biblischen Altertums, art. Syrakus).
Having put into the harbour, the Twin Brothers lay for three days, most likely
for purposes of trade, though possibly to wait for a favourable breeze. Whether
the apostle and his companions were allowed to go ashore is not related; but,
judging from the similar permission granted at Sidon (xxvii. 3), and remember-
ing the important services rendered to Julius by Paul during the preceding
voyage (xxvii. 10, 31), it may reasonably be concluded that they were. 2. One
day at Rhegiwm. Having weighed anchor, and either tacked about or stood out
to sea, because of adverse winds—certainly not having sailed round Sicily
(De Wette)—‘‘the Twin Brothers on the same day arrived at Rhegium, the
modern Reggio, a seaport situated on the Italian coast, and nearly opposite to
Messina.” “ By a curious coincidence,” say Conybeare and Howson, “ the same
hero protectors of sea-faring men, the Great Twin Brethren,” were the patron
divinities of the city, on whose ancient coins also their heads were exhibited.
3. Seven days at Puieoli. On the following morning, the south wind having
begun to blow, the gallant ship resumed her voyage, and next day landed at
Puteoli, the ancient Dikarchia, now called Pozzuoli, eight miles south-west of
Neapolis, the modern Naples, and lying in a sheltered recess of the bay. A few
months before Paul’s arrival it had been elevated to the dignity of a Colonia
(Tacitus, Ann., xiv. 27). Its distance of one hundred and eighty-two miles frow


590


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cpap. XXvutt.
re kl. ee eo.
Rhegium might easily have been traversed in twenty-six hours, supposing the
ship to have made seven knots an hour. In any case it was a quick passage,
and due to the favourable wind which filled the sails. ‘“ Puteoli,” say Conybeare
and Howson, ‘“‘ was the Liverpool of Italy.” In its harbour the corn ships of
Alexandria were accustomed to discharge their cargoes—Seneca (Hpist., 77)
mentioning that these vessels, easily recognised from afar by their flags, were
welcomed by loud hurrahs when they sailed into port, especially when they
arrived in early spring. From its wharves armies embarked, while ambassadors
from foreign parts landed at its quay. Travellers from Syria commenced at
Puteoli their land journey towards Rome. Before proceeding onward to the
eapital, Luke and Aristarchus, if not also Paul, embraced the opportunity of
holding fellowship with the Christians whom they found there. That disciples
should have existed in Puteoli was not surprising, since already they had become
numerous in Rome. And indeed a remarkable: confirmation of the wide and |
rapid extension of Christianity among the provincial towns of Italy has been
recently derived from an inscription found among the ruins of Pompeii, destroyed
by the first eruption of Mount Vesuvius in a.p. 79. Painted on a city wall
prior to its overthrow, the words “ Igni gaude Christiane,” ‘“ Rejoice in the fire,
O Christian,” clearly show that in Pompeii, within fifteen miles of Puteoli, a
little Christian community existed (see Modern Discoveries and the Christian
Faith, by Dr. Stokes, in The Sunday at Home, January 1892, p. 149). Re-
quested to remain among the Christians in Puteoli seven days, the apostle, first
having obtained Julius’ permission, consented. That the centurion should have
granted such permission need occasion no difficulty. He himself may have
been waiting for orders, while his better acquaintance with Paul would un-
doubtedly dispose him to extend towards so remarkable a person as much
indulgence as was consistent with his condition as a prisoner. How the seven
days were spent can be easily imagined. As at Troas (xx. 6, 7) and at Tyre
(xxi. 4), they would doubtless be devoted to Christian fellowship, to spea‘ing
and hearing things concerning the kingdom, and on the Lord’s day tc\the
breaking of bread and prayers. Indeed, the mention of seven days in each of
these places as the space of time over which Paul’s visit extended points by no
means obscurely to the existence at that early date of the Christian practice of
meeting for worship on the Lord’s day.

III. Entry into Rome.—1. Met by the brethren. Having heard of Paul’s
arrival at Puteoli, probably through tidings forwarded by the Christians there,
‘“‘the brethren ”—7.e., the Christians—of the metropolis determined to hurry out
and proffer him a welcome before he could approach the town. In two separate
companies they set forth, on the great military road called the Appian Way,
which led from Rome to Capua, and from Capua to Brundusium (Brindisi), on
the Adriatic shore. At Capua, distant twelve miles from Puteoli, and one
hundred and twenty-five from Rome, Julius and his prisoners would join the
road. The advanced party of Roman Christians—among whom may have been
Aquila and Priscilla, and others named in the sixteenth chapter of the Romans
(Spence)—encountered the apostle and his friends at Appii Forum, or “The
Market of Appius,” about forty miles from the capital; the second company at
‘‘The Three Taverns,” ten miles nearer. The first of these towns, named from
Appius Claudius Czcus, the builder of the Appian Way, was situated on the
northern border of the Pontine marshes, at the end of the canal which ran for
several miles along the road, and is described by Horace (Sat., I. v. 4) as having
been full of low tavern-keepers and bargemen. The second, not far from the
modern Cisterna, appears from Cicero’s letters to Atticus (ii. 12) to have been
located near the point where the road from Antium crossed the Appian Way.
When at these two points in succession the apostle looked upon the Roman


d91


cHAP. xxvii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.
Ce ees


Christians who, with kindly forethought, had thus expressed to him their
sympathy, he “thanked God and took courage ”—he felt the burden of isolation
lying on his heart in large measure relieved, and gave utterance to the gratitude
to God which their coming inspired within his soul. “The diminution of fatigue,
the more hopeful prospect of the future, the renewed elasticity of religious trust,
the sense of a brighter light on all the scenery round him—all this, and more, is
involved in Luke’s sentence. He thanked God and took courage ” (Conybeare and
Howson). 2. Lodged by himself. On arriving at Rome the centurion un-
doubtedly acted as the spurious clause in ver. 16 intimates, delivered over the
prisoners with whom he had been intrusted to the Preetorian prefect, whose duty
it was to receive such as were sent up from the provinces to the capital for trial
(see, however, “Critical Remarks”). In the case of Paul, however, through
the intercession of Julius, or perhaps in consequence of the representations of
Festus and Agrippa, an exception was made. Whereas ordinarily prisoners
remanded from the provinces were confined in a prison attached to the Preetorian
camp north-east of the city and outside of the Porta Viminalis, it was sometimes
allowed a prisoner to dwell in his own lodging under the supervision of a
soldier. This favour was extended to the apostle by the prefect of the day, ©
who may have been Burrus Africanus, whom Claudius had appointed sole
prefect, and who certainly retained this office as late as a.p. 62 (see “ Critical
Remarks”). If this was the individual into whose care Paul was delivered,
then one more coincidence occurs between Luke’s narrative and the history of
the times, since other calculations show that Paul must have reached Rome
about—certainly not later than —that date.

Learn.—1. That ships of commerce have often been used by God to carry His
messengers throughout the world. 2. That God’s servants have frequently to
visit places where no special blessing appears to be left behind. 3. That God’s
hidden ones are commonly found in unexpected places. 4. That the hearts of
true Christians beat towards one another with fraternal love. 5. That Christian
sympathy has a rare power to support under trial. 6. That God can raise up
friends for His people in unexpected places. 7, That when a man’s ways please ~
God, even his enemies are at peace with him.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 11. On Board the “ Dioscuroi,”
or, “ The Twin Brothers.” —“ The three
Christians stepped without hesitation
on board aship which carried a heathen
flag. Castor and Pollux are nothing
(1 Cor. viii. 4); but all the ships
belong to the Lord, and no idolatrous
banner can injure those who sail with
thankfulness thereupon—a consolation
for the followers of the apostle of the
Gentiles, who go forth with the banner
of the cross, and sail in ships which
have the golden calf of mammon for
their banner.” — Besser.


Vers. 12, 13. Quiet Days.

I. Are found in most _people’s
history No man’s life is all bustle
and activity. Interludes must occur


592





when seemingly nothing important
transpires or is done. Such days Paul
spent at Syracuse and Rhegium.

II. Have their uses when they do
occur.—Afford opportunities for rest,
if nothing else, and aiso for meditation,
Whether Paul met with Christians at
Syracuse is not stated.

III. Are worthy of being recorded
in the story of one’s life.—Just because
theyare notsounimportantas they seem.


Ver. 14, Seven Days at Puteoli.

I. Seven days of rest in the onward
pilgrimage of life.

II. Seven days of communion with
the brethren of Christ.

III. Seven days of service in the
edification of the Church.


\
HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cmap xxvtit.
; Dl Vel exiled eat peice


4V. Seven days of preparation for
entering the gates of Rome.


And so we went towards Rome.

I. As travellers towards their desti-
nation.—-A. picture of human life, and
especially of Christian pilgrims nearing
the city of the great king.

II. As prisoners to be tried by
their judge——Such were Paul and
many others in the company. Once
more a picture of life, both ordinary
and Christian. ‘“ We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ ”
(2 Cor. v. 10).

III. As missionaries toward their
field of labour.—Paul at least, and
perhaps also his companions, should be
viewed in this light, since Paul had
already been assured that he should
testify for Christ at Rome also
(xxiil. 11).


Vers. 14, 15. Finding Brethren.

I. Christ’s people are to be met with
in unexpected places.—Pau] found
them in places where he himself had not
been before, as at Puteoli and Rome.

II. Have usually small difficulty in
recognising each other.—All being
brethren in Christ, and possessed more
or less of the same moral and spiritual
characteristics.

III. Commonly take (or should take)
delight in each other’s society.—The
communion of saints being an article
in the creed which they profess in
common.

IV. Should always endeavour to
be mutually helpful_Bearing each
other’s burden’s, and so fulfilling the
law of Christ.


Ver. 15. Gratitude and Courage.
I. Pau] thanked God.—1. For the
approaching termination of his journey.


2. For the goodness and mercy that
had attended him throughout his pil-
grimage. 3. For the numerous friends
that God had raised up around him at
every time of need. 4. For the evi-
dence afforded by the presence of these
Roman Christians of the progress of
the gospel.

II. Paul took courage.—Believing
—l. That God would guide him till
his journey closed. 2. That God’s
mercy would not fail him in the great
city he was about to enter. 3 That
friends would not be wanting to him
in Rome, and that least of all would
his heavenly Friend desert him. 4. That
he would still have an opportunity to
advance his Master’s cause in the me-
tropolis of the world.


Ver. 16. Paul Before the Gates of
Rome.

I. As a homeless stranger, and yet
welcomed by loving brethren.

II. As an evildoer in bonds and
yet with the gracious testimony of
God in his heart.

III. As an offering appointed unto
death (for sooner or later he was to
lose his life within these walls), and
yet a victorious conqueror, who plants
the standard of the cross in the citadel
of heathenism.—Gerok.


From Jerusalem to Rome.—This the
course of the gospel in the Acts.

I. A painful course, full of shame
and persecution.

Il. A heroic course, full of the
power of faith and the glow of love.

Ill. A victorious course, full of
mighty acts and Divine wonders.

IV. A blessed course, full of salva-
tion and grace for the present and the
future.—Jbid.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 17-—22.


An Interview with the Jewish Chiefs ; or, an Explanation of his Imprisonment.


I. The assembly convened.—1. The place.


Either Paul’s own private dwelling


(ver. 30), which doubtless, through the kindness of Luke, Aristarchus, and other
Christian friends, he had been enabled to hire; or a temporary lodging which


had been provided for him by some of the Roman brethren.
Qa


“Tradition points
593


CHAP. Xxvitt, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





to the vestibule of the Church of Santa Maria, at the junction of the Via Lata
and the Corso, as the site of this dwelling; but it has been urged by Dr. Philip,
at present working as a missionary in the Ghetto at Rome, in a pamphlet
On the Ghetto (Rome, 1874), that this site, forming part of the old Flaminian
way, was then occupied by arches and public buildings, and that it was far more
probable Paul would fix his quarters near those of his own countrymen. He
adds that a local tradition points to No. 2in the Via Stringhari, just outside
the Ghetto, as having been St. Paul’s dwelling place, but does not give any
documentary evidence as to its nature or the date to which it can be traced back ”
(Plumptre). 2. Zhe time. After three days, which most likely the apostle
spent in recruiting his wearied frame after the long and fatiguing journey he
had undergone. It showed his zeal for the cause he represented, that he
rested only three days. If any part of these days was devoted to social
intercourse, it would certainly be with Luke, Aristarchus, and the friends who
had so kindly met him at Appii Forum and The Three Taverns. 3. The quests.
In other circumstances Paul would have sought out his countrymen at their
synagogues. As this was impossible in the position in which he then was, he
could only invite them to wait on him at his lodging. According'y at his
request they come—the chief men or rulers of the synagogues, and others
probably of high rank to whom invitations had been issued. The Jewish
community in Rome inhabited the “Trastevere ” or district beyond the river, a
part of the city then notorious as the residence of a low rabble and a place of the
meanest merchandise. The beginnings of the Jewish colony in that quarter
could have been traced back to the captives brought to the capital by Pompey
after his eastern campaign, many of whom had become freemen, and to whom
additions were constantly made as the years went on, in consequence of the
mercantile relations which subsisted between Rome and the East. Many of
these colonists were wealthy, and contributed largely for sacred purposes to the
mother country. (See Conybeare and Howson, ii. 388, 389; compare “ Hints ”
on ver. 17).

II. The explanation offered.—!. A protestation of his innocence. To the leaders ~
of the Jewish community Paul explicitly affirmed that, though a prisoner, as
they beheld, he had been guilty of no offence against the people— 7.e., the Jewish
nation or against the customs of their fathers. Paul had all along contended
that Christianity formed the legitimate because divinely promised development of
Judaism, and that in seeking to carry over his countrymen to an acceptance of
Jesus of Nazareth as Messiah, he was not actuated by hostility to the ancestral
religion. Nay, he had even shown by his unwonted zeal in attending the
Jewish feasts and by his observance of a Nazarite vow (xxi. 26), that he was
well disposed towards the customs of the fathers; and, though critics like Zeller
(Die Apostelgeschichte, p. 292) cannot understand how Paul with a good
conscience could have advanced the claim here put into his lips, when he knew
that his whole activity aimed at nothing else than to subvert the Mosaic
religion through faith in Christ, and that his whole religious consciousness had
its middle point in the abrogation of the Law through the gospel, it is by no
means hard to comprehend if one remembers that Paul never did insist upon
a Jew renouncing Moses before he exercised faith in Christ. 2. A vindication
of his appeal. The apostle doubtless felt that his countrymen in Rome would
want to understand how he came to be a prisoner if he had not been chargeable
with any offence ; and in order to meet this unspoken but natural request, he
proceeded to relate how the Roman officials who examined him were so convinced
of his innocence that they would willingly have set him at liberty had it not.
been for the interference of the Jews—z.e., of the Sanhedrists—and how solely,
as a means of self-defence, and not at all because he intended to prefer any


594


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. xxvut.





acéusation against the nation, he had been obliged to appeal unto Cesar. The
accuracy of this statement also has been challenged by Holtzmann (Hand
Commentar, in loco), and that on two grounds: first, that the Roman officials
expressed no such desire to liberate Paul as Luke here states; and, second, that
it was not the Jews but Festus (xxv. 9-12) who constrained Paul to appeal to
Cesar. But one who reads betwen the lines at xxv. 9 can have no difficulty
in perceiving that, while le:stus demsnded of Paul whether he would go to
Jerusalem to be judged, Festus himself felt inwardly disposed to discharge the
apostle, and probably would have done so but for the threatening attitude
assumed by the Sanhedrists; and that his actual proposal partook of the nature
of a compromise, which enabled him neither to condemn Paul nor to displease
the Jews. Moreover, if this explanation be correct, it will show how Paul could
speak of the Jews rather than of Festus as the parties whose action constrained
his appeal. 3. A reason stated for his invitation. He wished himself to place
his case before the bar of their unbiassed judgments, and to let them know that
he was in reality a sufferer for one of the main points of the national faith,
that in fact he was a prisoner for the hope of Israel. Perhaps also he cherished
the expectation that in this way he would obviate any hostile interposition on
their part in the course of his trial (Holtzmann).

III. The answer returned.—-1. A confession of ignorance. About the details of
his case. The Jewish leaders assured the apostle that they had neither received
letters from Judea concerning him, nor had any of the brethren arrived in the
city to report or speak harm of him. According to some interpreters the synagogue
chiefs imagined that Paul half suspected they might have heard disingenuous
and depreciatory rumours concerning him from the Judzan metropolis, and were
desirous of disabusing his mind of any such suspicion. Others are at a loss to
understand how people, living in the centre of the world, as the Roman Jews
did, could have professed to be unacquainted with the extraordinary commotion
excited by Paul in every Jewish community into which he had hitherto come.
It should, however, be noted that they do not assert they had never before heard
of Paul—in which case they would scarcely have accepted his invitation to wait
upon him in his lodging ; but only that they had received no official papers from
Judea about his case, and that no personal messenger had arrived with tidings
to his disadvantage. Both of which statements might easily have been true.
Until Paul had appealed to Cesar the Jerusalem Sanhedrists had no special
reason for sending word about him to the Roman Christians ; and even after
that event, as no great interval elapsed between the appeal and the voyage to
Rome, it is easy to comprehend how communications or passengers from Judea
may not have had time to reach Rome before the apostle himself arrived.
2. An eaupression of desire. To hear what Paul himself had to say about the
new sect of which he was so distinguished a champion, and which, they told him,
as a reason for their request, it had come to their ears, was everywhere spoken
against. How they could have pretended so be so ignorant of Christianity as to
represent it as a sect of which they had only incidentally heard has perplexed
the critics, some of whom do not hesitate to suggest that the synagogue leaders
told a lie (Schneckenburger, Tholuck), while others see in the narrative a
falsification of actual history on the part of the writer, for the purpose either of
vindicating Paul’s character as that of an orthodox Jew (Zeller), or of showing
how Paul in Rome, as elsewhere, commenced a Christian mission only after the
gospel had been rejected by the Jews (Baur, Holtzmann). That a large and
important Christian Church existed in Rome at this date the Epistle to the
Romans written from Corinth shows, not to speak of the evidence supplied by
the Neronic persecution, of which Tacitus says, “Nero subdidit reos et queesitissimis
penis affecit quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus Christianos appellabat” (Annals,


999


cHap. xxvii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.


xv. 44). That the Jewish leaders were ignorant of the existence of such a
Christian community is inconceivable. Nor do they deny that they were
cognisant of its existence. Only they express themselves concerning it ‘with
caution, talking of it as a sect everywhere spoken against, about which they
were anxious to receive further information. As to the reason of this reserve
various explanations have been offered ; as, for instance, that even before Claudius
had banished the Jews from Rome the Christians had separated themselves from
the synagogue, so that they remained practically unknown to the Jews who
returned after the edict of banishment had been recalled (Olshausen) ; that the
Jews purposely deceived Paul in order to obtain from him intelligence about
the sect (Tholuck) ; and that the Jews seeing Paul apparently in favour with the
Roman authorities, did not wish to assume an attitude of strong opposition
towards the Christians, and therefore carefully concealed their private opinions
(Philippi).

Learn.—1. That the love of a truly Christian heart for the salvation of others
is practically unquenchable. Paul’s desire for the conversion of his countrymen
was a remarkable phenomenon. Had he not imbibed much of his Master’s
spirit, his love for his own kinsman must have long since been extinguished.
2. That a truly Christian heart is incapable of revenge. Paul had nothing to
accuse his nation of, although they had unjustly hurled against him baseless
charges, loaded him with undeserved chains, and even pitilessly thirsted for his
blood as well as frequently attempted his life. 3. That Christ’s followers are
tender of the errors and superstitions of others. Paul in preaching Christ
never ran down Moses or depreciated the value of his religious institutions.
4, That good men are always careful of their own good names. Paul desired
to protect himself against the calumnies that he feared might have reached
the ears of his countrymen in Rome. 5. That the Christian Church has in no
age lacked detractors. As in the first, so in the nineteenth century, this
sect is everywhere by some, though happily now nowhere by all, spoken
against.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 17. The Jews in Rome.— The
Jewish quarter in Rome had for almost
a hundred years been the unceasing
object of attention, of sport, and of
anger, to the metropolis. Before the
first Jewish war the number of the
Jews in Rome had been of less im-
portance, but Pompey, Cassius, and
Antoninus had sold numerous Jewish
prisoners of war as slaves, who either
soon were made free because they were
of little value as slaves, or indeed were
even many times bought free. These
liberti formed the proper root of the
Jewish community in Rome, on which
account the Romish Jews were styled
simply the Libertines.” So, at least,
narrates Philo the origin of the Jewish
community in Rome. “Cesar desired
for himself no employment for his
genius, reports the philosopher, and


596


made no secret that he approved of the
Jews when they abominated such.
Otherwise had he not permitted that a


large part of the town on that side of |


the Tiber should be occupied by those
of whom the greater number were
freed men—that is, persons who were
set free by their masters, because they
could not be constrained to forsake the
customs of their fathers. He knew
also that they sent to Jerusalem
collections under the name of ‘ first-
fruits,’ by means of representatives
who offered these on their behalf. In-
tentionally had they been restricted
with their retail traffic to the four-
teenth district across the Tiber, whither
all dirty trades were banished. Their
quarter lay upon the slope of the Vati-
can, and stretched itself over one of the
flat islands in the Tiber, which were


cae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. omar. xxvuu.





e€posed to inundations, and at which
the Tiber boats coming from Ostia were
accustomed to land. Here, where the
ships’ cargoes were discharged, was for
the Jewish brokers the correct place
which from year to year they in
greater numbers occupied.” .. . “To the
grief of the Roman world the Jewish
immigrants in no way restricted them-
selves to business in general, but with
that manysidedness which was peculiar
to them, no department of life was
safe from their invasion. Whilst great
and small, from Josephus, the favourite
of Flavius, who dwelt in the palace
at Septizonium, down to the female
beggar who was stationed on the
Capena, they loved to make gain, and
by their Oriental manners, which were
strange to the metropolitan, and the
abomination in which the Romans
held the gods and mysterious writings
of the East, they largely increased their
power, on the other hand we see them,
through their pliantness, accommodat-
ing themselves to the manners of the
metropolis, and developing an incre-
dible allsidedness. What business had
the son of Israel not practised in the
capital of the world? Merchant,
banker, shopkeeper, pedlar, as a rule,
he was also an officer, and frequently
a soldier; he was scholar, poet, critic,
yea, even actor and singer. He swore
by the temple of the Thunderer, and
declaimed in mythological réles tragic
trimeters to the astonishment of the
court. He practised also asa physician,
and the doctor of Herod stood in such
favour that one had better lock up his
silver if he allowed himself to bargain
with him. This emancipated Jew
loved to imitate all the ways of the
heathen. In spite of certain mockery
from the heathen, he pressed into the
public baths, and with the persistence
peculiar to him blocked up the best
places, doubly pleased if he succeeded
in concealing his Jewish origin. The
sportive youth of the metropolis he
joined in all playgrounds with success ;
in short, no place was either so holy or
profane that it could not lodge a Jewish
guest, The speech of this Jewish com-


munity in Rome was the Greek, as in-
deed Paul had written in Greek to the
Christian Church there. The inscrip-
tions upon the Jewish churchyard in
the Transtiberine quarter’and upon the
other superior churchyard on the
Appian Way at Capena and upon
the third in the Catacombs are com-
posed ina Hebraising Greek, less often
in bad Latin, never in Hebrew. Con-
sequently even in the Metropolis the
Jewish Greek jargon of Asia Minor
was spoken, as Martial makes merry
over the manner of speech even of the
literary Jews” (Hausrath, der Apostel
Paulus, pp. 474-478).


Ver. 20. The Hope of Israel.

I. Implanted in Israel’s heart by
God.

II. Recorded in their sacred scrip-
tures.

III. Fulfilled by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ.

IV. Published to the Jewish people.

V. Rejected by the unbelieving
portion of the nation.


Paul’ s Chain.
I, A disgrace to Israel.
IT. An honour to Paul.
III. A comfort to Christians.—In
case they should be called upon to
suffer for the truth.


Ver. 22. Hverywhere spoken Against.
That this could have been said of
Christianity about the middle of the
first century was a signal testimony to
many things.

I. To the truthfulness of Christ’s
prediction.—That against His people
men should say all manner of evil
(Matt. v. 11; John xvi. 2).

II. To the wickedness of the human
heart.—Which could speak evil of
those who were really the lights of the
world and the salt of the earth (Matt.
v. 13, 14).

III. To the success of Christianity.
—Which had made its presence known
and felt even in the centre of ilie world


(Rom. i. 8).
097


CHAP. xxv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





IV. To the spiritual power of the
gospel.— Which roused against itself
the opposition of the world.


Ver, 22. Ewerywhere spoken against ;
or, Popular Olyections against Christi-
anity.—Now, as in Paul’s day, Christi-
anity is objected to by various classes
of persons, and on widely different
grounds; as, ¢.g.—

I. The supernatural character of its
origin.—This has been a difficulty with
Christianity from the beginning. Christ
advanced this claim on behalf of His
doctrine when He first promulgated it
(John vii. 16); and indeed the New
Testament writers generally maintain
that, like Mosaism, Christianity has
its source in Divine revelation, and not
merely in such Divine revelation as
might be imparted to the human mind
through, but in such as transcended,
ordinary channels, The Pharisees and
Jews generally rejected this claim on
the ground that they found it impossi-
ble to accept as Divine revelation what
seemed to them so unmistakably to set
aside the revelation which they believed
had been given to Moses:(John ix. 29).
Scientific men at the present day reject
it as in their judgment incompatible
with the Reign of Law, affirming in
vindication of their action that, if there
be a God, of which many of them are
not sure, they have no knowledge of
any action of His that transcends the
bounds of natural law (2 Peter iii. 4),
Philosophers reject it on the ground
that a supernatural origin is not re-
quired for the production of what they
find to be the essence or kernel of
Christianity ; after having stripped off
what they regard as the legendary
accretions with which it has come
down through the past nineteen
centuries, all that is valuable in it,
they affirm may be sufficiently ac-
counted for by the evolution of the
human mind. Students of compara-
tive religion, as they are called, reject
it on the plea that other religions, such
as Mohammedanism and Buddhism,
claim to have originated in the same
way, and yet their claims have not


098


been accepted by the critical faculty of
mankind, though as religions they
contain not a few of the same doctrines
as Christianity itself.

II. The metaphysical character of
its doctrines.—Not so much the cir-
cumstance that the Christian docu-
ments record miracles, in which the
scientific and philosophic worlds do not
believe—though, of course, to many
this does constitute a serious difficulty
in accepting the religion which these
documents teach ; but the circumstance
that as a religion Christianity claims
to be based on a series of supernatural
facts, which, if once admitted, not only
explain and justify the miracles com-
plained of, but render all other objec-
tions to Christianity itself unreasonable,
These facts are: 1. The incarnation of
the Second Person in the Godhead in the
person of Jesus, which, if true, involves
not only Christ’s supreme divinity, but
demands also a plurality of persons in
the Godhead. 2. The vicarious sacri-
jice of Jesus Christ upon the cross,
which, if true, involves the antecedent
doctrine of the fall of man, the total
corruption of the race, and the inability
of man to save himself, as well as the
possibility of a free salvation.
resurrection of Christ from the dead,
which again, if true, involves the truth
of the two preceding, and the cer-
tainty of both a future resurrection of
the dead (xxiv. 15; 1 Cor. xv. 20) and
a final judgment of the world (xvii. 31).
4. The necessity of a free justification
by Divine grace, and an entire regene-
ration by the Holy Spirit, in order to
salvation—which, once more, if true,
lays the axe at the root of self-sufficiency
and pride, and thus inevitably excites
the hostility of the natural heart. It
is perfectly well known that not one
of these doctrines is palatable to the
world, and even within the precincts
of the Church itself there are those
who in some surprising manner claim
to be counted Christians who repudiate
them all.

_ III. The objectionable character of
its precepts.—Many of the objections
urged against these are indeed un-


3. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. owar. xxvut.





reasonable and contradictory, having
only this in common, that they dislike
Christianity and often lead to its
rejection. 1. According to one class of
objectors, the precepts of Christianity
are too humbling. This holds good,
especially of the commandments, to
repent of sin and believe in Jesus
Christ. Did repentance of sin mean
nothing more than a formal, conven-
tional, and external acknowledgment
that one had not behaved exactly as
he should have done—an acknowledg-
ment which one might condescendingly
make without unduly putting an in-
dignity upon his self-respect ; and were
faith in Jesus Christ nothing beyond an
equally generous recognition on man’s
part that Christ had lived in His day
and generation a noble and self-sacri-
ficing life, from which all subsequent
ages had received an inspiration and
impulse for good, then the acceptance
of Christianity by men’s hearts would
not have been so difficult as it is
But repentance being an inward and
real sorrow for sin, which prostrates
the soul before God in self-humiliation,
and faith signifying the soul’s absolute
and final surrender to Jesus Christ for
salvation and eternal life, the soul
instinctively becomes conscious of an-
tagonism against demands so imperious
and exacting. 2. To a second class, the
precepts of Christianity are too severe—
too lofty, too spiritual, too inward,
too thoroughgoing. Easily enough
summed up in love to God and love to
man, when it comes to be understood
that what Christianity regards as a
perfect discharge of these duties is not
the performance of a few external,
conventional, and formal courtesies to
God in the shape of bodily worship,
however elaborate or costly, and phil-
anthropies to man in the shape of
munificent and frequent gifts of
charity ; but the continual up-going of
the heart towards God in adoring love
and obedience, and outgoing of the
heart towards man in sympathy and
succour—then Christianity is felt to
be too exalted, too inward, too exacting
a religion for the natural man, with


go to the wall.


0


the almost inevitable result that it is
spoken against and rejected. 3. A
third class complain that the precepts
of Christianity are too impracticable,
While to many the Sermon on the
Mount, with its doctrines of non-
resistance of evil, renunciation of
wealth, love to enemies, doing unto
others as one would that others should
do unto him, etc., is esteemed the very
essence of Christ’s religion, the class of
objectors now alluded to pronounce its
programme impracticable and visionary
—in fact, declare its non-suitability to
the exigencies of modern civilisation,
shrink not from saying that its morality
will not do for either commercial or
political life, and that if Christianity
insists on its doing, Christianity must
Of course Christianity
will not go to the wall, but the nation
and the people shall go to the wall that
propose to transact their businesses
and conduct their politics on other
principles than its.

IV. The visionary character of its
rewards.—Had Christianity proposed
to confer on its adherents immediate
benefits of a material kind, such as in-
creased wealth, power, pleasure, fame,
such as the world thirsts for, its repu-
tation might have stood higher to day
than it does with the unbelieving world.
But the chief blessings which Chris-
tianity undertakes to confer on its
adherents are of a spiritual sort
(see Ephes. i. 3), and to be enjoyed in
their fulness in a future world. Not
that Christianity has nothing to confer
on its adherents here, because it has
(see 1 Tim. iv. 8)—it has a sense of the
pardoning mercy of God, peace of
conscience, joy in the Holy Ghost, a
growing enlightenment in the truth of
God with a growing conformity to the
image of God, and over and above
these it has all things needful for life
and godliness (2 Peter i. 3), all those
“other things” which the heavenly
Father knows His children require
(Matt. vi. 33). But because Chris-
tianity sets a higher value on its
spiritual blessings than on its tem-
poral gifts (John vi.), teaches men


d99


cpap. xxviu. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS,





to set their affections on things above men pronounce it visionary, other-
rather than on things on the earth worldly, illusory, and pass it by for
(Col. iii. 1, 2), and encourages them to what they imagine to be a more’ sub-
seek for their inheritance in the future stantial good, but what they even-
life rather than in this (1 Peter i. 3-5), tually discover to be a shadow.


HOMILETICAL ANALYSIS.—Verses 23—29.


A Whole Day's Preaching ; or, a Last Appeal to his Countrymen.

I. The circumstances under which this appeal was made.—l. The place. The
same as that in which the previous address was delivered—viz., his lodging. (See
preceding ‘ Homily.”) 2. Zhe time. A day which had been appointed by the
Jewish leaders themselves more than likely the Jewish Sabbath, when they found
themselves free from business engagements. 3. The auditors. These same
Jewish leaders, and others of their co-religionists whom they had persuaded to
accompany them to the apostle’s lodging. 4. The speaker. The chained
prisoner of Jesus Christ, who, though himself looking forward to a trial of doubt-
tul issue, had time and thought to bestow on the spiritual necessities of his country-
men in Rome.

II. The character which belonged to this appeal.—l. The burden of it. The
kingdom of God and Jesus who had been its herald (Eph. ii. 17; Matt. iv. 17)
and founder (Luke xxii. 29, 30), and was its exalted Head and Lord (Matt.
xxviii. 18; John xiii. 36; Rom. xiv. 9; Eph. i. 20-22; Phil. ii. 9-11). 2. The
manner of it. By expounding the Scriptures (compare xvii. 2), reasoning out of
the law of Moses and out of the prophets (compare Luke xxiv. 27), and per-
suading them to recognise in Jesus their long-promised Messiah (compare xix. 8).
3. The fervour of it. Indicated by the fact that he continued a whole day from
morning till evening (compare xx. 7).

III. The result in which this appeal issued.—1. The faith of some. To these
the apostle’s preaching carried conviction. Paul seldom taught without gaining
converts; and wherever Christ crucified and risen as the King and Head of -
God’s empire of salvation is proclaimed, it may reasonably be anticipated that
some hearts will be won to believe. 2. The unbelief of others. This also usually
resulted from Paul’s preaching. If it awoke faith in some hearts it likewise
aroused unbelief and opposition. So to-day the proclamation of the gospel
excites against it the antagonism of the natural heart, which not unfrequently ©
terminates in unbelief and rejection of the truth. 3. The departure of all. As
the Sanhedrists in Jerusalem (xxili. 7), so the Jewish listeners in Rome, could not
agree among themselves, and, after an interchange of views it may be supposed
(ver. 29), withdrew from the apostle’s presence.

IV. The announcements by which this appeal was followed.—1. That their
rejection of the gospel had been foretold. Quoting from Isa. v1. 9, 10 (LXX.), a
passage which had also been cited by Christ in Capernaum (Matt. xiii. 14, 15)
and in Jerusalem (John xii. 40), he assured them that their present obduracy
had been distinctly anticipated in the Divine commission given to that Old.
Te-tament seer to whom Jehovah said, “Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed,
but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their
eyes and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and
be healed.” The words practically signified that Isaiah would carry his message
to a people who should refuse to hear it ; and Paul’s citation of the words to his
countrymen in Rome imported that he recognised in them the true successors of
the unbelievers to whom Isaiah preached, persons with souls so fast bound in
carnal security that they could not be aroused to a concern for spiritual things

600


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. CHAP. XXVIII.





s
(Ephes. iv. 19), and understandings so darkened that the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God could not shine into them (2 Cor. iv. 4); yea, it seemed to
the apostle as if his countrymen, through love of the darkness and devotion to
their own self-righteous ways, had deliberately closed their understandings and
hearts against the truth in case they should repent and be saved (John. iii. 19),
If both the Hebrew prophet and the Christian apostle represent the obduracy
of the Jewish people as a punishment sent on them by God for their unbelief,
that was only a strong way of saying that they had wilfully put away from
themselves the offer of eternal life (compare xiii. 46). 2. That the gospel should
be henceforth preached to the Gentiles, who should not reject but accept it. That this
actually took place the last two verses of the narrative inform us. For two
whole years the apostle waited for the hearing of his case, either because his
accusers had not arrived, or their witnesses had not been collected, or it did not
suit the emperor’s convenience. Whether at the end of that period he was
released from captivity or put to death is debated among expositors (see
“‘ Critical Remarks”). But during its continuance he lived in a hired dwelling
of his own, the rent of which he was without question enabled to pay through
the kindness of his numerous Christian friends (see, however, on xxi. 23). In
this, though still chained to a soldier of the Praetorian guard, he enjoyed a
large amount of liberty, and in particular “received all that came to him,
preaching the kingdom of God and teaching the things concerning the Lord
Jesus Christ with all boldness, none forbidding him.” Here also from time to
time he welcomed friends from distant Churches, such as Tychicus, Epaphras,
Epaphroditus, and Onesimus, who visited him with tidings how the brethren in
those Churches fared, and carried back in the shape of oral communications,
sometimes also in the form of letters (Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and
Philemon), wise and loving words of counsel and encouragement such as their
circumstances seemed to demand. Likewise, all who sought his presence in the
city to inquire into the kingdom or concerning Jesus met with a cordial
reception, and went away with all their questions answered, even if not always
with all their doubts removed.

Learn.—1. The supreme burden of the gospel ministry—the kingdom of God.
2. The transcendent value of the Scriptures—they testify of Jesus, the founder
and sovereign of the kingdom. 3. The dividing power of the gospel,—it separates
men into two hostile camps, those of believers and unbelievers. 4. The prescient
knowledge of Jehovah—who foresees the treatment men will accord to His
message of reconciliation. 5. The culpability of all who reject the truth—men
are held responsible by God for the hardness of their hearts. 6. The mercy of
. God—in sending the gospel to the Gentiles. 7. The highest glory of the Gentile
world—that it accepts God’s message of salvation.


HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 16-29. Last Words of Paul.

I. A last testimony to his innocence
(vers. 17-2‘).

II. A last confession of Jesus Christ,
as the Messiah (ver. 23).

III. A last effusion of love toward
His people (vers. 17, 19, 20).

IV. A last stroke of the hammer on
hardened hearts (vers, 25-28).—Gerok
in Lange.


Ver. 23. An All-day Meeting.

I. The place.—A private lodging. A
vindication of kitchen meetings and
drawing-room assemblies for the preach-
ing of the gospel.

IJ. The speaker.—A chained pri-
soner. As strange a preacher probably
as ever addressed his fellow-men. Cer-
tainly as sublime a spectacle as eye
ever gazed upon—a man so absorbed


601


CHAP. xxvii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





in the desire to honour Christ and save
his fellow-men, that he forgets all
about his own suffering and shame.

II. The themes.—The kingdom of God
and Jesus Christ. The grandest topics
that can engage the intellects and
hearts of men, Worthier than any
other themes to claim a day’s con-
versation.

IV. The hearers.—The Jews of
Rome. Not the Christian Jews, but
the Jews who belonged to the syna-
gogues. So that this all-day meeting
was not a fellowship meeting of dis-
ciples, but a meeting for the preaching
of the gospel.

V. The results. —Such as often
happen. Some believed and some
believed not.


Vers. 26, 27. The History of Un-
belief.

J. Its nature.—A deliberate and
wilful rejection of the truth of the
gospel.

II. Its origin.—It results from an
incapacity to understand the truth.

III. Its effect.—To render the heart
obdurate, the understanding darker,
the soul’s sensibility to Divine things
vmaller, and the possibility of ultimate
recovery feebler.

IV. Itsend.—The soul’s loss. Since
without knowledge the soul cannot
believe, without believing it cannot
turn, without turning it cannot be
healed or saved.


Ver. 28. This Salvation.

I. Its author.—Goe.

II. Its mediator.—Christ.

III. Its preacher.—Paul, and after
him the pastors and teachers of the
Christian Church, not excluding all
who believe. ‘ Let him that heareth
say, Come!”

IV. Its mission.—To the Gentiles.
Not to the exclusion of, but as well as
to the Jews.

V. Its fortune.—If rejected by some


(the Jews) heard by others (the
Gentiles).

Ver. 30. Two Whole Years in his own
Hired House. What then?


602


2


I.: That Paul was liberated aftera suc-
cessful trial is supported by the follow-
ing considerations: 1. The unanimous
testimony of the Primitive Church. (1)
The Epistle of Clement, Bishop of Rome
—believed to have been Paul’s friend
and disciple (Phil. iv. 3)—wrote in A.D.
99 that Paul, after instructing the whole
Roman world in righteousness, ‘ had
gone to the extremity of the west”
before his martyrdom (Clem. Rom., i.
5). (2) Muratori’s Canon (a.p. 170),
in the account given by it of the Acts of
the Apostles, says: “Luke relates to
Theophilus events of which he was an
eyewitness,as also in a separate place”—
(Luke xxii. 31-33) it is supposed—“ he
evidently declares the martyrdom of
Peter, but (omits) the journey of Paul
from Rome to Spain.” (3) Eusebius
(A.D. 320) writes: “After defending
himself successfully, it is currently
reported that the apostle again went
forth to proclaim the gospel, and after-
wards came to Rome a second time,
and was martyred under Nero” (Hist.
Ecel., ii. 22). (4) Chrysostom (A.D.
398) mentions it as an undoubted
historical fact, that “St. Paul after
his residence in Rome departed to —
Spain. (5) Jerome (a.p. 390) relates
that “Paul was dismissed by Nero,
that he might preach Christ’s gospel
in the west.” 2. The indirect witness
of Scripture. (1) The fact that Acts
closes without mention of the apostle’s
death suggests that he was liberated
at the end of the two years (xxviii. 32).
(2) The apostle appears himself to .
have expected a favourable issue to his
first trial (Phil. ii. 24). (3) If the
Epistle to the Hebrews was written by
Paul, as many still contend, it proves
conclusively that he was liberated from
his Roman imprisonment; for its
writer is in Italy and at liberty (Heb.
xii. 23, 24). (4) The Pastoral Epistles,
whose genuineness has often been dis-
puted but never satisfactorily disproved,
support the theory of the apostle’s
liberation, as the historical facts they
mention cannot be placed in any portion
of the apostle’s life before or during
his first imprisonment in Rome.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cHar. xxviii.





+

II. That Paul was put to death by
Nero, either as the result of his trial
or soon after in the persecution that
arose in A.D. 64 against the Christians,
though advocated by many has little
to rest upon except—l. The absence
of any account of the apostle’s subse-
quent labours. “It isa fact that we
have no historical trace of Pauline
Church foundations in Spain, which
makes the Spanish journey (above
referred to) highly improbable” (Weiss,
Manual of Introduction, i. 372). 2.
The circumstance that in Acts xx. 25
Luke appears to betray complete
ignorance of the apostle’s return to
his former mission field, which shows,
it is argued, that Luke knew nothing
of Paul’s deliverance from the Roman
captivity (lbid., i. 370). 3. The
necessity of finding an argument in
favour of the spuriousness of the
Pastoral Epistles, since’ if Paul was
not released from captivity the case
against them is closed. 4. The im-
probability of a second imprisonment
being repeated so soon afterwards
under circumstances so nearly similar to
those attending the first (Baur, Paul,
his Life and Works, i. 246). The
similarity of the circumstances, how-
ever, is not so obvious as is here
suggested (see Weiss, Manual, 1.
373).


Ver. 31. Paul Preaching in Rome.

I. The sublimity of the spectacle.—
“ History has few stranger contrasts
than when it shows us Paul preaching
Christ under the walls of Nero’s palace.
Thenceforward there were but two
religions in the Roman world—the
worship of the Emperor and the wor-
ship of the Saviour. The old super-


‘


stitions had been long worn out... .
The residuum they left was the phi-
losophy of Epicurus and the religion of
Nerolatry. But a new doctrine was
already taught in the Forum and
believed even on the Palatine. Over
against the altars of Nero and Poppea
the voice of a prisoner was daily heard,
and daily woke in grovelling souls the
consciousness of their Divine destiny ”
(Conybeare and Howson, ii. 458).

II. The success of the work.—Of
this testimony is furnished by the
Epistle to the Philippians, in which
Paul told them that ‘his bonds be-
came manifest in Christ throughout
the whole Pretorian guard and to all
the rest” (Phil. i. 13), and that even
out of Cesar’s household saints had
been gathered into the Church of
Christ (Phil, iv. 22), while those who


‘had been preaching before he came, or


commenced preaching in the city while
he taught in his own hired room, had
by his example been stimulated to
greater diligence (Phil. i. 14).

III. The immortality of the
preacher.—Whether Paul was libe-
rated or put to death at the end of
two years, it is certain that his labours
in the world’s metropolis came to an
end, and himself disappeared from the
stage of human history. But the work
he then began has never ceased to in-
fluence the thoughts and destinies of
men both within the Church and
without, not in Rome merely, but
throughout the world; while of him-
self the words of the Hebrew prophet
will evermore be true: “They that
be wise shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness as the stars for
ever and ever” (Dan. xii. 3).


NOTE.
The Theology of Paul as set forth in the Acts of the Apostles.


Tr is frequently asserted that so glaring a contradiction exists between Paul’s
theology in the Acts of the Apostles and his theology in the four larger Epistles
bearing his name, that if the latter represents Paul’s doctrinal system the former
can only be regarded as the free composition of the author of the Acts. A
careful examination of the various discourses attributed to Paul in the Acts,


603


cHap. xxvin, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS.





however, will show that this allegation is not well founded. These discourses
are: 1. That delivered in the synagogue at Antioch in Pisidia (xiii. 16-41).
2. The address to the Lycaonians (xiv. 15-17). 3. The exposition given to the
Athenians on Mars Hill (xvii. 22-31). 4. The farewell charge to the Ephesian
elders at Miletus (xx. 17-35). 5. The defence made to his countrymen from the
castle stairs of Antonia in Jerusalem (xxii. 1-21). 6. The answer before Felix
to the charges of Tertullus (xxiv. 10-21). 7. The oration before Agrippa
(xxvi. 2-23). And the last words spoken to his countrymen in Rome (xxviii.
23-28). A study of these with the isolated utterances which have been pre-
served in illustration of his teaching, as, for instance, at Philippi (xvi. 31),
Thessalonica (xvii. 3), and Corinth (xviii. 5), shows that the germs at least of the
teaching developed in the Epistles may be detected in the Acts.

I. The doctrine of God—Theology proper—which appears in the Acts, represents
the Supreme Being: (1) as a living, personal intelligence, unlike the dumb idols
of wood and stone which were worshipped by heathen nations (xiv. 15, xvii. 29);
(2) as a spiritual essence, who could neither be confined to temples made with
hands (xvii. 24) nor worshipped by mere external performances (xvii. 25); (3) as
the Creator of the universe (xiv. 15), and in particular as the Author of human
life (xvii. 25, 28); (4) as the Lord of providence (xiv. 16, 17, xvii. 26) and of
grace (xvii. 30, xxvi. 18); and (5) as the final Judge of mankind (xvii. 31).

Il. The doctrine of Christ—Christology—is equally explicit. 1. The human
nature of Jesus is repeatedly and clearly emphasised (xii. 23, 38, xvii. 31).
2. So also is His essential Godhead—directly by calling Him God (xx. 28), and
indirectly by styling Him Lord (xvi. 31). 3. His Divine Sonship, if not
unambiguously stated, is at least suggested (xiii. 33). 4. His Messiahship is
proclaimed in language that admits of no hesitation (xiii. 27, xvii. 3, xxvi. 23).
5. His death as an atonement for sin is assuredly implied in such statements as
these, that “ through this man”—who had been slain for no sin of His own and
raised again from the dead—“ is preached the forgiveness of sins ” (xiii. 38), and
that ‘“‘the Church of God” (Christ) had been “ purchased with His own blood”
(xx. 28). 6. His resurrection from the dead is set forth in the clearest light ~
(xiii. 30, 34, xvii. 31, xxvi. 23). 7. His future advent. as the Judge of men is
not forgotten (xvii. 31).

III. The doctrine of man—Anthropology—is also admirably outlined.
1. The heavenly origin of man’s spiritual nature is impressively taught
(xvii. 28, 29); as also is 2. The reality of his fallen condition, which, in order to
salvation, demands the forgiveness of sins (xiii. 38). 3. The responsibility of
man for his dealing with the Gospel offer (xiii. 46, xxviii. 29-28); and 4. His
ultimate accountability to God (xvii. 31, xxiv. 25), are likewise plainly set
forth.

IV. The doctrine of salvation—Soteriology—finds a place, and that in several
particulars. 1. The blessings of which salvation consists are indicated as at
least three in number: (1) forgiveness of sins (xiii. 38); (2) sanctification
(xx. 32, xxvi. 18); and (3) an inheritance in the great hereafter (xx. 32, xxvi. 18),
2, The method by which salvation is imparted is explained to be (1) by a Divine ~
act of justification, which acquits the sinner, and renders him righteous in the
eyes of the law (xiii. 39) ; (2) by an equally Divine work of upbuilding through
the word of God or truth of the Gospel (xx. 32) ; and (3) by a Divine bestowment
of heavenly glory when the work of sanctification has been completed (xx. 32).
3. The ground on which salvation is bestowed on any is the atoning death of
Jesus Christ (xiii. 39), and not the performance of any ceremonial or moral works
whatsoever. 4. The condition of salvation is in every instance faith in Jesus
Christ (xvi. 31). 5. The principal source of salvation is grace (xviii. 27, xx. 32).
6. Its world-wide intention is expressly pointed out (xiii. 46, 47, xxii. 15, 21,

604


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: THE ACTS. cwap. xxv.


xxvf. 17, 20, 23, xxviii. 28). 7. So also is its rejection by some who hear
(xxviii. 27).

V. The doctrine of the last things—Eschatology—is not forgotten. 1. The
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust, is repeatedly insisted
on (xvil. 32, xxiii. 6, xxiv. 15, xxvi.8). 2. The judgment of the last day is lifted
into view more than once (xvii. 31, xxiv. 25). 3. The blessed portion of believers
is declared to be eternal life (xiii. 46), or an inheritance among the sanctified
(xx. 32, xxvi. 18).

It is impossible to note these several points of doctrine extracted from the Acts
without perceiving how completely they harmonise with the fuller statements
contained in the Epistles.


BOF


<


1S eg ae


He At .


is
Le





LING De HX:


(Nore: H, = Homily; I.


ABRAHAM, history of; or, the progenitor of
Israel, H. 153
Abrahamic covenant, H. 91
Accession of Simon Magus, H. 182
Accident at Troas, H. 431
Aceldama, the field of blood, H. 38
Actions, doubtful, H. 456
Acts and Luke’s Gospel, connection between
the: two treatises, H. 15
Acts of the Apostles—
author and date, N. 8
integrity and credibility, N. 3
sources and aim, N. 10
theology of Paul as set forth in the Acts,
H. and N. 603
title and contents, N. 1
Admission of Gentiles vindicated, H. 248
Adrift upon the deep, H. 562, 570
Advent, necessity of the, for barbarian world,
H. 586
Advocates of servant of God, best, before
judgment-seat of unrighteous world,
H. 488
Aineas, healing of, H. 222, 223
After-knowledge and foreknowledge, Divine,
H. 63
Agabus, the prophet, H. 450
Aged Christian’s retrospect of his past career,
H. 536
Agrippa and Bernice, H. 523
a third hearing of Paul before, H. 525
and Felix, Paul’s two distinguished lis-
teners, H. 548, 550
Festus’s conversation with, about Paul,
H. 521
persecution of the Church by, H. 265
secret of Paul’s joy in addressing, H. 535
shortcomings of, H. 552
Agrippa’s wish, H. 525
Aims, unrealised, H. 459
Alive after His Passion, H. 19
All men alike, H. 310
of grace, H. 400
things common: a sermon on Christian
socialism, H. 114
All-day meeting, an, H. 601


Illustration ; N. ~ Note.


Almost a Christian, H. 552
persuaded, H. 552

Alms-asking and alms-giving, H. 80

Alone in a heathen city, H. 367


. Ananias and Barnabas, H. 121


and Paul, H. 484
mission of, H. 212
Ananias and Sapphira, love of money as
exemplified in, H. 122
or, fearful perversion of the marriage
state, H. 121
sevenfold union of, H. 122
sin of, H. 128, 124
story of; or, hypocrisy unveiled, H.
119, 124
Ananias’s theology, H. 214
Ananiases, the two, H. 213
three, in Acts, H. 483
Anchored from the stern, H. 575
Anchors, four, H. 566
Ancient prayer-meeting, an, H. 343
types of modern men, H. 418, 420
Angel, face of an, N. 145
in the bush, H. 164
Angels, H. 197
Annas upon the move; or, the bursting of
the storm, H. 127
Another King, one Jesus, H. and I. 363
Antioch, awakening at, H. 257
Barnabas at, H. 259
Church at, H. 9, 281
origin of, H. 253
circumcision controversy raised at, H. 347
forward movement at, H. 282
in Syria, back to, H. 311
Judaising teachers at, H. 317
Paul’s return to: close of second mis-
sionary journey, H. 395
departure from: commencement of
third missionary journey, H. 398
Pisidian, sabbath day in, H. 287
second sabbath day in, H. 289
Antipatris, apostle’s ride to, N. 495 :
Anxiety, a night of: nearing the breakers,
H. 572
Anxious inquirers, words for, H. 72


607


INDEX.





Apollos, a model preacher, H. 400
biography of, H. 400
Apology, first Christian ; or, the Pentecostal
mystery explained, H. 57
of Stephen ; or, a vindication of Chris-
tianity, H. 150
Paul’s first, H. 472
Apostasy of Israel, H. 165
Apostle and slave-girl, H. 348
Christian, the lofty oration of a: Paul’s
answer, H. 501
Simon the, and Simon the tanner, H. 231
Apostle’s ride to Antipatris, N. 495
Apostles and the first Christians; or, the
effect of the first persecution, H. 113
before Sanhedrim; or, sheep among
wolves, H. 99
college of, the Sanhedrim and the, H. 130
courage of the, H. 105
four lists of the, N. 33
in gaol; or, the first taste of persecution,
13k OY
. removed from court; or, conspirators in
conclave, H. 103
the, and the Jewish leaders, H. 107
wealth of the ; or, Peter’s pence, H. 80
with their own company; or, the wel-
come of the first confessors, H. 108
Apostles’ Creed, the, H. 323
Apostleship, completing the: election of
Matthias, H. 36
Apostolic agent prepared; or, Peter’s trance,
H, 231


delegates, first, H. 186

miracle, first, H. 81

times, progress of gospel in, H. 274
Apostolical generosity, H. 81
Appearances of the risen Christ, H. 21
Aquila and Paul, H. 385

and Priscilla, H. 385
Aquila’s workshop, Paul in, H. 385
Archipelago, across the, and back, H. 424
Areopagus oration, the, H. 377; N. 359

Paul on the; or, preaching to philosophers,


H, 374; N. 859
unto the; or, in the university at Athens,
N. 371


Arrested in the temple; or, long looked for
come at last, H. 456
Art not thou that Egyptian? H. and N. 459
Ascended Lord, command of the, H. 23
Ascending Lord and His witnesses, H. 34
Ascension of Christ, and its lessons, H. 28, 29
necessity of, H. 29
views of, H. 29
was it a visible phenomenon? H. 30
the; or, the exaltation of the Church’s
Head, H, 24
Ashore, running; or, escaping safe to land,
H. 576
Asia and Bithynia, forbidden to preach in,
N, 338
certain Jews from, H. 505
Assembly, first Christian, H. 38
Assize, the world’s, H. 380 _
Assos, Paul alone on his way to, H. 432


608


Athenian philosophers and their relation to
Christianity, H. 370
Athens, a microcosmus, H. 370
in the university at, N. 371
Paul at, H. 367, 377
Awakened souls, cry of, H. 67
Awakening at Antioch, H. 257
in Samaria, H. 184


BAD men, good points in, H. 505
Baptism, Christian, administration of, H. 246
household, H. 347
of fire; or the descent of the Holy Ghost,
H. 46
of Saul, H. 212
on the import of, H. 407
Baptisms, two, H. 24
Barbarian world, necessity of the Advent for,
H. 586
Barbarians, the gospel among, H. 307
Bar-jesus, story of, H. 285
Barnabas and Ananias, H. 121
and Paul and the Lord, H. 330
quarrel between, H. 330
separation of, H. 328
and Saul
at Lystra, H. 307
homeward journey of, H. 311
in Cyprus, H. 282
in Iconium, H. 304
on the way to Jerusalem, H. 319
at Antioch, H. 259
Joses; or, the consecration of wealth, H.116
piety of, H. 260
Beach, two fires upon the, H. 586
Beautiful Gate of temple, H. 78, 80
Beauty and profit of kindness, H. 589
Beginning, momentous, H. 17
Behold! he prayeth, H. 214
this man! H. 528
Believers, daily life of primitive; or, the
Pentecostal Church, H. 72
Believest thou the prophets? H. 551
Believing, hearing and, H. 99
people, H. 74
Bernice and Agrippa, H. 523
a third hearing of Paul before, H. 525
Bercea, Silas and Timothy in, N. 367
Berceans, noble, H. 365
Paul and Silas among the, H. 364
Best graces for a Church, H. 115
Bible, pious mothers of the, H. 335
three questions about the, H. 197
Bible-reading, H. 197
Biography of Apollos, H. 400
of Moses in three chapters;
founder of the nation, H. 160
of Stephen, H. 145
Bithynia and Asia, forbidden to preach in,
N. 338
Blessing, great, of gospel, H. 245
Pentecostal, H. 51
Blessings of David, H. 292
Blinding glory, H. 469
Blood, first taste of, H. 168
the field of, Aceldama, H. 38


or, the


INDEX.


sss


BWssoms, true, of a Christian congregation,
H. 116
Blots in a Church, H. 140
Blotting out of sin, the, H. 87
Boldness in preaching, H. 111
Bonds, true, of a Christian, H. 451
Books, burning of the, H. 412
God’s three great, about Himself, H. 379
Bound in the Spirit, H. 438
Bread, days of unleavened, H. 263
Breakers, nearing the: a night of anxiety,
H. 572
Brethren, chief men among the, H, 325
finding, H. 593
in Lydia’s house, the, H. 356
Joseph’s, H. 160
of our Lord, H. 34
weak, concessions to, H. 455
Bright particular star, rising of a, H. 142
Builders and the stone, the, H. 101
Burial of Stephen, H. 180
Buried in Canaan, H. 159
Burning bush, H. 163
of the books, H. 412
Bursting of the storm, the; or, Annas upon
the move, H. 127
Bush, angel in the, H. 164


CmsaAr, Paul’s appeal to, H. 520
Czsar’s judgment-seat and Christ’s :
trast, H. 520
Ceesarea, centurion of, N. 230
Festus’s audience-chamber at, H. 529
from, to Fair Havens, H. 5656
midnight ride to, H. 492
Paul’s imprisonment at, H. 506
Peter’s arrival at, H. 237
to Joppa, embassy from, H. 236
with Philip at, H. 448, 449
Call to Macedonia, H. 340
Called sinner, history of a, H. 155
Calm before a storm, the; or, a page from
the Church’s life, H. 125
Canaan, buried in, H. 159
Career, Paul’s survey of his past; or, what he
was and did before his conversion,
H. 463, 466, 472
Castor and Pollux ; or, Paul’s arrival in Rome,
H. 589, 592
Centre for approaching Gentile mission, pre-
paration of, H. 253
Centurion of Cexsarea, N. 230
Certain disciple named Timothy, H. 334
no, thing to write, H. 528
Certificates of character, Cornelius’s, H. 236
Chain, Paul’s, H. 597
Chained prisoner on his defence, H, 535
Changed times, I. 81
Changes in government, H. 516
Characteristics of good evangelist, H. 199
preacher, H. 102
Characters, typical, group of, H. 420
Charges, reckless, men who make, H. 505
Charter of liberty, the Church’s: the Jerusa-
lem epistle, H. 326
Cheer, good, for Christian sailors, H. 566


@ con-


Chief men among the brethren, H. 325
Children, husbands, wives, H. 447
to you and to your; or, the Church-mem-
bership of children, H. 71
Christ alone, salvation in, H. 101
and His apostles, H. 307
and John, two masters, H. 407
and Moses, H. 90
ascension of, and its lessons, H, 28, 29
necessity of, H. 29
views of, H. 29
was it a visible phenomenon ? H, 30
Church of, in Europe, H. 345
clouds that conceal, H. 30
death of, H. 244
and resurrection of, a necessity,
H. 362
earthly ministry of, H. 16
faith in, H. 542
glory of, H. 85
in Jerusalem, Paul’s adoption of a Gentile
mission; or, his interview with,
H. 471
in the prophets, H. 90
Jesus, faith in, H. 511
Joseph a type of; or, the last of the
patriarchs, H. 157
mnission of, H. 91
Name of, hazarding one’s life for, H. 326
names of, H. 91
of God and Christian history, H. 17
Paul’s sacrifices in the cause of, N. 450
Peter’s threefold ‘testimony concerning,
H. 91
prayer addressed to, H. 39
resurrection of, H. 64
risen, and the power of the gospel, H. 115
eating and drinking with, H. 245
Saul preaching, H. 219, 221.
second coming of, H. 30
sufferings of, H. 87
the risen, fellowship with, H. 18
appearances of. H 21
threefold office of, H. 245
two visions of, H. 214
voices from mouth of, H. 470
was Paul’s vision of, an objective reality ?
N. 545
witness of the second psalm to, H. 292
Christ’s answers, soul’s questions and, H. 211
judgment-seat and Czxsar’s: a contrast,
H. 520
Name, H. 245
question to Saul, H. 468
to Paul, H. 211
servants, troubles of, H. 98
suffering servants, comfort for, H. 488
witnesses, H. 26
Christian, almost a, H. 552
apology, first ; or, the Pentecostal mystery
explained, H. 57
assembly, first, H. 38
baptism, administration of, H. 246
Church, four causes of joy in a, H. 126
on earth, Church in wilderness a type
of, H. 164


609


INDEX.


enn  —_


Christian Church, variety of gifts bestowed | Church, characteristics of the, H. 440


on, H. 226
companions, H. 385
conception of God, H. 111
congregation, true blossoms of a, H. 116
courage, H. 111
deacons, first, H. 140
early, practice, light from, H. 428
farewells, H. 447
fortitude, H. 520
history, Christ of God and, H. 17
journeymen on their travels, H. 385
knowledge, growth in, H. 400
martyr, first, H. 172, 174
minister, qualifications and work of,
H. 470
ministers, dignity and eel of, H. 348
words of warning for, H . 439
ministry, H. 115
orator, qualities requisite for a, H. 464
Paul’s subsequent career as a ; or, how he
turned tothe Gentile mission, H.543
preacher, model for, H. 85
resignation, H. 451
salutations, H. 523
service in strange place, H. 527
three differing types of, H. 269
socialism, a sermon on: all things com-
mon, H. 114
primitive, and modern unchristian
communism compared and con-
trasted, H. 73
steadfastness, H. 73
the name, H. 260
true bonds of a, H. 451
greatness of a, H. 569
unity, ideal of, H. 51
work, H. 82
Christian’s, aged, retrospect of his past
career, H. 536
vocation, H. 27
Christians, model, H. 74
Christianity and socialism, H. 115
Athenian philosophers and their relation
to, H. 370
double work of, H. 287
new doctrines of, H. 371
popular objections against, H. 598
reasons why men oppose themselves to,
H. 418
teaching of, at once old and new, H. 371
the origin of; or, of men or of God,
H. 134
two apologies of, towards Judaism and
towards heathenism: Stephen and
Paul, H. 380
vindication of ; or, the apology of Stephen,
H. 150


world’s misconceptions about, H. 523, 525,


Church at Antioch, H. 279, 281
origin of, H. 253
at Jerusalem, letter from the, H. 323
Peter’s report to, H. 248
at Philippi, H. 356
best graces for a, H. 115
blots in a, H. 140


610


Christian, four causes of joy in a, H. 126
place of women in the, H. 449
variety of gifts bestowed on the, H. 226
discipline, H. 122
dissension in the, N. 140
elders of the, H. and N. 436
example to the unsteadfast in the, H. 430
in Jerusalem; or, ten days before Pente-
cost, H. 31
in Mary’s house, H. 268
in wilderness a type of Christian Church
on earth, H. 164
of Christ, conversion of heathen a source
of joy to the, H. 319
in Europe, H. 345
of Jesus Christ, H. 223
voyage of the, H. 577, 578
on sleeping in, H. 430
Pentecostal ; or, the daily life of primitive
believers, H. 72
persecution of the, by Agrippa, H. 263,
265


prayers of the, H. 267

primitive, murmuring in the, H. 139
palmy days of the, H. 126

progress of the, H. 142

prosperous, H. 74

the strength of a, H. 336

visitation, first, H. 187

which was in Jerusalem, H. 179

Church’s care of the poor; or, serving tables,

H. 140

charter of liberty : the Jerusalem epistle,
H. 326

first strife allayed ; or, the institution of
the diaconate, H. 137


Head, exaltation of the; or, the Ascen- _


sion, H. 24
history, story of Israel a type of, H. 291
life, a page from the; or, the calm before
a storm, H. 125
persecutor punished, H. 272, 274
poverty and Church’s wealth, H. 80
Church-membership of children; or, to you
and to your children, H. 71
Circumcision controversy raised at Antioch,
. 317


settled, H. 320, 323
no salvation without, H. 319
Citizenship, Roman and heavenly, H. 476
City, reformed, H. 184
City-troublers, preachers of gospel, H. at
Civil magistrate, Gallio the, H. 395
power of the, H. 130
Cleaving to the Lord, H. 259
Clouds that conceal Christ, H. 30
Collection, concerning the, H. 261
College of apostles, the Sanhedrim and the,
H. 130
Come over and help us—cry of the heathen,
9


H. 33
Comfort for Christ’s
H. 488
Command of the ascended Lord, H. 23
Commission, preacher’s, H. 129


suffering servants,


INDEX.





Common, all things: a sermon on Christian
socialism, H. 114
Communion festival at Troas, H. 426, 429
Communism, modern unchristian, and primi-
tive Christian socialism compared and
contrasted, H. 73
Companions, Paul’s, on the second mission-
ary journey, N. 335
Companionship with Jesus, H. 105
Company, great ship’s, H. 577
Completing the apostleship :
Matthias, H. 36
Concessions to weak brethren, H. 455
Conclave, conspirators in; or, the apostles
removed from court, H. 103
Concordat, the Jerusalem, N. 325
Confession in the midst of storm, N. 567
of faith, the first, H. 323
Confessors, welcome of the first; or, the
apostles with their own company,
H. 108
Confirmation of the saints, H. 1.85
scriptural, H. 313
Congregation, a minister and Lis, H. 239
at prayer, H. 110
Christian, true blossoms of a, H. 116
picture of a model, H. 240
Conquer, divide and; or, Pasil’s happy stroke,
N. 485
Conscience, a good, H. 483
liberty of, H. 106
three phases of, H. 512
Consecration of wealth; or, Joses Barnabas,
H. 116
Conspiracy of (more than) forty, H. 488
Conspirators in conclave; or, the apostles
removed from court, H. 103
Contemplating new plans, H. 413
Contest, triangular: sorcerer, proconsul, and
apostle, H. 286
Continuing in the faith, H. 313
in the grace of God, H. 298
Contrary winds, H. 560
Controversy, ecclesiastical, H. 251
Convenient seasons, H. 512
Conversion as illustrated by that of Paul,
H. 211
of Cornelius, H. 245
of Crispus, H. 388
of heathen a source of joy to the Church
of Christ, H. 319
of Lydia, H. 344, 346, 347
of Saul, H. 206, 209, 211, 212, 215, 218
of the Ethiopian eunuch, H. 193, 203
of the Gentiles, H. 323
of the jailor at Philippi, H. 354
Paul’s survey of his past career ; or, what
he was and did before his, H. 463, 466
secret of Panl’s, explained, 537
sermon on, H. 542
true, marks of, H. 218
Convert, doubtful, reception of a, H. 182
first, in Europe, H. 345
Conyert’s danger, a new, H. 217
Converts, first ; or, the firstfruits of the gospel
harvest, H. 65


election of


Conviction of sin, H. 67
Corinth, court-scene in, H. 394
great things in, H. 390
how often did Paul visit ? E.. 425
Paul at; or, meeting with new friend
H. 383 ;
Paul’s midnight vision at, H. 390
preaching at, H. 392
year and six months in, H. 386
Corn in Egypt; or, good news frem ¢ far
country, H. 159
Cornelius the centurion, H. 230
conversion of, H. 245
Cornelius’s certificates of character, H, 236
house, Peter’s sermon in, H. 241
messengers at Joppa, H, 235
vision, H. 228
Corner-stone, rejected, H. 101
Council at Jerusalem, the, H. 320
Council-chamber, scene in the, H. 480
Counsel, Gamaliel’s, H, 133, 134
of the good, H. 562
soldiers’, H. 577
Counsels, mistaken, H. 452


- Counterpart of Paul, great modern—Martin


Luther, N. 450
Country, far, good news from a; or, corn in
Egypt, H. 159
Courage and gratitude, H. 593
Christian, H. 111
of the apostles, H. 105
Court, a friend at; or, Gamaliel and his col-
leagues, H. 131
the apostles removed from ; or, conspira-
tors in conclave, H. 103
Court-scene in Corinth, H. 394
in the olden time, H. 519
Covenant, Abrahamic, H. 91
Covenants, two—against Paul and for him,
H. 490
Credibility of the story of Paul’s conversion,
note on, H. 209
Creed of the Sadducee, H. 486
the Apostles’, H. 323
Crete, from Fair Havens to: caught in a
storm, H. 560
Crimes, great, remembered, H. 473
Criminality of Jewish rulers, H. 291
Cripple, the Lystra, H. 309
Crispus, conversion of, H. 388
Cross, holy, way of the, H. 135
the crucifiers, and the Crucified, H. 71
Crowns, Stephen’s three, H. 172
Crucified, the cross, the crucifiers, and the,
Ho
Cry of awakened souls, H. 67
of the heathen—Come over and help us,
H. 339
of the nations, H. 340
Cure of a pythoness, H. 348
Custom of the Romans, not the, H. 523
Cyprus, Barnabas and Saul in, H. 282


Daiuty life of primitive believers; or, the
Pentecostai Church, H. 72
Damascus, H. 210


611


INDEX.


Damascus, before and in, H. 466
miracle near, H. 206, 210
Paul’s escape from, H. 217
Saul at, H. 215
Danger, a new convert’s, H. 217
impending, announced, H. 445
Dangerous voyages, H. 562
Daring prophecy, a, H. 575
Darkness and light, kingdoms of, in conflict,
H. 185
David, blessings of, H. 292
life, death, and burial of, H. 292
Day of judgment, great, H. 380
of Pentecost, H. 76
of the Lord, H. 59
our, H. 292
Days of unleavened bread, H. 263
the forty, H. 18
words of, H. 22
Deacon, Stephen the, H. 145
Deacons, first Christian, H. 140
Dead, did Jesus Christ actually rise from
the? H. 19
raising the—credible or incredible? H.
536
Death and resurrection of Christ a necessity,
H. 362
of Christ, H. 244
of Herod, H. 272, 274
of James the brother of John, H. 266,
267, 274
Deaths, sudden, H. 122
Deep, drifting upon the, H. 562, 570
Defeated plot, a, H. 491
Defence, model, H. 519
Paul’s, H. 535
Deliverance, Peter’s, H. 269
Demetrius and his brother craftsmen, H.
418
Descending Spirit, H. 52
Descent of Holy Ghost; or, the baptism of
fire, H. 46
Despondency, ministerial, thoughts for the
night of, H. 390
Destiny, individual, H. 39
Devices, Satan’s, H. 348
Devout men, H. 56
Diaconate, institution of the; or, the
Church’s first strife allayed, H. 137
Diana and Jesus, H. 419
temple of, endangered, H. 415; N. 420
Did Jesus Christ actually rise from the dead ?
19


Difference, no, H. 233
no, between us and them, te. between

man and man, H. 323

Dignity of man, H. 379

Dioscuroi, on board the, or the Twin
Brothers, H. 592

Discipline, Church, H. 122

Discourse, a great, and what came of it,


Dispensation of the Spirit, H. 58


Dissension in the Church, N. 140
Divide and conquer ; or, Paul’s happy stroke,


612


Dividing power of the gospel, H. 307 -
Divine after-knowledge and foreknowledge,
H. 63 :


“ must,” the, H. 569
warnings, H. 252
worship, some thoughts about, H. 503
Divinity and Personality of Holy Spirit,
H. 50


Docility of temper in relation to truth,
H. 366


Doctrine of a resurrection, H. 504

of future judgment a doctrine of reason,

N. 380

of justification, Paul’s, H. 298
Doctrines and mistakes, theological, H. 575
Doing good, who went about, H. 244
Door, great, opened for gospel, H. 407

of faith, H. 314
Dorcas and Peter, H. 226

raising of, H, 223
Double work of Christianity, H. 287
Doubtful actions, H. and N. 456

convert, reception of a, H. 182

strategy, Paul’s, H. 480
Downward course of Israel, H. 166
Draught of souls, miraculous, H. 72
Drifting life and its opposite, N. 565

upon the deep, H. 562, 570
Drunkenness and spiritual influence, H. 58
Drusilla and Felix, Paul’s interview with,

H. 507, 512

the wife of Felix, H. 510

Dwellers, the house and its, H. 167


EARLY Christian practice, light from, H. 428 _
Earth, Saul arose from the, N, 212
Earthly ministry of Christ, H. 16
Eating and drinking with risen Christ,
H, 245
Ecclesiastical assembly, first, H. 322
controve:sy, H. 251
Effects of Peter’s sermon, N. 74
Egypt, a type of the world, H. 158
cone ; or, good news from a far country,
. 159


Egyptian, art not thou that? H. and N. 459
Elders at Miletus, Paul's address to the,
H. 436
of Ephesus, a meeting with the, H. 433
of the Church, H. and N. 436
Eldership, office of the, H. 313
Election of Matthias: completing the
apostleship, H. 36
Elements of truly noble spirit, N. 365
Eloquence, vapid, of a heathen lawyer, H.
498


Elymas Bar-jesus and Simon Magus: two
sorcerers, H. 286
Sergius, Saul ; or, three sorts of wisdom,
H, 285, 286
Embassy from Czsarea to Joppa, H. 236
Emperor, an appeal to the—Paul before
Festus, H. 517
Entering the kingdom, H. 313
Ephesus, an incident in, H. 409
Demetrius of, H, 418





Ephesus, meeting with the elders of, H. 433
Paul’s last days in, H. 413
return to, H. 404
popular tumult in, H. 415, 419; N. 403
sailing past; or, bound for Jerusalem,
H. 431
three years’ ministry in, H. 407, 412
town-clerk of, H. 419
two years’ work in, N. 409
uproar at, H. 419; N. 403
Epistle, the Jerusalem : the Church’s charter
of liberty, H. 326
Erastus and ‘Timothy, mission of, into
Macedonia, H. and I. 414
Escapes, Paul’s midnight, H. 495
Escaping safe to land; or, running ashore,
H. 576
Eternal life, ordained to, H. 301
Ethiopia, gospel carried into, H. 193
Ethiopian eunuch, conversion of the, H. 193,
203
Philip and the, H. 198, 199, 200, 201
Eunuch, conversion of the Ethiopian, H. 193,
203
Europe, Church of Christ in, H. 345
first convert in, H. 345
gospel carried to, H. 341
Paul’s second visit to, H. 424
Eutychus, story of the young man, H. 426,
430
Evangelist, characteristics of a good, H. 199
Everywhere spoken against, H. 597, 598
Evil overruled for good, H. 178
renewed fore-announcements of, H. 448
Exaliation of the Church’s Head; or, the
Ascension, H. 24
Examination, Gentile candidate’s, H. 237
Excitement in Jerusalem ; or, what the mul-
titude thought of the phenomenon,
H. 55
Experience of a soul, H. 156
Experiences, mixed, H. 366
three significant, H. 386
Expository preaching, H, 252


FABLES, Grecian, on the subject of Lycaonia,
I. 309
Face of an angel, N. 145
Stephen’s illuminated, N. 145
Fair Havens, from Cesarea to, H. 556, 560
from, to Crete: caught in a storm,
H. 560
Faith and superstition: incident of the
viper, H. 586
continuing in the, H. 313
door of, H. 314
first confession of, H. 323
in Christ, H. 542
Jesus, H. 511
saving, is faith in Christ, N. 542
substance of the, H. 437
to be saved, H. 309
true, characteristics of, H. 347
Far country, good news from a; or, corn in
Egypt, H. 159
off and to near, peace to, H. 243


Farewell, pastor’s, H. 440
Farewells, Christian, H. 447
Fast in the stocks, H. 352
Fathers, God of our, H. 84
promise made to the, H. 536
Feast, keeping the, H. 398
of the Fulfilment, H. 50
Felix and Agrippa, Paul’s two distinguished
listeners, H. 548, 550
character of, H. 510.
Drusilla, the wife of, H. 510
love of money as exemplified in, H, 512
Lysias’ letter to, N. 494
Paul before, H. 510
Paul’s first interview with, H. 495
interview with, and Drusilla, H. 507,
512
Fellowship with the risen Christ, H. 18
Fellow-voyagers, Paul and his, H. 579
Fellow-workers in gospel, H. 307
Festus, Paul before: an appeal to the em-
peror, H, 517


‘Festus’s audience-chamber at Czsarea, H.


529
conversation with Agrippa about Paul
H. 521 :
excuse for calling forth his prisoner,
H. 525


Field of blood, the, Aceldama, H. 38
Fighting against God, H. 134, 468
Filled with the Holy Spirit, H. 51
with joy, H. 302
Finding brethren, H, 593
Fire, baptism of; or, the descent of Holy
Ghost, H. 46
tongues of, H. 50
Fires of persecution rekindled, H. 178
two, upon the beach, H. 586
First apostolic delegates, H. 186
miracle, H. 81
Christian apology; or, the Pentecostal
mystery explained, H. 57
assembly, H. 38
deacons, H. 140
martyr, H. 172, 174
Christians, apostles and the ; or, the effect
of the first persecution, H. 113
Church visitation, H. 187
confession of faith, H. 323
confessors, welcome of the; or, the
apostles with their own company,
H. 108
convert in Europe, H. 345
converts; or, the firstfruits of the gospel
harvest, H. 65
day of the week, H. 429
ecclesiastical assembly, H. 322
interview, Paul’s, with Felix, H. 495
man in Malta: sermon on true greatness,
H. 589 ;
missionary journey, commencement of,
H. 282
ship, H. 285
missionaries, designation and despatch of,
H. 279
pagan persecution, H. 349


613


INDEX.





First persecution, effect of the ; or, the apos-
tles and the first Christiuns, H. 113
recorded missionary meeting, H. 313
strife allayed, Church’s; or, the institu-
tion of the diaconate, H. 137
taste of blood, H. 168
of persecution; or, the apostles in
gaol, H. 97
Firstfruits of the gospel harvest ; or, the first
converts, H. 65
Flock, pastor's duty towards his, H. 440
Foes and friends of Paul, H. 490
Followers of Christ, world’s misrepresenta-
tions of, H. 455
Forbidden to preach in Asia and Bithynia,
N. 338
Fore-announcements of evil, renewed, H. 448
Foreign missionary’s return, H. 455
missions, opposition to, H. 475
Foreknowledge and after-knowledge, Divine,
H. 63
Foreordination, sermon on, H. 301
Forgiveness, sermon on, H. 298
Fortitude, Christian, H. 520
Fortunate journey, H. 240
Fortunes of the Twelve, H. 130
Forty, conspiracy of (more than), H. 488
days, the, H. 18
words of, H. 22
Forward movement at Antioch, H. 282
Founder of the nation ; or, the biography of
Moses in three chapters, H. 160
Four anchors, H. 566
causes of joy in a Christian Church,
H. 126
classes in the school of suffering, H. 135
lists of the apostles, N. 33
marvels, H. 198
Old Testament typical persons, H. 167
remarkable things in Peter’s sermon,
H. 65
valuable lessons, H. 330
Friend at court, a; or, Gamaliel and his
colleagues, H. 131
Friends and foes of Paul, H. 490
Fulfilment, Feast of the, H. 50
Full of good works, H. 225
Future judgment, doctrine of, a doctrine of
reason, N. 380


GALATIA, region of, H, 337
Gallio, Paul before, H. 392
Sosthenes and, H. 395
tue civil magistrate, H. 395
Gallio’s action, N. 395
behaviour, H. 395
Gamaliel and his colleagues; or, a friend at
court, H. 131
Gamaliel’s counsel, H, 130, 134
Gaol, apostles in; or, the first taste of per-
secution, H. 97
Gate, Beautiful, of temple, H. 78, 80
Generosity, apostolical, H. 81
Gentile candidate’s examination, H. 237
inquirer directed, H. 228
knocking for admission, H. 235


614


Gentile mission, how Paul turned to the, H.
543
Paul’s adoption of a; or, his interview
with Christ in Jerusalem, H. 471
preparation of centre for approaching,
H. 253
Gentiles, admission of, vindicated, H. 248
and Jews, H. 301
conversion of the, H. 323
gospel preached to, H. 241
Gift of the Holy Ghost, H. 71, 130, 245
Gifts, variety of, bestowed on Christian
Church, H. 226
Girdle, Paul’s, lessons from, H. 451
Give, more blessed to, than to receive, H. 441
Glorify the Word of God, how to, H. 302
Glory, blinding, H. 469
God of, H. 155
of Christ, H. 85
of gospel of grace of God, H. 547
of that light, H. 470
God alone King, H. 274
and man, obedience to, H. 130
and religion, Paul’s, H. 504
and the believer, H. 570
Christ of, and Christian history, H. 17
Christian conception of, H. 111
fighting against, H. 134, 468
glorified by people for healing of lame
man, H. 107
gospel of grace of, H. 438, 547
grace of, continuing in the, H. 298
great things of, man’s reception of, H. 57
greatness and majesty of, H. 168
heart not right with, H. 189
ignorant worshippers of, H. 378
impossibility of withstanding, H. 253
Israel beloved of, H. 94
kingdom of, H. 23
progress of, H. 274
no respecter of persons, H. 242, 243
of glory, H. 155
of men or of; or, the origin of Christianity,
H. 134
of our fathers, H. 84
Old Testament views of, H. 323
Paul’s, H. 569
seeking after, H. 379
to the unknown, H. 378
was with him, H. 244
wonderful works of, H. 56
Word of, H. 391
words to seekers after, H. 198
God’s grace, gospel the word of, H. 306
hope for His workers, H. 388
judgment on whited walls, H. 484
knowledge of the heart, H. 323
offspring, H. 379
people, portion of, H. 158
presence with His people, H. 158
promises to His people, H. 155
three great books about Himself, H. 279
witness of Himself, H. 311
Gods are come down to us in the likeness of
men, H. 309
hand-made, H. 419


INDEX.





Gods, strange, H. 370
Good cheer for Christian sailors, H. 566
conscience, a, H. 483
counsel of the, H. 562
evil overruled for, H. 178
man, troubles of a, H. 459
men, quarrels of, H. 3380
news from a far country; or, corn in
Egypt, H. 159
points in bad men, H. 505
preacher, characteristics of, H. 102
tidings, H. 184
of peace, publishing, H. 243
work, another, interrupted: Bercea, H.
364
works, full of, H. 225
Gospel among barbarians, H. 307
carried into Ethiopia, H. 193
to Europe, H. 341
dividing power of the, H. 307
fellow-workers in, H. 307
great blessing of, H. 245
door opened for, H. 407
harvest, firstfruits of the; or, the first
converts, H. 65
hearers and their different attitudes,
characters, and destinies, H. 301
man’s treatment of, H. 380
of grace of God, H. 438, 547
preached to Gentiles, H. 241
preacher and his, H. 307
preachers of, city-troublers, H, 352
progress of, in apostolic times, H. 274
promise of the, H. 71
risen Christ and the power of the, H. 115
spreading, the; or, Philip in Samaria,
H, 181
the word of God’s grace, H. 306
truth, Paul a model witness of, H. 547
Government, changes in, H. 516
Governor, new, succession of a, H. 518
Grace, all of, H. 400.
before meals, H. 575
God’s, gospel the word of, H. 306
of God, continuing in the, H. 298
gospel of, H. 438, 547
providence and, thoughts concerning,
H. 578
Graces, best, for a Church, H. 115
Gratitude and courage, H, 593
Great crimes remembered, H. 473
prophecy and its fulfilment, H. 156
things in Corinth, H. 390
of God, man’s reception of, H. 57
Greatness and majesty of God, H. 168
true, sermon on: first manin Malta, H. 589
of Christian, H. 569
Grecian fables on the subject of Lycaonia,
I. 309
Ground, holy, H. 164
Group of typical characters, H. 420
Growth and power of Word of God, H. 412
in Christian knowledge, H. 400


HAND of providence, H. 490.
Hands, twe right, 8 63, 64





Hand-made gods, H. 419
Happy stroke, Paul’s; or, divide and conquer,
N, 485
Harvest, firstfruits of the gospel; or, the first
converts, H. 65
Hazarding one’s life for Name of Christ, H. 326
Head, exaltation of the Church’s; or, the
Ascension, H. 24
Healing, miracle of, H. 82
of Aineas, H. 222, 223
of lame man, H. 78, 82
God glorified by people for, B. 107
secret of miracle explained, H. 83
of Publius’s father, H. 587
Hearers, gospel, and their different attitudes,
characters, and destinies, H. 301
preachers and their, some thoughts about,
H. 475
Hearing and believing, H. 99
patient, H. 535
Word of God, H. 409
Heart, God’s knowledge of the, H. 323
not right with God, H. 189
the natural, H. 191
thoughts of the, H. 190
Heart-purification, H. 323
Heathen city, alone in a, H. 367
conversion of, a source of joy to the Church
of Christ, H. 319
cry of the—*Come over and help us,”
H. 339
lawyer, vapid eloquence of a, H. 498
mission, mirror for the, H. 234
world, expressive representation of the:
the people of Malta, H. 589
Heathenism and Judaism, two apologies of
Christianity towards: Stephen and
Paul, H. 380
Heaven opened, H. 233
why stand we gazing into? H. 30
Heavens opened, H. 171
Heavenly and Roman citizenship, H. 476
treasure, H. 197
vision, H. 544, 545
Worker, H. 16
Hebrew, did Christ speak ? N. 541
Helps and hindrances, H. 447
Heretics, how to deal ‘With, H. 319
Herod and Peter, H. 270
death of, H. 272, 274
sin and punishment of, H. 274
Heroism of Paul, H. 451
Paul’s, in the storm, H. 570
High places, wickedness in, H. 516
Highway of life, meetings on the, H. 199
Hindrances and helps, H. 447
Hired house, two whole years in his own—
what then? H. 602
Historical credibility of speech of Stephen,
N. 152
History, Christian, Christ of God and, H. 17
Church’s, story of Israel a type of, H
291
of a called sinner, H. 155
of Abraham ; or, the progenitor of Israel,
H. 153


615


INDEX.





History of Jesus of Nazareth, H, 244
John Mark, H. 275
of unbelief, H. 602
personal, of Jesus, H. 39
Holy cross, way of the, H. 135
Ghost, a sermon on the, H. 50
and Satan, the, H. 122
descent of; or, the baptism of fire,


H. 46
gift of the, H. 71, 130, 245
on receiving the, H. and I. 406
receiving the, H. 187
tongues which, gives, H. 407
witness of the, H. 130
ground, H. 164
Spirit, filled with the, H. 51
Personality and Divinity of the, H. 50
Home-coming of the messengers, H. 275
Homeward journey of Paul and Barnabas,
H. 311


Hope of Israel, the, H. 597
and the resurrection of the dead, H.
484
Hour of prayer, H. 80
House and its dwellers, the, H. 167
model, H. 231
Household baptism, H. 347
Housetop, Peter’s vision on the, H. 234
Husbands, wives, children, H. 447
Hypocrisy unveiled; or, the story of Ananias
and Sapphira, H. 119
Hypocrite, detection of a, H. 187


Icon1um, Paul and Barnabas in, H. 304
Ideal of Christian unity, H. 51
Idolatry, H. 310

of novelty, N. 372
* Ignorance, sins of, H. 87, 484
Ignorant worshippers of God, H. 378
Ijlness, Paul’s supposed, at Perga, N. 290
Imaginings, vain, H. 110
Impending danger announced, H. 445
Impotence, state of sin a state of, H. 82
Imprisonment of Paul and Silas, H. 349

Paul’s, at Cessarea, H. 506

explanation of, H. 593

Incident in Ephesus, an, H. 409
Incomparable Teacher, H. 16
Increase of nations, H. 163
Indictment of Tertullus, H. 498

terrible, H. 168
Indignation, misdirected, H. 129
Individual destiny, H. 39
Infidelity, uncertainties of, H. 528
Influence, drunkenness and spiritual, H. 58
Inhabitants of Samaria, H. 182
Inheritance, way to the, H. 541
Inquirer, Gentile, directed, H. 228
Inquirers, anxious, words for, H. 72
Institution of the diaconate; or, the Church’s

first strife allayed, H. 137

Intercessory piayer, H. 190
Intolerance in religion, spirit of, H. 466
Israel, apostasy of, H. 165

beloved of God, H. 94

downward course of, H. 166


1616


Israel, progenitor of; or, the history of
Abraham, H. 153
story of, atype of Church’s history, H. 291
the Hope of, H. 597
Italy, Paul’s voyage to, H. 559


JAIL, singing in, H. 352; I. 353
Jailor at Philippi, story of the, H. 353, 354
James and the elders at Jerusalem, with ; or,
mistaken counsels, H. 452
the brother of John, death of, H. 266, 267,
274
Jameses, three, of Scripture, H. 269
Jerusalem, bound for; or, sailing past
Ephesus, H. 431
Church in; or, ten days before Pentecost,
H. 31 ;


which was in, H. 179
concordat, the, N. 325
epistle, the: the Church’s charter of
liberty, H. 326
excitement in; or, what the multitude
thought of the phenomenon, H. 55
hastening to, H. 433
letter from the Church at, H. 323
Paul and Barnabas on the way to, H. 319
Paul’s adoption of a Gentile mission ; or,
his interview with Christ in, H. 471
desire to be in, at Pentecost, H. 432
third visit to, H. 320
Peter’s report to Church at, H. 248
Saul’s first visit to: his discipleship con-
firmed, H. 217
the council at, H. 320
to Rome, from, H. 593 =
with James and the elders at; or, mistaken
counsels, H. 452
Jesus and Diana, H. 419
and Paul, H. 411
before the Sanhedrim, H. 484
and the resurrection, H. 370
ascension of, H. 29
Christ, Church of, H. 223
did, actually rise from the dead ? H. 19
Leadership of, H. 243
marks of a true minister of, H. 437
power of love to, H. 447
See also Christ
companionship with, H. 105
from Joshua to, H. 166
I know, and Paul I know ; but whoare ye?
H. 411
Lord, Name of the, H. 411, 412
Name of, H. 17
of Nazareth, did, really work miracles?
N. 63
history of, H. 244
one, another King, H. end I. 363
—dead or alive? H. 524
personal history of, H. 39
Saviour, H. 291
Spirit of, H. 339
sufferings of, H. 198
unrecorded words of, N. 441
what the Name of, is toa preacher, H. 218
whom Paul preacheth, H, 411


n INDEX.





Jewish chiefs, interview with, H. 593
leaders and the apostles, H. 107
opposition of, H. 99
orthodoxy, a vindication of his; or, Paul’s
appeal to his past life, H. 533
rulers, criminality of, H. 291
Jews and Gentiles, H. 301
and the temple of Diana, N. 420
continued opposition from, H. 304
from Asia, certain, H. 505
in Rome, N. 596
John and Christ, two masters, H. 407
and Peter, H. 80
Mark, history of, H. 275
Mark’s departure, H. 290
John’s disciples, re-baptism of some of, H.
404 .
Joppa, among disciples at, H. 223, 225
Cornelius’s messengers at, H. 235
embassy from Cesarea to, H. 236
Joseph a type of Christ; or, the last of the
patriarchs, H. 157
Joseph’s brethren, H. 160
Joses surnamed Barnabas, H. 116
Joshua to Jesus, from, H. 166
Journey, first missionary, commencement of,
nooo
second missionary, commencement of, H.
328, 398
third missionary, commencement of, H,
398
Paul’s companions on, N. 335
fortunate, H. 240
Journeymen, Christian,
H. 385
Joy, conversion of heathen a source of, to the
Church of Christ, H. 319
filled with, H. 302
four causes of, in a Christian Church,
H. 126
in Samaria, H. 182
Joyful traveller on his way home, H. 198
Judaising teachers at Antioch, H. 317
Judaism and heathenism, two apologies of
Christianity towards: Stephen and
Paul, H, 380
Judas, concerning, H. 38
miracle in house of, H. 470
miserable end of; or, the wages of sin,
H., 39
Judges and kings, H. 291
Judgment, God’s, on whited walls, H. 484
great day of, H. 380
on Elymas and its effects, H. 287
Judgments, mistaken, H. 501
Judgment-seat, Czesar’s and Christ’s: a con-
trast, H. 520
Jupiter, temple of, at Lystra, N. 310
Justification, Paul’s doctrine of, H. 298
Justus and Matthias, H. 39


on their travels,


KEEPING the feast, H. 398

Kindness, beauty and profit of, H. 589
no common, H. 585

King, another, one Jesus, H. and I. 363
God alone, H. 274


SEE cry


King, world’s treason against its, H. 110
Kings and judges, H. 291
Kingdom, entering the, H. 313
of God, H. 23
progress of, H. 274
way into the, H. 313
Kingdoms of darkness and light in conflict,
H. 185
Knowledge, Christian, growth in, H. 400


LADDER of Salvation, the; or, Scala Salutis,
H. 72
Lame man, healing of, H. 78, 82
God glorified by people for, H. 107
secret of miracle explained, H. 83
Land, escaping safe to ; or, running ashore,
H, 576
Last appeal, Paul’s, to his countrymen, H.
600
of the patriarchs; or, Joseph a type of
Christ, H. 157
words of Paul,.H. 601
Lawyer, heathen, vapid eloquence of a, H,
498
Leadership of Jesus Christ, H. 243
Lessons, four valuable, H. 330
of the ascension of Christ, H, 28
Let go in peace, H. 328
those men go! H. 356
Letter from the Church at Jerusalem, H.
323
Liberty of conscience, H. 106
the Church’s charter of: the Jerusalem
epistle, H. 326
Life, drifting, and its opposite, N. 565
meetings on the highway of, H. 199
model of, H. 295
Prince of, H. 88
repentance unto, H. 253
storms of, H, 562
voyage of, H. 566, 578
Light and darkness, kingdoms of, in conflict,
H, 185
from early Christian practice, H. 428
glory of that, H. 470
of nature, H. 311
Lights, great, which shone around Paul,
H. 46
Loosened bands and opened doors, H. 353
Lord and Paul and Barnabas, the, H. 330
ascending, and His witnesses, H. 34
brethren of our, H. 34
cleaving to the, H. 259
day of the, H. 59
laughed at Paul’s enemies, how the, H.
491
reigns, the, H. 517
remembering words of the, H. 252
right ways of the, perverting, H. 2:6
the ascended, command of, H. 23
upon the right hand, H. 64
way of the, H. 400
what shall I do? H. 469
will of the, be done! H. 451
Love of money as exemplified in Ananias
and Sapphira, H. 122


617


INDEX.





Love of money as exemplified in Felix, H. 512
to Jesus Christ, power of, H. 447
Luke and Paul, N. 342
the beloved physician, N. 342
Luke’s Gospel and Acts, connection between :
the two treatises, H. 15
Luther, Martin—great modern counterpart
of Paul, N. 450
Lycaonia, Grecian fables on the subject of,
I. 309
Paul and Silas in, H. 333
Lydda, miracle at, H. 222
Lydia, conversion of, H. 344, 346, 347
Lydia’s heart opened, H. 346
house, the brethren in, H. 356
Lysias’ letter to Felix, H. 494
Lystra cripple, the, H. 309
Paul and Barnabas at, H. 307
temple of Jupiter at, N. 310


MACEDONIA, call to, H. 340
man of, vision of the, H. 336
mission of Timothy and Erastus into, H.
and I. 44
Madman, which is the? H. 550
Magistrate, civil, Gallio the, H. 395
power of the, H. 130
Magnifying Name of the Lord Jesus, H. 411,
412


Maid named Rhoda, a, H. 268
Majesty and greatness of God, H. 168
Majority, vote of the, H. 562
Malta, first man in: sermon on true great-
ness, H. 589
people of: expressive representation of
heathen world, H. 589
three months in, H. 583, 587
Maltese, mistakes of the, H. 589
Man and God, obedience to, H. 130
and man, no difference between, H. 323
behold this! H. 528
dignity of, H. 379
I myself also am a, H. 239
not for, to know times and seasons, H. 26
of Macedonia, vision of the, H. 336
Man’s partnership with Satan in his sins,
H. 121
reception of great things of God, H. 57
treatment of gospel, H. 380
Marks of a true minister of Jesus Christ,
H. 437
of true conversion, H. 218
Marriage state, fearful perversion of the ; or,
Ananias or Sapphira, H. 121
Marriages, mixed, H. 335
Mars’ Hill, great sermon on, N. 359; H. 377
Martyr, first Christian, H. 172, 174
Stephen, Thy, H. 473
Martyrdom of Stephen, H. 168
sleeping on eve of, I. 267
Marvellous sight, a, H. 301
Marvels, four, H. 198
three, H. 52
Mary’s house, Church in, H. 268
Masters, two, John and Christ, H. 407
Matthias and Justus, H. 39


618


Matthias, election of:
apostleship, H. 36
Meals, grace before, H. 575
Mediatorial throne, H. 64
Meeting, an all-day, H. 601
with new friends: Corinth, H. 383
with Timothy, H. 333
Meetings on the highway of life, H. 199
Memorable moments, H. 541
Men, devout, H. 56
oppose themselves to
reasons why, H. 418
or of God, of; or, the origin of Chris-
tianity, H. 134
who make reckless charges, H. 505
whom the world sometimes seeks to
murder, H. 547
Messengers, home-coming of the, H. 275
Messianic salvation, H. 59
Microcosmus, a: Athens, H. 370
Midnight escapes, Paul’s, H. 495
on the sea, H. 574
ride to Czsarea, H. 492
vision, Paul’s, at Corinth, H. 390
Visitor, Paul’s, H. 478, 488
Miletus, a balt at, H. 433
Minister and his congregation, a, H. 239
Christian, qualifications and work of, H.
470
of Jesus Christ, marks of a true, H. 437
or missionary, ideal, H. 214
true, indispensable requirements of,
H. 281
true, qualifications, work, and reward of,
H. 219
Minister’s tears, H. 437
Ministers, Christian, dignity and duty of,
H. 348
words of warning for, H. 439
how, should preach, H. 409
Ministerial despondency, thoughts for the
night of, H. 390
ordination, true, H. 541
responsibility, thoughts about, H. 388
success, secret of, H. 391
Ministering spirits, H. 129
Ministry, Christ’s earthly, H, 16
Christian, H. 115
of Stephen, H. 142
office of the, H. 438
Miracle at Lydda, H. 222
at temple gate, H. 82
first apostolic, H. 81
in house of Judas, H. 470
near Damascus, H. 206, 210
of healing, H. 82
ee did Jesus of Nazareth really work?
. 63
Miraculous draught of souls, H. 72
Mirror for the heathen mission, H. 234
Misconceptions, world’s, about Christianity,
H. 523
Misdirected indignation, H. 129
Miserable end of Judas; or, the wages of
sin, H. 39
Mission at Philippi, opening of the, H. 343


completing © the


Christianity,


2 INDEX.


_—_—_— lh hl cO ll


Mission of Ananias, H. 212
of Christ, H. 91
of Peter and John to Samaria, H. 185
of Timothy and Erastus into Macedonia,
H. and I. 414
Philip’s, to Samaria, H. 182
Missions, mistaken, H. 466
Missionary, best travelling attendance of, on
his departure, H. 282
journey, first, commencement of, H. 282
second, commencement of, H. 328
Paul’s companions on, N. 335
third, commencement of, H. 398
meeting, first recorded, H. 313
or minister, ideal, H. 214
true, indispensable requirements of,
H. 281
ship, first, H. 285
Missionary’s life, routine of a, H. 426
return, foreign, H. 455
Missionaries, first, designation and despatch
of Hf. 279
Mistaken counsels, H. 452
judgments, H. 501
missions, H. 466
Paul’s, thoughts, H. 540
thoughts, Paul’s, H. 540
worship, H. 238
Mistakes and doctrines, theological, H. 575
of Simon Magus, H. 190
of the Maltese, H. 589
Mixed experiences, H. 360
marriages, H. 335
Model Christians, H. 74
congregation, picture of a, H. 240
defence, H. 519
for Christian preacher, H. 85
house, H. 231
of life, H. 295
preacher: Apollos, H. 400
witness, Paul a, of gospel truth, H. 547
Modern counterpart of Paul, great—Martin
Luther, N. 450
men, ancient types of, H. 418, 420
unchristian communism and primitive
Christian socialism compared and con-
trasted, H. 73
Momentous beginning, H. 17
Moments, memorable, H. 541
Money, H. 189
love of, as exemplified in Ananias and
Sapphira, H. 122
in Felix, H. 512
Moral and spiritual history of a soul,
H. 353
More blessed to give than to receive, H. 441
Moses and Christ, H. 90
biography of, in three chapters; or, the
founder of the nation, H. 160
Prophet like unto, H. 90
story of, H. 163
Mothers, pious, of the Bible, H. 335
Motto, preacher’s, H. 106
Much-employed servant of God, quiet hours
of a, H. 432
Multitudes, stirring up the, H. 367


Murder, men whom the world sometimes
seeks to, H. 547
Murmuring in the primitive Church, H. 139
“Must,” the Divine, H. 569
Mystery of Pentecost explained ; or, the first
Christian apology, H. 57
traced up to Christ, H. 60


NAME, Christ’s, H. 245
none other, H. 102
of Christ, hazarding one’s life for, H. 326
of Jesus, H. 17
what the, is to a preacher, H. 218
of the Lord Jesus, H. 411, 412
suffering shame for the, H. 135
Names of Christ, H. 91
Narrow escape from scourging, Paul’s, H, 474
Nations, cry of the, H. 340
increase of, H. 163
Natural heart, the, H. 191
selection in spiritual world, H, 39
Nature, light of, H. 311
Nazarenes, sect of, H. 500
Nazareth, did Jesus of, really work miracles ?
N. 63
Nazarites, Paul among the, H. 458
Near and to far off, peace to, H. 243
Nearing the breakers: a night ofanxiety,H.572
Necessity of death and resurrection of Christ,
H. 362
of the ascension of Christ, H. 29
true preacher’s, H. 438
New and old, teaching of Christianity at
once, H. 371
doctrines of Christianity, H. 371
governor, succession of a, H. 515
plans, contemplating, H. 413
sense of sin, the Spirit and the, H. 67
Testament, number three in the, H. 233
News, good, from a far country ; or, corn in
Egypt, H. 159
Night of anxiety, a: nearing the breakers,
H. 572
service at Troas, H. 430
songs in the, H. 353
No delay ! H. 523
salvation out of Christ, H. 102
small stir about that way, H. 418
Nobility of mind, true, H. 365
Noble Berceans, H. 365
spirit, elements of truly, N. 365
None other name, H. 102
Novelty, idolatry of, N. 372


OBEDIENCE to God and man, H. 130
Objections against Christianity, popular,
H. 598
Objective reality, was Paul’s vision of
Christ a? N. 545
Offspring, God’s, H. 379 ,
Old and new, teaching of Christianity at
once, H. 371
disciple, an, H, 455
plot, revival and defeat of an, H. 515
story, Paul’s rehearsal of an; or, the secret
of his conversion explained, H. 537


619


‘ INDEX.





Old Testament prophets, H. 291
Testament Scripture, H. 38
typical persons, four, H. 167
views of God, H. 323
Olden time, court-scene in the, H. 519
One Jesus—dead or alive? H, 524
Only salvation, the, H. 102
Opened doors and loosened bands, H. 353
heavens, H. 171
Opening of the mission at Philippi, H. 343
Opponents of Stephen, H. 145
Opposition, continued, from Jews, H. 304
of Jewish leaders, H, 99
to foreign missions, H, 475
Oration, effect of Paul’s, on his audience,


H. 474
lofty, of a Christian apostle: Paul’s
answer, H. 501


the Areopagus, N. 359; H. 377
Orator, Christian, qualities requisite for a,
H, 464


Ordained to eternal life, H. 301

Ordination, true ministerial, H. 541

Origin of Christianity, the ; or, of men or of
God, H. 134


PAGAN persecution, first, H. 349

Page from the Church’s life; or, the calm
before a storm, H. 125

Palmy days of the primitive Church, H.
126


Partnership, man’s, with Satan in his sins,
H. 121


Passing through Perga, N. 290
Passion, alive after His, H. 19
Past and present, H. 380
Pastoral office—its true function, H. 313
visitation, H. 330
Pastor’s duty towards his flock, H. 440
farewell, H. 440
Pastors, three things of which Christian,
should take heed, H. 440
Patient hearing, H. 535
Patriarchs, last of the; or, Joseph a type of
Christ, H. 157
the twelve, H. 156
Paul a model witness of gospel truth, H. 547
alone on his way to Assos, H. 432
among the Nazarites, H. 458
and Ananias, H. 484
and Barnabas and the Lord, H. 330
at Lystra, H. 307
homeward journey of, H. 311
in Iconium, H. 304
on the way to Jerusalem, H, 319
quarrel between, H. 330
separation of, H. 328
and his fellow-voyagers H. 579
and Jesus, H. 411
before the Sanhedrim, H. 484
and Luke, N. 342
and Silas among the Berceans, H, 364
at Thessalonica, H. 360
imprisonment of, H. 349
in Lycaonia, H. 333
in Philippi, H. 341


620





Paul and Stephen: two apologies of Christi-


anity towards Judaism and to-
wards heathenism, H. 380

at Athens, H. 367, 377

at Corinth ; or, meeting with new friends,


H. 383

before Felix, H. 510

before Festus—an appeal to the emperor,
H


before Gallio, H. 392

before the gates of Rome, H. 593

Christ’s question to, H. 211

Festus’s conversation with Agrippa about,
H. 621

foes and friends of, H. 490

great lights which shone around, H. 468

modern counterpart of — Martin

Luther, N. 450

heroism of, H. 451

in Aquila’s workshop, H. 385

in the storm, H. 576

in the temple at Jerusalem, H. 473

on Areopagus; or, preaching to philo-
sophers, H. 374 ; N. 359

preacher such as, H. 511

preacheth, Jesus whom, H. 411

preaching in Rome, H. 603

preservation of, H. 583

stoning of, H. 311

the persecutor, H. 466

the prisoner, H. 491

theology of, as set forth in the Acts, H.
and N. 603

visit Corinth, how often did? H. 425

was, a member of the Sanhedrim? H. 540 -

youth of, promising but disappointing,
H. 465


See also Saul
Paul’s address to the elders at Miletus, H. 436
adoption of a Gentile mission; or, his
interview with Christ in Jeru-
salem, H. 471
answer; or, the lofty oration of a
Christian apostle, H. 501
appeal to Cesar, H. 520
te his past life; or, a vindication of
his Jewish orthodoxy, H. 533, 536
arrival in Rome, H. 589
case, H. 523
chain, H. 597
companions on the second missionary
journey, N. 335
conversion, H. 206, 209, 211, 212, 215, 218
departure from Antioch: commencement
of third missionary journey, H. 398
desire to be in Jerusalem at Pentecost,
H. 432
defence, H, 535
doctrine of justification, H. 298
doubtful strategy, H. 480
enemies, how the Lord laughed at, H. 491
escape from Damascus, H. 217
first apology, H. 472
interview with Felix, H. 495
friends, H. 559
or. the sacred circle of seven. H. 426


+ INDEX.





aul’s imprisonment at Czsarea, H. 506

increase in strength, H. 216

interview with Felix and Drusilla, H. 507,
512

girdle, lessons from, H. 451

God, H. 569

and Paul's religion, H. 504

happy stroke; or, divide and conquer,
N. 485

heroism in the storm, H. 570

joy, secret of, in addressing Agrippa,
H. 535


last days in Ephesus, H. 413
life endangered, H, 488
midnight escapes, H. 495
vision at Corinth, H. 390
Visitor, H. 487, 488
mistaken thoughts, H. 540
oration, effect of, on his audience, H. 474
personal religion, H. 567
prayer upon the ship’s deck, H. 575
preaching at Corinth, H. 392
rehearsal of an old story; or, the secret
of his conversion explained, H. 537
return to Antioch: close of second
missionary journey, H. 395
to Ephesus, H. 404
sacrifices in the cause of Christ, N. 450
safety ensured, H. 492
sermon in the synagogue at Antioch,
H, 289


subsequert career as a Christian; or, how
he turned to the Gentile mission,
H. 543
supposed illness at Perga, N. 290
survey of his past career; or, what he was
and did before his conversion, H.
463, 466, 472
third visit to Jerusalem, H. 320
two distinguished listeners—Felix and
Agrippa, H. 548, 550
vision of Christ an objective reality, was?
N. 545
visit to Thessalonica, H. 363
voyage to Italy, H. 559
Peace, let go in, H. 328
preaching, H, 243
publishing good tidings of, H. 243
to far off and to near, H. 243
Pence, Peter’s ; or, the wealth of the apostles,
H. 80
Pentecost, Day of, H. 76
Paul's desire to be in Jerusalem at,
* H, 432
phenomena at, H. 52
ten days before ; or, the Church in Jeru-
salem, H. 31
Fentecostal blessing, H. 51
Church; or, the daily life of primitive
believers, H. 72
mystery explained ; or, the first Christian
apology, H. 57
traced up to Christ, H. 60
power, H. 27
wonder, H. 51
People, believing, H. 74


Perga, incident at: John Mark’s departure,
2


passing through, N. 290
Paul’s supposed illness at, N. 290
Perplexing things about Christianity to
worldly men, H. 525
Persecution, fires of, rekindled, H. 178
first, effect of the; or, the apostles and
the first Christians, H, 113
pagan, H. 349
taste of; or, the apostles in gaol


H. 97
of the Church by Agrippa, H. 263, 265
unsuccessful, a case of, H. 392
Persecutor, Church’s, punished, H. 272, 274
Paul the, H. 466
turned preacher, H. 215, 219, 221
Personal history of Jesus, H. 39
religion, Paul’s, H. 567
ne and Divinity of Holy Spirit,
H. 50


Persons, ‘God no respecter of, H. 242, 243
Perversion, fearful, of the marriage state;
or, Ananias and Sapphira, H. 121
Perverting right ways of the Lord, H. 286
Peter and Dorcas, H. 226
and Herod, H. 270
and John, H. 80
mission of, to Samaria, H. 185
or, the first apostolic delegates, H. 186
the speech of, H. 91
theology of, H. 250
Peter’s arrival at Ceesarea, H. 237
deliverance, H. 269
pence ; or, the wealth of the apostles,


report to Church at Jerusalem, H. 248
sermon : 1. First Christian apology ; or the


Pentecostal mystery explained,
H. 57

2. Mystery of Pentecost traced up to
Christ, H. 60


effects of, N. 74
four remarkable things in, H. 65
second sermon (in Solomon’s Porch): 1.
The secret of the miracle explained,
H, 83
2. The people comforted and coun-
selled, H. 85
sermon in Cornelius’s house, H. 241
shadow, H, 126
threefold testimony concerning Christ,
Hil


trance ; or, the apostolic agent prepared
H. 231


vision on the housetop, H. 234
lessons from, H, 234
Pharaohs mentioned in Scripture, H. 159,
Phases of conscience, three, H. 512
Phenomenon, visible, was Christ’s ascension,
a? H. 30
what the multitude thought of the; or,
excitement in Jerusalem, H. 55
Phenomena at Pentecost, H. 52
Philip and the Ethiopian eunuch, H. 198, 199,
200, 201


621


INDEX.





Philip at Czesarea, with, H. 448, 449
in Samaria; or, the gospel spreading, H.
181, 182
the deacon, H. 199
Philippi, Church at, H. 356
jailor at, story of the, H. 353, 354
Paul and Silas in, H. 341
sabbath in, H. 344
Philosophers, Athenian, and their relation to
Christianity, H. 370
preaching to; or, Paul on Areopagus, H.
374, 377
Physician, Luke the beloved, N. 342
Piety of Barnabas, H. 260
or presumption—which ? H, 414
Pious mothers of the Bible, H. 335
Pisidian Antioch, sabbath day in, H. 287
second sabbath day in, H. 299
Plot, a defeated, H. 491
old, revival and defeat of an, H. 515
Poor, Church’s care of the ; or, serving tables,
H. 140


Popular objections against Christianity, H.
598


tumult in Ephesus, H. 415, 419; N. 403
Porch, Solomon’s; or, Peter’s second sermon :
1. The secret of the miracle explained,
H. 83
2. The people comforted and coun-
selled, H. 85
Portion of God’s people, H. 158
Poverty and wealth, Church’s, H. 80
Power and growth of Word of God, H 412
for service, H, 27
of love to Jesus Christ, H. 447
of the civil magistrate, H. 130
of the gospel, risen Christ and the, H. 115
Pentecostal, H. 27
Prayer addressed to Christ, H. 39
congregation at, H. 110
hour of, H. 80
intercessory, H. 190
Paul’s, upon the ship’s deck, H. 575
Prayers of the Church, H, 267
Prayer-meeting, an ancient, H. 343
Praying always, H. 231
and preaching, H. 140
Preach, how ministers should, H. 409
Preacher, a model: Apollos, H. 400
and his gospel, H. 307
Christian, model for, H. 85
good, characteristics of, H. 102
persecutor turned, H, 215, 219, 221
such as Paul, H. 511
what the Name of Jesus is to a, H. 218
Preacher’s commission, H. 129
motto, H. 106
Preachers and their hearers, some thoughts
about, H. 475
of gospel city-troublers H, 352
precepts for, H. 437
Preaching and praying, H. 140
boldness in, H. 111
expository, H. 252
in Rome, Paul, H, 603
peace, H. 243


62°


Preaching to philosophers ; or, Paul on Areo-
pagus, H. 374, 377; N. 359
whole day’s, H. 600
world’s veto upon, H. 129
Precepts for preachers, H. 437
Preparing for the worst, H. 562
Presence, God’s, with His people, H. 158
Present and past, H. 380
Preservation of Paul, H. 583
Presumption or piety —which ? H, 414
Prey, wolf and his, H. 180
Primitive believers, daily life of;
Pentecostal Church, H. 72
Christian socialism and modern unchris-
tian communism compared and
contrasted, H. 73
Church, murmuring in the, H. 139
palmy days of the, H. 126
Prince of life, H. 88
Priscilla and Aquila, H. 385
Prison, saints in, I. 487
Prisoner, a chained, on his defence, H. 535
Paul the, H. 491
Profit and beauty of kindness, H. 589
Progress of gospel in apostolic times, H. 274
of kingdom of God, H. 274
of the Church, H. 142
Promise made to the fathers, H, 536
of the gospel, H. 71
time of the, H. 162
Promises, God’s, to His people, H. 155
Promising situation changed, the: Pisidian
Antioch, H. 299
Prophecy, a daring, H. 575
great, and its fulfilment, H. 156
Prophesy, virgins which did, H, 449
Prophet like unto Moses, H. 90
world’s true, H. 90
Prophets and sons of the prophets, H. 92
believest thou the? H. 551
Christ in the, H. 90
Old Testament, H. 291
voices of the, H. 292
Prosperous Church, H. 74
Providence and grace, thoughts concerning,
H. 578
hand of, H. 490
Publius’s father, healing of, H. 587
Puteoli, seven days at, H. 592
Pythoness, cure of a, H. 348


or, the


QUALIFICATIONS and work of Christian
minister, H. 470
Qualities requisite for a Christian orator,
. 464


Quarrel between Barnabas and Paul, H. 330
Quarrels of good men, H. 330
Questionable question, H. 26
Questions, three, about the Bible, H. 197
Quiet days, H. 592
hours of a much-employed servant of
God, H. 482


RAISING of Dorcas, H. 223
the dead—credible or incredible? H. 536


+ INDEX,


Reason, doctrine of future judgment a doc-
trine of, N. 380

Re-baptism of some of John’s disciples,
H. 404


Receive, more blessed to give than to, H. 441

Receiving the Holy Ghost, H. 187

Reception, man’s, of great things of God,
H. 57


of a doubtful convert, H. 182
of new truth, on the, H. 243
Reckless charges, men who make, H, 505
Reformed city, H. 184
Refreshing, times of, H. 88
Region of Galatia, H. 337
Regions beyond : vision of the man of Mace-
donia, H. 336
Rejected Corner-stone, H. 101
Religion and God, Paul’s, H. 504.
Paul’s personal, H. 567
spirit of intolerance in, H. 466
true, H, 465
Religious life, vows in the, H. 398
service, strange, H. 352
Remarkable things, four, in Peter’s sermon,
. 65
year, H. 260
Remembering word of the Lord, H, 252
Repentance of sin, H. 379
unto life, H. 253
works worthy of, H. 547
Representations, world’s, of followers of
Christ, H. 455
Requirements, indispensable, of true minis-
ter or missionary, H, 281
Resignation, Christian, H. 451
Respecter of persons, God no, H. 242, 243
Responsibility, ministerial, thoughts about,
H. 388
Restoration, times of, H. 88
Resurrection, death and, of Christ a neces-
sity, H. 362
doctrine of a, H. 504
Jesus and the, H. 370
of Christ, H. 64
f the dead, Hope of Israel and the,
H. 484
Retrospect, aged Christian’s, of his past
career, H. 536
Rhoda, a maid named, H. 268
Right hands, two, H. 63, 64
ways of the Lord, perverting, H. 286
Righteous One, H. 470
Risen Christ and the power of the gospel,
H. 115
appearances of the, H. 21
eating and drinking with the, H. 245
fellowship with the, H. 18
Rising of a bright particular star, H. 142
Rome, after I have been there I must also
see, N. 413
and so we went towards, H. 593
from Jerusalem to, H. 593
Jews in, N. 596
Paul before the gates of, H. 593
preaching in, H. 603
Paul’s arrival in, H. 589


Roman and heavenly citizenship, H. 476
and uncondemned, is it lawful to scourge

a man who is a? H. 475

Romans, not the custom of the, H. 523

Room, upper, N. 33

Routine of a missionary’s life, H. 426

Rulers, Jewish, criminality of, H. 291

Running ashore; or, escaping safe to land,
H. 576


SABBATH DAY in Pisidian Antioch, H. 287
second ditto, H. 299
days and week-days; or, work and wor-
ship, H. 385
in Philippi, H. 344
Sacred circle of seven ;
H. 426
Sacrifices, mee in the cause of Christ,
N


or, Paul’s friends,


4

Sadducee, creed of the, H, 486

Safety, Paul’s, ensured, H. 492

Sailing past Ephesus; or, bound for Jerusa’
lem, H. 431

Sailors, Christian, good cheer for, H. 566

Saints, confirmation of the, H. 185

in prison, I. 487

Salutations, Christian, H. 523

Salutis, Scala; or, the Ladder of Salvation,
H. 72


Salvation in Christ alone, H. 101
Messianic, H. 59
no, without circumcision, H. 319
the Ladder of ; or, Scala Salutis, H. 72
this, H. 291, 301, 602
way of, H. 353
words of, H. 252
Samaria, awakening in, H. 184
inhabitants of, H. 182
joy in, H. 182
Philip in; or, the gospel spreading, H. 181
Philip’s mission to, H. 182
mission of Peter and John to, H. 185
Sanhedrim and the college of apostles, H. 130
apostles before ; or, sheep among wolves,
a


Jesus and Paul before the, H. 484
was Paul a member of the? N. 540
Sapphira, Ananias and, love of money as
exemplified in, H. 122
or, fearful perversion of the mar-
riage state, H. 121
sevenfold union of, H, 122
sin of, H. 12%, 124
story of; or, hypocrisy unveiled, H.
119, 124
Satan and the Holy Ghost, H. 122
man’s partnership with, in his sins,
.121


Satan’s devices, H. 348
Saul and Barnabas in Cyprus, H. 282
and Paul, H. 180
and Stephen, H. 180
arose from the earth, N. 212
at Damascus, H, 215
baptism of, H. 212
Christ’s question to, H. 468


623


INDEX.





Saul, conversion of, H. 206, 209, 211, 212,
215, 218
preaching Christ, H. 219, 221
Sergius, Hlymas; or, three sorts of wis-
dom, H, 285, 286
young man named, H. 171
See also Paul
Saul’s first visit to Jerusalem: his disciple-
ship confirmed, H. 217
Saving faith is faith in Christ, N, 542
Saviour Jesus, H. 291
Scala Salutis ; or, the Ladder of Salvation,
72


Scene in the council-chamber, H. 480

Sceva’s sons, story of, H, 409

Schism and separation, H. 409

School of suffering, four classes in the,
H. 135


Scourging, Paul’s narrow escape from, H. 474
Scriptural confirmation, H. 313
Scripture, Old Testament, H. 38
Pharaohs mentioned in, H. 159
three Jameses of, H. 269
Scriptures, searching the, H. 365
Sea, midnight on the, !{, 574
Searching the Scripturos, H. 365 :
Seasons and times, not for man to know,
. 26
convenient, H. 512
Second coming of Christ, H. 30
missionary journey commenced, H. 328
Paul’s companions on the, N. 335
psalm, witness of the, to Christ, H. 292
visit to Europe, Paul’s, H. 424
Secret of ministerial success, H. 391
of Paul’s joy in addressing Agrippa, H. 535
Sect of Nazarenes, H. 500
Seekers after God, words to, H. 198
Seeking after God, H. 379
Selection, natural, in spiritual world, H. 39
Sense of sin, the new, the Spirit and, H. 67
Separation and schism, H. 409
of Barnabas and Paul, H. 328
Sergius Paulus, a prudent man, H. 286
Saul, Elymas; or, three sorts of wisdom,
H. 285, 286
Sermon for philosophers, H. 377
great, on Mars’ Hill, N. 359 ; H. 377
on foreordination, H. 301
on forgiveness, H. 298
on the Holy Ghost, H. 50
on wealth, H. 116
Paul's, in synagogue at Antioch, H. 287
Servant of God, best advocates of, before


judgment-seat of unrighteous
world, H. 488

quiet hours of a much-employed,
H. 432


Service, Christian, in strange place, H. 527
three differing types of, H. 269
power for, H. 27
strange religious, H. 352
Serving tables; or, the Church’s care of the
poor, H. 140
Setting as from Cesarea to Fair Haveng,
H. 556


624





Seven chosen, the, H. 141
days at Puteoli, H, 592
at Tyre, H. 445; N. 447
sacred circle of; or, Paul’s friends, H.
426
Sevenfold union of Ananias and Sapphira,
H. 122


Shadow, Peter’s, H. 126
Shame for the Name, suffering, H. 135
Sheep among wolves; or, apostles before
Sanhedrim, H. 99
Ship, first missionary, H. 285
Ship’s company, great, H. 577
deck, Paul’s prayer upon the, H. 575
Sight, a marvellous, H. 301
Silas and Paul among the Berceans, H. 364
at Thessalonica, H. 360
imprisonment of, H. 349
in Lycaonia, H. 333
in Philippi, H. 341
and Timothy in Bercea, N. 367
Simon Magus, accession of, H. 182, 185
and Elymas Bar-jesus: two sorcerers,
H. 286
mistakes of, H. 190
Simon the apostle and Simon the tanner,
H. 231


7


Simons, the two; or, detection of a hypocrite,
H. 187


Sin, conviction of, H. 67
of Ananias and Sapphira, H. 123
repentance of, H. 379
state of, a state of impotence, H. 82
the blotting out of, H. 87
the Spirit and the new sense of, H. 67
wages of; or, the miserable end of Judas,

H. 39


washing away of, H. 471
Sins, man’s partnership with Satan in his,
Hei2k


of ignorance, H. 87, 484.
Singing in jail, H. 352; I. 353
Sinner, history of a called, H. 155
Sirs, why do ye these things? H. 310
Situation, the promising, changed: Pisidian
Antioch, H, 299
Slave-girl and the apostle, H. 348
Sleep of Stephen, H. 172
Sleeping in church, on, H. 430
on eve of martyrdom, I. 267
Soberness and truth, words of, H. 550
Socialism, Christian, a sermon on: all things
common, H, 114
Christianity and, H. 115
primitive Christian, and modern un-
christian communism compared and
contrasted, H. 73
Soldier’s counsel, H. 577
Solomon’s Porch ; or, Peter’s second sermon:
1. pe secret of the miracle explained,
83


2.The people comforted and coun-
selled, H. 85
Somebodies, the world’s, N. 133
Songs in the night, H. 353


1 Sons of the prophets, prophets and, H. 92





Sorcerers, two: Simon Magus and Elymas
Bar-jesus, H. 286
Sosthenes and Gallio, H. 395
Soui, experience of a, H. 156
moral and spiritual history of a, H. 353
Soul’s questions and Christ’s answers, H.


211
Souls, awakened, cry of, H. 67
miraculous draught of, H, 72
subverting, H. 326
two, struggling against truth, H, 548
Soul-miuistry, H. 470
Speak for himself, permitted to, H. 535
Speaking evil of the way, H. 408
Speeck of Peter, the, H. 91
uf Stephen, H. 152
historical credibility of, N. 152
Spirit, bound in the, H. 438
descending, H. 52
dispensation of the, H. 58
noble, elements of truly, N. 365
of intolerance in religion, H. 466
of Jesus, H. 339
the, and the new sense of sin, H. 67
Spirit’s utterances, how the world receives
the, H. 56
Spirits, ministering, H. 129
Spiritual and moral history of a soul, H. 353
influence, drunkenness and, H. 58
world, natural selection in, H. 39
Spoken against, everywhere, H. 597, 598
Spots in the sun, H. 485
Star, rising of a bright particular, H. 142
State dignitaries, talked about by, H. 521
of sin a state of impotence, H, 82
Bieadfastness, Christian, H. 73
Stephen and Paul, two apologies of Chris-
tianity towards Judaism and towards
heathenism, H. 380
and Saul, H. 180
apology of; or, a vindication of Chris-
tianity, H. 150
biography of, H. 145
burial of, H. 180
martyrdom of, H. 168
ministry of, H. 142
opponents of, H. 145
sleep of, H. 172
speech of, H. 152
the deacon, H. 145
Thy martyr, H. 473
Stephen’s illuminated face, N. 145
prayer for himself, H. 172
for his enemies, H. 172
three crowns, H. 172
Stern, anchored from the, H. 575
Stirring up the multitudes, H. 367
Stocks, fast in the, H. 352
Stone, the builders and the, H. 101
Stones, changed, H. 171
Stoning of Paul, H. 311
Storm, caught in a; or, from Fair Havens to
Crete, H. 560
confession in the midst of, N. 567
_ Paul in the, H. 576
Paul’s %eroism in the, H. 570


aA


INDEX.





Storm, the bursting of the; or, Annas upon
the move, H. 127
the calm before a; or, a page from the
Church’s life, H. 125
Storms of life, H. 562
Strange gods, H. 370
place, Christian service in, H. 527
religious service, H. 352
sight, a, H. 214
Strategy, Paul’s doubtful, H. 480
Strength of a Church, the, H. 336
Paul’s increase in, H. 216
Strife, Church’s first, allayed ; or, the institu-
tion of the diaconate, H. 137
Strong, duty of the, towards the weak, H.
441


Struggle, the great, H. 271
Substance of the faith, H. 437
Subverting souls, H. 326
Success, ministerial, secret of, H. 391
Sudden deaths, H. 122
Suffering, four classesin the school of, H. 135
servants, Christ’s comfort for, H. 488
Sufferings of Jesus, H. 198
of Christ, H. 87
Sun, spots in the, H. 485
Superstition, H. 377
and faith: incident of the viper, H. 586
Supposed, as I, H. 523
Synagogue at Antioch, Paul’s sermon in,
H. 287
Syria, Antioch in, back to, H. 311


TABERNACLE of testimony in wilderness,
H. 165


Tables, serving ; or, the Church’s care of the
poor, H. 140
Take heed to yourselves: words of warning
for Christian ministers, H. 439
Taken up ; or, views of the Ascension, H. 29
Tanner, Simon the, and Simon the apostle,
H. 231
Teacher, incomparable, H. 16
Tears, minister’s, H. 437
Temper, docility of, in relation to truth,
H. 366
Temple, arrested in the; or, long looked for
come at last, H. 456
Beautiful Gate of, H. 78, 80
gate, miracle at, H. 82
of Diana endangered, H. 415 ; N. 420
Paul in the, at Jerusalem, H. 473
Ten days before Pentecost ; or, the Church in
Jerusalem, H. 31
Terrible indictment, H. 168
Tertullus, indictment of, H. 498, 500
Testimony, Peter’s threefold, concerning
Christ, H. 91
tabernacle of, in wilderness, H. 165
Theological doctrines and mistakes, H. 575
Theology of Paul as set forth in the Acts,
H. and N. 603
of Peter, H. 250
Thessalonica, Paul and Silas at, H. 360
Pawl’s visit to, H. 363
They went about to slay him, H. 218


625


INDEX.





Third hearing of Paul before Agrippa and
Bernice, H. 525
missionary journey, commencement of,
H. 398
Thoughts of the heart, H. 190
Paul’s mistaken, H, 540
Three Ananiases in Acts, the, H. 483
crowns, Stephen’s, H, 172
differing types of Christian service, H. 269
great books, God’s, about Himself, H. 379
Jameses of Scripture, the, H. 268
marvels, H. 52
months in Malta, H. 583, 587 :
number, in the New Testament, H. 233
phases of conscience, H. 512
questions about the Bible, H. 197
significant experiences, H. 386
sorts of wisdom ; or, Elymas, Sergius,
Saul, H. 285, 286
things of which Christian pastors should
take heed, H. 440
years’ ministry in Ephesus, H. 407, 412
Threefold office of Christ, H. 245
testimony, Peter’s, concerning Christ,
H. 91
Throne, mediatorial, H. 64
Tidings, good, H. 184
Time of the promise, H. 162
Times and seasons, not for man to know, H. 26
of refreshing, H. 88
of restoration, H. 88
Timothy and Erastus, mission of, into Mace-
donia, H. and I. 414
and Silas in Bercea, N. 367
certain disciple named, H. 334
meeting with, H. 333
Tongues of fire, H. 50
which the Holy Ghost gives, H. 407
Town-clerk of Ephesus, H. 419
Trance, Peter’s; or, the apostolic agent pre-
pared, H. 231
Traveller, joyful, on his way home, H. 198
Travelling attendance, best, of missionary on
his departure, H. 282
Treason, world’s, against its King, H. 110
Treasure, heavenly, H. 197
Treatises, the two: connection between the
Acts and Luke’s Gospel, H. 15
Triangular contest: sorcerer, proconsul, and
apostle, H. 286
Trio, a remarkable, H. 394
Troas, accident at, H. 431
communion festival at, H. 426, 429
night service at, H. 430
Troubles of a good man, H. 459
of Christ’s servants, H. 98
of unbelievers, H. 98
True blossoms of a Christian congregation,
H. 116
Church, the Church at Antioch a, H. 281
faith, characteristics of, H. 347
greatness of Christian, H. 569
minister or missionary, indispensable re-
quirements of, H. 281 .
qualifications, work, and reward of,
H. 219 ,


626


True ministerial ordination, H. 541
nobility of mind, H. 365
religion, H. 465
Truth and soberness, words of, H. 550
docility of temper in relation to, H. 366
new, on the reception of, H. 243
two souls struggling against, H. 548
Tumult, popular, in Ephesus, H. 415, 419;
N, 403
Turning world upside down, H. 363
Twelve, fortunes of the, H. 130
patriarchs, the, H. 156
Twin Brothers, on board the, or the Dioscuroi,
H. 592
Two Ananiases, the, H. 213
baptisms, H, 24
covenants—against Paul and for him,
H, 490
fires upon the beach, H. 586
masters, John and Christ, H, 407
right hands, H. 63
Simons, the; or, detection of a hypocrite,
H. 187
sorcerers: Simon Magus and Elymas
Bar-jesus, H. 286
souls struggling against truth, H. 548
treatises, the : connection between the
Acts and Luke’s Gospel, H. 15
visions of Christ, H. 214
whole years in his own hired house—what
then? H. 602
years’ work in Ephesus, N. 409
Typical character, group of, H. 420
persons, four Old Testament, H. 167
Tyre, seven days at, H. 445; N. 447


UNBELIEF, history of, H. 602

Unbelievers, troubles of, H. 98

Uncertainties of infidelity, H. 528

Unchristian communism, modern, and primi-
tive Christian socialism compared and
contrasted, H. 73

Union, sevenfold, of Ananias and Sapphira,
H. 122

Unity, Christian, ideal of, H. 51

University of Athens, in the; or, unto the
Areopagus, N. 371

Unknown God, to the, H. 378

Unleavened bread, days of, H. 263

Unrealised aims, H. 459

Unreasonable things, H. 529

Unrecorded words of Jesus, N, 441

Unrighteous world, best advocates of servant
of God before judgment-seat of, H. 488

Unsteadfast in the Church, example to the,
H. 430

Unsuccessful persecution, a case of, H. 392

Upper room, N. 33

Uproar at Ephesus, H. 419

Upside down, turning world, H. 363

Utterances, Spirit’s, how the world receives
the, H. 56


VAIN imaginings, H. 110
Veto, world’s, upon preaching, H. 129
Views of the Ascension ; or, taken up, H. 29


INDEX.





Vindication of Christianity ;
of Stephen, H. 150
Viper, incident of the: faith and superstition,
H. 586
Virgins which did prophesy, H. 449
Visible ascension, H. 30
Vision, Cornelius’s, H, 228
heavenly, H. 544, 545
midnight, in the castle, H. 488
of the man of Macedonia, H. 336
Paul’s midnight, at Corinth, H. 390
Peter’s, on the housetop, H. 234
Visions for young men, H. 58
of Christ, two, H. 214
Visitation, first Church, H. 187
pastoral, H. 330
Visitor, Paul’s midnight, H. 487, 488
Vocation, Christian’s, H. 27
Voices from mouth of Christ, H. 470
of the prophets, H. 292
Vote of the majority, H. 562
Vows in the religious life, H. 398


or, the apology


Voyage of Church of Jesus Christ, H. 577,
578


of life, H. 566, 578
to Italy, Paul’s, H. 559
Voyages, dangerous, H. 562


WAGES of sin; or, the miserable end of Judas,
H. 39


Waiting-time, H. 42
Warning, words of, for Christian ministers,
H. 429
Warnings, Divine, H. 252
Washing away of sin, H. 471
Way into the kingdom, H. 313
no small stir about that, H. 418
of salvation, H. 353
of the holy cross, H. 135
of the Lord, H. 400
speaking evil of the, H. 408
the, H. 211
to the inheritance, H, 541
“We” passages in Acts, writer of, N. 342
Weak brethren, concessions to, H. 455
duty of the strong towards the, H. 441
Wealth and poverty, Church’s, H. 80
consecration of; or, Joses Barnabas,
H. 116
of the apostles ; or, Peter’s pence, H. 80
sermon on, H. 116
Weariness in well-doing, H. 290
Week, first day of the, H. 429
Week-days and sabbath days; or, work and
worship, H. 385
Welcome of the first confessors; or, the
apostles with their own company,
H. 108
Well-doing, weariness in, H. 290
What meaneth this? H. 56
shall I do, Lord? H. 469
we do with these menj? H. 106
Which is the madman? H. 550
Whited walls, God’s judgment on, H. 484
Whole day’s preaching, H. 600
Why stand we gazing into heaven? H. 30


Wickedness in high places, H. 516
Wilderness, Church in, a type of Christian
Church on earth, H. 164
tabernacle of testimony in, H. 165
Will of the Lord be done! H. 451
Winds, contrary, H. 560
Wisdom, three sorts of ; or, Elymas, Sergius,
Saul, H. 285, 286
Withstanding God, impossibility of, H. 253
Witness, God’s, of Himself, H. 311
of the Holy Ghost, H. 130
of the second psalm to Christ, H. 292
Witnesses, ascending Lord and His, H. 34
Christ’s, H. 26
Wives, husbands, children, H. 447
Wolf and his prey, H. 180
Wolves, sheep among ; or, apostles before
Sanhedrim, H. 99


Y
Women in the Christian Church, place of


H. 449
Wonder, Pentecostal, H. 51
Wonderful works of God, H. 56
Word of God, H. 391
growth and power of, H. 412
hearing, H. 409
how to glorify the, H. 302
Words for anxious inquirers, H. 72
of Jesus, unrecorded, N. 441
of salvation, H. 252
of the forty days, H. 22
of truth and soberness, H. 550
to seekers after God, H. 198
Work and worship; or, week-days and
sabbath days, H. 385
Christian, H. 82
Works, wonderful, of God, H. 56
worthy of repentance, H. 547
Worker, heavenly, H. 16
Workers, God’s hope for His, H. 388
World, Egypt a type of the, H. 158
how the, receives the Spirit’s utterances,
H. 56
men whom the,
murder, H. 547
spiritual, natural selection in, H. 39
turning, upside down, H. 363
World’s assize, the, H. 380
misconceptions about Christianity, H.
523, 525
misrepresentations of followers of Christ,
H. 455
somebodies, the, N. 133
treason against its King, H. 110
true Prophet, H. 90
veto upon preaching, H. 129
Worship and work; or, week-days and
sabbath days, H. 385
Divine, some thoughts about, H. 503
mistaken, H. 238
Worshippers of God, ignorant, H. 378
Worst, preparing for the, H. 562


sometimes seeks to


YEAR and six months in Corinth, H. 386
remarkable, H. 260
Years, two whole, in his own hired house —
what then? H. 602


on


INDEX.
- ax = == ——————————E——Ee
Young man Eutychus, story of the, H. 426, | Young men, visions for, H. 58 :


430 Youth of Paul, promising but disappointing,
named Saul, H. 171 H. 465
this, H. 492 what a, may be and do, H. 492





HOMILIES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS.


Church Seasons: Advent, ch, i, 11. Christmas, ch, i. 1; iii. 24; 26. St. Stephen’s Day,
ch. vi. 8; vii. 1-53; 54-64; 60. St. Paul’s Day, ch. vii. 58;:ix. 1-9; xxii. 1-5; 6-16,
St. Matthias’ Day, ch, i, 15-26; 23. Good Friday, ch. iii. 18; iv. 11; x. 39. aster,
ch. ii, 31; xxv. 19; xxvi. 8. Great Forty Days, ch. i. 2-5; 3. Ascension Day, ch. i.
6-11; 9; 9-11; iv. 88. Whit Sunday, ch. ii. 1-4; 1; 3; 4; 5-13; 17,18; 38; v. 32.

Missions to Heathen: ch. xiii. 1-3; 2, 3; 4-12; xiv. 1-7; 26, 27; xv. 3; 26; xvi. 9; 13;
xvii. 18; 22-34; xviii. 10; xix. 8-12; 23-41; 26; xx. 1-6; xxi. 17-20; xxii. 23. Bible
Society, ch. viii. 28; 30; xi. 16; xvi. 1; xvii. 11; xviii. 11; xxvi. 27.

Evangelistic Services: ch, ii. 87 ; 37-40; iii.19; iv. 12 ; viii. 9-13; ix.6; xi. 14; 18; xiii. 26;
47; xiv. 3; 27; xvi. 19-34; 23-34; 380, 31; xvii. 22; 27; 30; xviii. 10; xx. 24; xxii. 10;
xxiv. 24, 25; 26; xxvi. 18; 22, 23; 28; xxviii. 28.

Special: Ordination, ch. iii. 11-16; iv. 8-12 ; 33; v. 20; vi. 1-7; ix. 15, 16; x. 29; xiv. 21, 22;
23; xv. 3; xviii. 11; xix. 8-12; xx. 17; 24; xxii. 22; xxvi. 16-18. Workers, ch. iii. 1-7;
iv. 13; vi. 1-7; xiv. 3; 23; xv. 36-40; xvii, 11; xviii. 10; xxii. 22. Baptism, ch. x. 47,
48; xvi. 15; xix. 3. Confirmation, ch. viii, 14-17; xiv. 22; xix. 2. To aged, ch. xxi. 16.
To parents, ch. xxi. 5. Women, ch. xvi. 1; 14. Young men, ch. xxiii. 18; xxvii. 44.
Girls’ Friendly Society, ch. xii. 13; 14. Sailors, ch. xxvii. 15; 10-35; 15-20; 21-26;
22; 29. Christian socialism, ch. ii. 44, 45; iv. 82; 36, 37. Death, ch. v. 5-10 (sudden):
xiii. 36. Almsgiving, ch. iv. 36, 37; xi. 29, 30.


ne : THEOLOGY LIBRARY
CLAREMONT, CALIF








S491 P65 /vol26 0


4 ) The Preacher s complete homiletical com a





74/
66
V2


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711 se


OEMCO





vee
SR eee
Maawwoue wea es PK eA ied
¢ oe eae
itty ee
Roe SNS see
avy trey MP eM NE
Etter we.
Seer ;
LR EE ea ;
Aas
PSST eat LEME
Lie ateo aie ee


weds
CR aD


eee
evewee
Vly ee
ony Vy ey
’ Vee yy
eh Ohana Wore wane we
eee Ny, Pe ae eae ee
ele wie ey ty
Vee Ve et va
“ew
Ge EN
PAE IIS
eae ae
Were


Ox


Arun ieee
Anan tate i
: Rear as ia tceesta tS Se
_ Ad Oe Ee EY A A A A
7 very vw © ee SO A Ln
Oye nee : SOIR vat tro
tata EU Me "
teehee! > ii
aittaniscmithee aetee rine
ere RAS ay Ce Nae EAT IMS ISN,
tieeruer ee ie Ret eee Ane
i AANA ee ENE SOE OO aa wa
BO eee, « eee ee eet
See
2
eee : ; ;
ewe ee tay
EEN OTE STN TN I ;
Reet Sesame ate NN, , Tee oi
Wesco ee ¢ AE Aa
oO OR A ee Oe gene eer
Lestere eho Sea tame Cea
vue} veuyvy Ue
UN EPO OR NR Aah ah ALA
Loe NN NEA


vee ew
oa ary ee vy


oper Tee UN Se


Je Nr ee EM tsa
RNR aE OT
renee
Maa eY
irihetrenenen
ree oe
aN Eee we
OS tty noe
: ‘ beiei c
Uetahetteay
eee aS,
uate ; SEE
evens Mallee
Wate, Maia ae
Peas fs
eMeRataoe Cae ee
Petites
eu EM Vv ALY vw
Soatgretatyatsat teat i
pibceiontniet Seria
Bao ae hsteta teria tates EEK Ee
COS PATR OK Da DRA Whe DY NO NE ene
eae ESTE EEE UV NEY, Ve Ma ran An Ae WENN at MSE NCSD c ;
Nace ae AATEC TM AE IAT MY A ER MEAT ASE ITA SESE SS Meg rg ror
Te NEM Sette Sidelareteye da Lb a
Sty alsa cts :
APRN MRT eee redishes ure
LER MRED
deat


an ee EMM MCR DM,
Pn ee Ee MAL ITE
rN Se ge we ae ASIN SEE AMAT A AN
"
NE
Leg er oe Et OE
eS


ae
aie
2

=
«
Sa


<


a


<
3
ases
<


:
A:
:
4
z
3


.


esate
Sass


pt
Se
Sa
G
<
e
ce
$9)
ee,
3s
4343
-.


2
¢
2
4
BS
4

$
2
Ke
Sa
2
4
?
a
i<

S524

s.
SNS
»


<
-,
3
<,
¢
€
r
;
3
<
ES
ese
ers
5
.


2
<
¢
<
2
¢
<
<
B
&«
s,
C3


S<
ti
4
2
ae
<
=
436.
s3<
232
4
eS
$2
aie
25.
bet
<
)
4
2
=


<
333


<
64%
ese
bert
<
ase
SeSase
< 25
393435
ze
4 xs,
33433
Ps!
$38
Pett
6Se
pet
33
3434
<<
Ce ery
esas


oP LE SY Oe
SLR EES


es
zs
>
2%.
<
<


s
7
aa
e
38

¢


<5<
425,
528,

4

S

<

Pt?

se
4505
eieee
etase®
2535
eseae
a5

433

828
328
S28 >,
nS


¢
<
by}
*
<,
$2
@
pe)
Se
a
<
36.
<
3
a


4


¢!


-
als
Serbey


<
<
¢
e
se
i
<
=
<
*
s


3
pee
s
os
zo
$3
Po)
<)
ae
sea


$3,
<e%,
ee
Paty
<3<,
62S,
Pal
<4
aSe)


“30%
¢
bs
s
<2
<
¢
”
3
<


!


<5 ¢,

eae

atate
232
¢


e)
&
<
4
<.
B3
sae
Pa
ret
3
ag8
=.
S:


3.

«:

4
<.
¢;


254
¢
*.
<

ry

36
a
fe
5
2

5.


<

<

¢

222
=
4384
<


ana
ke
28
56
<
2
4


ent
S454
aoeee
oe
oa
5%
e
34
tact.
aeesas:
eScs
23s382525
ascadesee
Sheers
atases
easesa
aoeese
easea,
SS
s2Ais
Sa3<


3
=353:
ot


Parnes


aysi¢
iz


ee
335
S8

S28,

Pera}


a
aa
see
a5¢
pe
s3<
Sat

<
ie


,


f
asese
S35.
as:
<
<3.


eS


38
a3
<,
<3
<i
3


a
Sede
eal
e243
S533)
36,
te
eee
P}
Se
28
Petey
3
2s
4
a8.


5
232
a
aa
Ps
pH
a6
+)
56


<
a6
sa
4.
asp
aes
2a
ac
<2
Pr
oe
ee
:
Se
25K
pp yrs
epese.
eset
peerel
<
lasesas
334,
*
3S
y


S
Aa SS,
S352.
Pathe)

Pes


=
s
<,
J
x
5,
5
a
¢
et
be
<
34
<
<


4


A Eee,
Oeste


2
<
3
4,
a
S,
=
494
52%
as,
*
Ps
5
3
#
$i
452
>?
Rey


SP at
<


*.

&

ae

pes
3isis


as
ie.
By
aay
cP
324,
?)
Set


zaass
5,
e258.
28
Sage
7
<


3323
a
4
4
ss.


ay
eee
ees


232325.

4
3

2525

<

4

=

&

#


)
38
Ss
be
is
<
s


a8,
4.
283
eee
3
a


s
4,
=.

sae
at)


J
53
M)


ata,
4
¢,
a
es
aeences


3
Se rah
oe
<
4
pres


secasesises
Ch
<
<
<'
<


aaa


s


aSatets
Bees
PL Ps
Eee
Sehecas
a8


e
a
5
4


Goats
6.
-

<,


aSes
pe
oh
6
tt
¢
Ps


3
tot


aS

rete

aiese
e504
AS,
4


=
,


¢
s.
33


<
>
e


<.


rs


3
LO


3
ecase
=)
Pops
>


sees
pe
sf,
ee
prerens
3


5


as


wet


bee


bd
Fan ee ee
ptt
